
                               1 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TO BE A CITIZEN: NEWCOMERS' QUEST

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1860 words


In this week of parades, celebrations and spectaculars, there are to be short
and simple ceremonies rich with meaning. Across the country today, tomorrow and
Friday, some 26,000 immigrants will raise their right hand, renounce their
loyalty to the lands of their birth and swear an oath of allegiance to a new
country - the United States of America.

Almost all Americans, of course, were immigrants or the descendants of
immigrants - some who came by choice, some driven here by hate, some pulled from
their homeland against their will.

With each new citizen comes a story, a saga, really, of flight or quest, of love
or lament.

What follows are the stories of four people who will this week become Americans:
Armand Amzallag from Morocco, Mikhail Chernyak from Russia, Diego Bautista from
Colombia and Thanh Quoc Lam from Vietnam.

JOURNEY FROM COLOMBIA

MIAMI, July 1 - Diego Bautista's American odyssey began on a hot day in
September 1969 when, with his brothers and three sisters, he said goodbye to his
grandparents and boarded a plane in Cali, Colombia. By nightfall the children
were in Jersey City, taking stock of the gritty tenement apartment rented by
their mother, a worker in a knitwear factory.

''It was a lonely, scary adventure,'' recalls Mr. Bautista, now a 29-year-old
cameraman for a Spanish-language television station here. ''For two years I
begged my mother to let me return to my home in Colombia.''

His mother, long divorced from her Colombian husband, worked making sweaters in
a factory beside a railroad track. She had saved her money and yearned for her
children.

When her son pleaded to return, she told him to be patient. Things would get
better, she promised.

On Thursday, her prophecy will be fulfilled. Diego Bautista is to take his place
in the Orange Bowl along with 14,000 other men, women and children and take the
oath of citizenship.

Most of those who will be in the stadium are Cubans who fled the regime of Fidel
Castro. Others, like Mr. Bautista, are Hispanic people from across the Western
hemisphere who came to the United States seeking economic opportunity after a
1965 change in immigration laws relaxed barriers.

''When I was a boy in Cali,'' Mr. Bautista says, ''it was the dream of everyone
to go to the United States. My mother went first with two of my aunts to find
work. Then we were sent for. After that, it seems like we were going to the
airport every week to greet aunts and cousins.''

The seven children in his family went to college, he said. Five of the siblings
have married, all to other Colombians. Mr. Bautista followed his fiancee's
family to Miami in 1980.

In Miami, he said, ''It was strange to hear everyone speak Spanish and see all
the signs in Spanish.''

''On my first visit back to New York a lady dropped a package, and I said
something to her in Spanish and I was surprised when she had no idea what I was
saying,'' he said.

Mr. Bautista and his wife, Maria, were married in 1981 and live with their
2-month-old son, Alexandrio, in the suburb of Pembroke Pines. Today they seem
well settled.

''When I was a young scared boy living in Jersey City,'' he said, ''a teacher
said this to me, 'Once you start thinking in English you will know you are an
American.' In my mind, I have been an American a very long time.''

FLEEING MOROCCO

Armand Amzallag says he was caught in the tensions of the times.

In 1967, during the bitter fighting of the Six Day War, Mr. Amzallag - the son
of a family of Moroccan Jews who had survived and sometimes prospered for 700
years in an Arab world -heard a Moslem friend praise the Arabs for taking the
lives of so many Israelis.

''That's when I realized what was going on,'' he said. That's when the growing
tensions between the Moslems and Jews of Morocco began to prompt tens of
thousands of Jews to leave.

''I knew that sooner or later, I had to leave,'' Mr. Amzallag said. Tomorrow,
Mr. Amzallag, a real estate broker who lives in Manhattan, will be sworn in as
an American citizen. And for him, the timing of the oath -as America celebrates
the centennial of the Statue of Liberty - is no coincidence.

''I really wanted it to be special,'' he said. ''I planned to have it this
way.''

Last year, when Mr. Amzallag read about the pageantry planned for this week, he
decided to time his application for citizenship with the centennial. And he
wrote to the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service telling them
of his plans.

''The woman at immigration, she said, 'No way,' '' he recalled. ''She threw the
letter away.''

Mr. Amzallag is not sure why his wish was ultimately granted. He simply
attributes his good fortune to chance. ''I'm very excited,'' he said. ''My wife,
she's even more excited.'' After studying management for several years in Paris,
Mr. Amzallag arrived in this country in 1979, joining relatives. He knew a
little English and had less money, so he went to work for a cousin who was an
antique dealer.

He later got a job with a Manhattan real estate agency and last year, started
his own agency.

And four months ago, he and his wife, Kim, opened a store in Manhattan, modeled
on a popular Parisian concept, which combines shoe repairs, key making and
printing under one roof. He met his wife, an American, two years ago playing
volleyball in Central Park.

''When I think of what I had when I arrived - the opportunity is really there,''
he said.

What has most impressed Mr. Amzallag in America, he said, is the country's
commitment to religious freedom. In New York, he said, ''you can wear a
yarmulke, you can do anything. When you come to the U.S., you feel free, you
really do.''

FAMILY'S FREEDOM

ST. LOUIS - Mikhail Chernyak and his wife, Bella, left the Soviet Union five
years ago, driven from their homeland by hate, drawn to a new country by
promise.

''The discrimination that my family and I faced as Jews in Russia was too
difficult to bear,'' said Mr. Chernyak, who is 45 years old. ''I did not want my
daughters growing up with that hatred.''

Along with 300 other immigrants in St. Louis, the Chernyaks will be sworn in as
American citizens Thursday evening on the steps of the Old Courthouse in St.
Louis as part of the nationally televised swearing-in ceremony.

He is now employed by Mallinckrodt Inc. as an expert in cyclotron technology and
lives with his wife, 44, and two daughters, Ludmila, 14, and Svetlana, 7, in a
ranch-style, suburban home. He bought it last year -the American way, he said,
on credit.

''If you have money in America,'' he said, ''you can go anywhere. You don't have
to ask permission.''

The family - Mr. Chernyak, his wife, children and wife's parents -applied twice
for permission to emigrate from Bobruisk, where all of them had been living in a
two-bedroom apartment.

''This is a dream,'' said Mr. Chernyak, looking around the stucco family room of
his new home in Creve Coeur. ''In Russia, I waited nine years to get my own
apartment and was turned down. We lived with my parents-in-law, six of us in a
two-bedroom apartment. Now we come here and we have all this room.''

Mr. Chernyak attended a military school in Russia. As the only Jew in his
platoon, he said, he became a target for barbs and insults.

''Anything that went wrong in the country was automatically blamed on the
Jews,'' he said. ''It was 'dirty Jew' this. Jews were made out to be evil,
bad.''

Mr. Chernyak says he is not a religious man. He does not attend synagogue or
take part in formal services. ''I am an atheist,'' he said. ''Being Jewish is my
nationality. I do not want to hide that. I never want to hide that or feel I
have to. I am proud of my heritage.''

He says he wants his children to ''become good citizens with good moral
standards.'' His eldest daughter listened as he spoke, and she smiled.

''Listen to her,'' he said to a visitor. ''The children are truly Americans
-they speak English without an accent.''

After he and his wife take the oath of citizenship, their children automatically
become American citizens. The Chernyaks plan to celebrate with an elaborate
party at their home. But the joy will be mixed.

''I am excited about becoming an American citizen, but we are alone here,'' he
said. Although his wife's family came to St. Louis with the Chernyaks, his
81-year-old mother, older sister and other relatives remain in Russia.

''I want my children to have some connections with my mother,'' Mr. Chernyak
said. ''A telephone is something that she can only dream about there. I wish so
I could bring my family here, but I think that is impossible.''

VIETNAM REFUGEES

SAN DIEGO - He was a child when he fled the war, 10 years old, a child of the
boats. They made their way to the harbor in Saigon, while the enemy moved on the
city's gates. There were six - Thanh Quoc Lam, his mother, three of his brothers
and a sister.

Mr. Lam is now a 21-year-old electrical engineering student at San Diego State
University, and he, with 580 other immigrants, will become an American citizen
on Thursday at a ceremony at the Cabrillo Monument.

Mr. Lam, who lived with his parents and 11 brothers and sisters in a suburb of
Saigon, saw very little of the devastation of the war, he said.

''When we left Saigon, we didn't know where we were going,'' he said. ''I didn't
know what was going on.'' Each member of the family took only a duffle bag full
of posessions with him. ''We thought we would stay for only a month or two like
we had once before,'' Mr. Lam said. ''My mother would never have left her other
six children behind if she thought she wasn't coming back.''

They fought to board the fishing boat in the harbor, the boat packed with 4,000
other refugees. ''It was scary,'' Mr. Lam said. ''The waves were high, and we
started taking on water in the engine room. The captain kept ordering us from
one side of the boat to another.''

After they spent three days at sea with no food, but plenty of fresh water, a
Danish ship picked up the refugees from the water-ravaged fishing boat and
brought them to Hong Kong.

Mr. Lam's memories of the refugee camps - one in Hong Kong and one later at Fort
Chafee, Ark. - are the memories of a child. It was fun, he said. ''There were
other families around, so there were other children to play with.''

The family found a sponsor in the First Christ Reformed Church at Oskaloosa,
Iowa. The church provided clothing and a place to live, Mr. Lam said.

Asylum, however, does not always carry good fortune with it. One of Mr. Lam's
older brothers died in an automobile accident shortly after they arrived in the
United States. And in 1977, Mr. Lam's mother, Tam Thi Biu, died of a heart
attack.

Mr. Lam plans some day to marry and begin a family. He said he hopes citizenship
will be the tool to bring his 67-year-old father to America. He hopes to sponsor
his father and a brother in Canada.

''I still have two brothers who are missing,'' he added.

He talks about visiting Vietnam, but feels he is too much the American to make a
home there.

''It's a big change to move here from Vietnam, a different life style,'' he
said. ''I think it would be even harder to go back.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Bella and Mikhail Chernyak (NYT/Bill Stover); photo of Armand
Amzallag (NYT/Kim Garnick); photo of Diego Bautista (NYT/Susan Greenwood); photo
of Thanh Quoc Lam (NYT/Robert Burroughs)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 3, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. and Vietnam Pledge To Find the Missing

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 112 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 2


The United States today gave Vietnam its first written commitment to support
Hanoi's plan to resolve, within two years, the issue of Americans missing in
action since the Indochina war.

Richard Childress, a member of the National Security Council, said at a news
conference here that Vietnam in turn had given assurances that it would provide
Washington with written reports on its progress in the search and would
investigate reported live sightings of missing Americans.

The two sides left open the possibility of establishing an American technical
office in Hanoi. The Vietnamese promised to deliver ''especially productive''
information in August and October.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 4, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

LIBERTY WEEKEND/THE STATUE;
LIBERTY AT 100: SYMBOLISM IS EVER FRESH

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1062 words


Nearly a century ago, and continents away, a young Armenian prepared to leave
for America. The craftsmen of his village, too old to join the journey, sent a
gift with him. It was a traditional silk rug, bearing the image of the Statue of
Liberty.

How those villagers knew Miss Liberty's face is a mystery. The statue was only
four years old, and the men lived in a distant land. Perhaps they had received
letters or picture postcards from those who had gone before. Perhaps tales had
somehow made their way to Armenia from New York City.

The idea of the Statue of Liberty, you see, has always exceeded its physical
self. Across the globe, if she is out of sight, she is rarely out of mind. And
as large as she looms out there in the harbor - 151 feet tall, and more than
twice that with her pedestal - she is as small as a $1.99 curio compared with
what she symbolizes: freedom, hope and opportunity for newcomers in a nation of
newcomers.

Once, the Statue of Liberty was the tallest man-made structure in the world,
singular by dimension alone. Now she is outdone by all sorts of towers and
arches and skyscrapers. Yet the idea of the statue ever expands.

Grander monuments, pyramids and colossi, have faded into history, becoming the
stuff of archeology. From the start, Miss Liberty demanded a different destiny.
Emma Lazarus pointedly wrote that she was ''not like the brazen giant of Greek
fame,'' John Greenleaf Whittier that she was ''unlike the shapes on Egypt's
lands.''

She was a monument to the living rather than a memorial to the dead. Architects
and engineers created her form, but millions of immigrants and the children and
grandchildren who heard their stories created her spirit. ''Like an adopted
child,'' the historian Marvin Trachtenberg wrote, ''the statue retained the
hereditary physical form of its natural parents, but took its mature character
from its foster home.''

As a nation celebrates her centennial, Miss Liberty remains as contemporary as
every plane touching land, every boat reaching shore, every Korean and Haitian
and Indian and Greek seeing her for the first time. And whatever today's
immigrant thinks in that moment, face-to-face with the copper expression of his
highest aspirations, it cannot be so different from what a man named Edward
Corsi remembered of his own arrival in 1907:

''This symbol of America - this enormous expression of what we had all been
taught was the inner meaning of the new country we were coming to - inspired awe
in the hopeful immigrants.

''Many older persons among us, burdened with a thousand memories of what they
were leaving behind, had been openly weeping ever since we entered the narrower
waters on our final approach toward the unknown. Now somehow steadied, I
suppose, by the concreteness of this symbol of America's freedom, they dried
their tears.''

Beyond Law

Miss Liberty exists beyond law, beyond religion, beyond sectarian concerns -
and, surely, beyond this weekend's commercial hype. She represents tolerance and
acceptance, a generosity of spirit, the America that lives in the words of Walt
Whitman and William Saroyan, the films of Frank Capra, the music of Aaron
Copland - boundless and catholic and all-embracing. And when, in a life that is
real and not fictive, a nation falls short of the ideals she represents, she
towers in silent reproach.

It is the very history of Miss Liberty to confound every limit thrust upon her.
Broken chains rest at her feet, and no ideologue has ever succeeded in enslaving
her again. When anyone can claim her - from Hungarian patriots to Vietnam
veterans to American Indians - then no one can truly own her.

She was, remember, designed with a narrow purpose in mind: the gift to America
of French republicans seeking primarily to advance their own political cause.
She was not especially welcomed at first, derided as a ''useless gift,''
''several hundred feet of bronze female,'' ''neither an object of Art or of
Beauty.''

When much of the New York gentry scoffed at France's gift, and it seemed that
Boston or Philadelphia would step in to adopt her, the Hungarian-born publisher
Joseph Pulitzer took to raising the last $100,000 needed for the pedestal. ''As
the rich citizens of New York have shown such apathy in this matter,'' he wrote
in 1883, announcing the fund drive, ''let the poor citizens move.''

And so they did. Who cannot find themselves touched, even now, by this
century-old letter to Pulitzer's newspaper, The World: ''I am a young girl alone
in the world, and earning my own living. Enclosed please find 60 cents, the
result of self-denial. I wish I could make it 60 thousand dollars, instead of
cents, but drops make the ocean.''

Some 334,203 immigrants arrived in 1886, the year of Miss Liberty's dedication,
and on the Oct. 28 unveiling this constituency of orphans fought for a glimpse
of their surrogate mother. The young Cuban revolutionary Jose Marti wrote of the
day, ''Irishmen, Poles, Italians, Czechs, Germans freed from tyranny or want
-all hail the monument of Liberty because to them it seems to incarnate their
own uplifting.''

Like any true idealist, Miss Liberty held fast to her own truth, as unmoved by
the winds of political whim as by the tempests of the Atlantic. Even as the
calls went up 70 years ago for immigration restrictions, even as the nation's
laws divided newcomers into such categories of undesirability as ''idiots,''
''vagrants'' and ''professional beggars,'' Miss Liberty was receiving her famous
benediction from Emma Lazarus and becoming a national landmark.

It took decades, but in 1965, America again rose to welcome the ''huddled masses
yearning to be free.'' Congress passed a wide-ranging reform of immigration
laws, ending the dark years of quotas and statutory racism, and as President
Lyndon B. Johnson signed the new law in a ceremony on Liberty Island, he said,
''We can all believe that the lamp of this grand old lady is brighter today.''

The immigrants continue to come - 570,009 in the last full year, led by
Mexicans, Filipinos and Koreans. And as Congress deliberates anew on immigration
laws, Miss Liberty continues to play the maverick, her lamplight falling equally
on the newcomer with papers, sponsors and a profession and on the furtive
illegal alien, slipping over a fence with nothing but the incandescent desire
for a better life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of the crew of the Kador, a Japanese training ship (NYT/Sara
Krulwich) (page B3); photo of President and Mrs. Reagan viewing the Statue of
Liberty (NYT/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 4, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NATION REKINDLES STATUE OF LIBERTY AS BEACON OF HOPE;
ACROSS U.S., A CEREMONY FOR HISTORY

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 766 words


Under starlit skies, in view of a newly resplendent Statue of Liberty, Ron
Ranvindran, Sadye Lee Vassil, Riva Sagalova, Thanh Tran, Mikhail Baryshnikov,
Arman Amazallag, Samson Arshansky and Pirkko Antonopoulos became Americans last
night.

Along with 268 other men, women and children who had come to the United States
from 100 countries, they were sworn in by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger on
Ellis Island, the gateway to this country for more than 12 million immigrants
and refugees.

''Now I'm American!'' shouted the jubilant Thanh Tran, 22 years old, who fled
his native Vietnam eight years ago aboard a fragile, overcrowded boat.

''I'm happy,'' said Iluminada Rodriguez, 24, from the Dominican Republic, the
first member of her family to become an American citizen. She was accompanied by
her 80-year-old father, Bienvenido Rodriguez, who had worked as a dishwasher at
the Waldorf-Astoria so that he could afford to bring his wife and six children
to America. Last night, Mr. Rodriguez, too overcome to speak, just smiled and
smiled upon his daughter.

Ceremony in Orange Bowl

The oath-taking was a focal point for what surely was the most extraordinary
naturalization ceremony in the nation's history. Simultaneously, from New York
to Miami to Kansas City, Mo., to San Francisco - at 44 sites all around the
country - more than 25,000 immigrants joined in the oath. In the Orange Bowl in
Miami, 14,000 people became new Americans. In Chrissey Field in San Francisco,
1,000 people took the oath.

On Ellis Island, about 200 were from New York, two of them, including Mr. Tran,
chosen by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the others selected from regular
lists of those seeking naturalization. The others taking the oath on the island
came from 31 states, chosen by their governors. Nineteen states chose not to
send representatives. It was in many ways a made-for-television ceremony. There
were huge color television screens mounted on each side of a podium on the south
lawn of Ellis Island. The candidates sat through several commercials that were
shown after the first few speeches and before the administration of the oath.

Shortly after 9 P.M., Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d stepped to the podium and
presented the candidates to the Chief Justice. Saying that many of the ''most
honorable men and women'' in the history of the nation had ''passed through this
isle in pursuit of freedom,'' he said he was confident that ''many of you will
follow in their footsteps.'' Then he formally recommended that the oath of
citizenship be administered.

Chief Justice Burger pointed out to the candidates that the ''great Lady of
Liberty faces not the West, to our land, but out to the sea as a welcome to
those who seek our kind of freedom.''

He asked the candidates ''to raise your right hand and, on this Bible, repeat
after me.''

In reciting the Oath of Allegiance, they declared, ''freely and without any
mental reservation,'' that they ''entirely renounce and abjure all allegiance
and fidelty to any foreign prince, potentate, state or sovereignty'' and that
they would ''support and defend the Constitution and laws of the United States
of America.''

Five of the new citizens were under 14 years old. And as befits a modern
American ceremony, one was a bona fide celebrity - Mr. Baryshnikov, the ballet
dancer and choreographer, from the Soviet Union. But last night, in what may
have been the moment that most embodied the meaning of Liberty Week's
festivities, they were all stars. Some of those standing on Ellis Island, with
their right hands raised, had endured great hardship and suffering in other
lands. They had fled wars, religious persecution and economic oppression.

Before being ferried to the island, the soon-to-be-citizens, their friends and
families, all dressed in their best, mingled in the courtyard of Castle Clinton,
the old fort at Battery Park. They smiled. They wept. They took pictures of one
another. And they spoke of why they had come to this country.

Mr. Tran, a 22-year-old senior at the State University of New York Maritime
College who hopes to become an officer in the Merchant Marine, was 14 when he
escaped from Vietnam aboard a 22-foot boat packed with 22 refugees. Mr. Tran,
who left his entire family behind, survived 22 days at sea and two years in a
refugee camp in Manila before coming to New York in October 1980.

Imagining what he might write in his next letter home, Mr. Tran - standing tall
in his black cadet uniform, brass buttons gleaming and a miniature American flag
in his breast pocket -said: ''Mom, I'm American!''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of people on Ellis Island being sworn in as United States
citizens (NYT/Jim Wilson) (page B6)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 4, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REPORT SHOWS U.S. WAS OUTVOTED IN THE U.N. THROUGH MOST OF 1985

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 969 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 3


The United States Mission issued a report today that it said showed that most of
the world voted against the United States most of the time during the 1985
United Nations General Assembly session.

The study of voting patterns, which was made by the United States Mission, says
member countries on average vote on the same side as the United States only 22.5
percent of the time.

The overall voting pattern has fluctuated little since 1983 when the first such
report was submitted to Congress. It reflects the tendency of countries to vote
in regional blocs, especially among developing nations, the report said. Such
solidarity against the United States is often cited as one of the reasons why
Congress voted last year to withhold part of the annual financial contribution
to the United Nations, even though such a step violates international treaty
obligations.

Some diplomats question the conclusions of the annual American report, saying
that the voting patterns of member countries should be analyzed not according to
agreement with the United States but according to adherence to principles in the
United Nations charter.

Votes Not 'Against the U.S.'

''Just because a country doesn't follow the same voting pattern as the United
States doesn't mean that it is voting against the United States, not at all,''
said Kishore Mahbubani, the chief delegate of Singapore, who voted with the
United States 23.6 percent of the time in last year's Assembly. ''Member states
should be judged on the basis of whether or not their voting behavior conforms
to the principles of the United Nations charter.''

Other countries suggested that it is the United States that is in the minority
on major international issues. ''I definitely reject that our votes mean we are
targeting the United States,'' said Constantine Moushoutas, the Cyprus delegate.
Cyprus voted with the United States only 11.6 percent of the time. ''There are
certain issues that are important to our part of the world, certain issues where
it is the United States that is in the minority.''

The report says in its introduction that its main purpose ''is to highlight
those parts of a country's performance in multilateral fora which most directly
affect its bilateral relationaship with the country.''

However, a number of major recipients of aid from Washington sided against the
United States. Egypt, for example, whose $2 billion in aid from the United
States this year makes it the second-largest recipient of such aid, voted with
the United States about 15 percent of the time.

In making its calculations, the United States mission included only resolutions
decided by roll-call voting and omitted resolutions adopted without a vote or by
consensus. It also counted countries that abstained or did not take part in
votes as if they voted against the United States.

Following is a list issued by the United States Mission grouping countries
regionally. The list shows the percent of votes each country cast in agreement
with the United States in last year's General Assembly Session. The list shows
Israel as not belonging to any grouping; it also excludes South Africa, which
was suspended from the General Assembly in 1974.

AFRICA Ivory Coast...27.3 Malawi...26.9 Liberia...23.7 Zaire...23.1
Mauritius...22.1 Swaziland...22.0 Equatorial Guinea...21.2 Central African
Rep....20.9 Gabon...19.7 Senegal...19.3 Togo...19.0 Sierra Leone...18.3
Cameroon...18.0 Chad...18.0 Niger...17.6 Botswana...17.4 Rwanda...17.4
Kenya...16.7 Somalia...16.3 Mauritania...16.1 Lesotho...16.0 Burundi...15.9
Morocco...15.9 The Sudan...15.5 Egypt...15.3 Gambia...14.9 Zambia...14.9
Nigeria...14.7 Zimbabwe...14.6 Djibouti...14.3 Tunisia...13.9 Ghana...13.2
Uganda...13.2 Burkina Faso...13.1 Guinea Bissau...12.2 Comoros...12.1
Guinea...12.1 Cape Verde...11.9 The Seychelles...11.9 Congo...11.3
Tanzania...11.3 Mali...11.1 Madagascar...10.6 Sao Tome & Principe...10.3
Ethiopia...9.3 Benin...8.8 Libya...6.9 Mozambique...5.9 Algeria...5.1
Angola...3.5 ASIA AND THE PACIFIC Japan...66.3 Australia...60.2 New
Zealand...55.3 Solomons...48.1 Samoa...27.4 Fiji...26.0 Singapore...23.6 Papua
New Guinea...23.1 Thailand...22.4 Philippines...22.3 Cambodia...21.4
Nepal...18.0 Burma...17.1 Sri Lanka...16.8 Malaysia...16.3 Bangladesh...16.1
Pakistan...16.1 China...15.9 Brunei...15.3 Indonesia...14.3 Jordan...14.2
Bhutan...13.9 Oman...13.6 Saudi Arabia...13.6 Vanuatu...13.4 Lebanon...13.1
Bahrain...12.8 Qatar...12.8 United Arab Emirates...12.8 Maldives...12.5
Kuwait...12.2 Cyprus...11.6 Iran...11.3 Mongolia...9.9 Yemen...9.0 India...8.9
Iraq...8.7 Syria...8.1 Vietnam...6.5 Afghanistan...6.2 Laos...5.9 Southern
Yemen...5.7 THE AMERICAS Grenada...71.7 Canada...69.8 St. Christopher &
Nevis...50.0 Belize...37.8 Paraguay...35.4 St. Vincent & Grenadines...32.7
Chile...31.4 El Salvador...30.2 Honduras...29.8 Costa Rica...29.1
Colombia...27.9 St. Lucia...26.2 Guatemala...25.2 Antigua & Barbuda...25.0
Dominican Republic...25.0 Ecuador...24.6 Dominica...24.2 Haiti...23.8
Jamaica...22.7 Barbados...20.3 Panama...19.7 Venezuela...19.0 Bahamas...18.6
Bolivia...18.5 Uruguay...18.1 Trinidad & Tobago...17.9 Peru...17.8
Argentina...16.4 Suriname...16.2 Brazil...16.0 Mexico...14.5 Guyana...13.9
Nicaragua...8.4 Cuba...6.2 WESTERN EUROPE Britain...86.6 West Germany...84.4
France...82.7 Belgium...82.3 Italy...81.9 Luxembourg...80.2 The
Netherlands...76.3 Portugal...75.0 Iceland...62.4 Norway...61.2 Denmark...58.3
Spain...55.6 Ireland...51.0 Sweden...42.2 Austria...40.0 Finland...39.8
Turkey...38.1 Greece...33.3 Malta...16.5 NO AFFILIATION Israel...91.5 EASTERN
EUROPE Poland...14.8 Rumania...14.6 Hungary...12.3 Ukraine...12.3
Bulgaria...12.2 Byelorussia...12.2 Czechoslovakia...12.2 East Germany...12.2
Soviet Union...12.2 Yugoslavia...ll.9 Albania...6.7

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 4, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

GEORGE ARCENEAUX

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 115 words

DATELINE: HOUMA, La., July 3


George Arceneaux, a pioneer in the development of new varieties of sugar cane,
died died Tuesday at the Terrebonne Medical Center. He was 91 years old.

Mr. Arceneaux once headed the Department of Agriculture's sugar cane breeding
program and helped restored the Louisiana sugar industry by developing improved
varieties of cane.

He founded and directed the International Research Service, a private sugar-cane
research organization. He planned research or studied sugar cane production in
Mexico, Vietnam and Israel.

Survivors include his wife, Louise, and two sons, Federal District Judge George
Arceneaux Jr. and Tom E. Arceneaux of Baton Rouge. Services will be held
Thursday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 5, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

A VERY SPECIAL DAY: MILLIONS WATCH FESTIVE HARBOR SALUTE TO LIBERTY;
FAMILY SAILS AMID HISTORY FOR A MOMENT

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. GEIST

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words


Seven-year-old Josh Curtis wondered aloud yesterday what in the world the Statue
of Liberty would say if she could speak. His question was lost in the roar of
thousands of boat engines and the blare of their horns.

The boy had just entered New York Harbor, uttering a ''Wow!'' as the family
motorboat emerged from a tributary. He beheld more boats than he had ever
imagined existed - indeed, perhaps more than have ever been assembled - as they
swirled about the statue's feet and swarms of blimps, skywriters, helicopters
and fighter planes buzzed around her head.

Josh's family had slept aboard their well-traveled, 26-foot boat at the New Elco
Marina in Bayonne, N.J., for an early getaway. With American flags unfurled,
they sailed across Newark Bay and down the Kill Van Kull, lined with salvage
yards and oil tankers, a dreary approach that made the harbor view all the more
dramatic.

His father, Skip Curtis, dressed in a red-white-and-blue ''Liberty Park, New
Jersey'' T-shirt, enthusiastically loaded the family - Josh; his mother, Ellen,
and Matthew, his 10-year-old brother - aboard, along with two coolers so full of
beer, soda, cold cuts and nacho cheese chips that their sides were splitting.
Also on board was a sack of fireworks and a radio playing rock-and-roll oldies.

Mr. Curtis, 42, said he wanted them to be ''present and part of an unforgettable
moment in American history.'' All they could do was hope this turned out better
than Halley's comet, which he was also excited for them to see.

Mrs. Curtis went along reluctantly on the pilgrimage to the refurbished Statue
of Liberty. Matthew had suggested to his father a little fluke fishing instead.

''They told us at school we had to contribute $5 to the statue,'' Matthew said,
''or we were in trouble.''

But now they were all excited - if occasionally afraid for their lives -as Mr.
Curtis deftly wove them through this assemblage of virtually every type of
vessel conceived by man to pay homage to the statue.

There were sloops, hydrofoils, junks, carriers, brigantines, the Queen Elizabeth
2, Jet-Skis, an oil barge with bleachers, schooners, water taxis, a submarine, a
battleship and a thousand and one would-be Don Johnsons in sleek Cigarette
boats.

The parade of breathtaking tall ships, the ostensible reason for the gathering
of the masses, seemed but a sideshow at times.

The Curtis family, of North Bergen, N.J., beheld two seemingly crazed people out
in a kayak in this hull-to-hull traffic. There was even a car, one of those
small convertible automobiles that run on land or water, with waves breaking
over the windshield wipers.

They next came upon what appeared to be a four-foot-high remote-controlled model
of a battleship, which turned out to have a man and wife from California inside,
peeping out through a hole in the bridge to pilot the craft.

So closely spaced were the vessels, in tricky waters, that when a man sneezed
aboard the Nauti but Nice, passengers on the Ship of Fools and the Banker's Away
yelled, ''Gesundheit!''

''Taxi!'' yelled a man with his hand raised as if he were on a corner in midtown
Manhattan rather than bobbing on a boat. The two cabbies driving the South Bay
Water Taxi, a small outboard boat, reported that business was brisk, what with
running people to shore for dinners and Broadway shows. The fare was $25 a
passenger.

Other boaters reported that water vendors had come around in boats hawking ice
and fuel and that they were finding buyers among the throngs, some of whom had
been anchored in prime viewing positions for four days.

''All part of the Fourth,'' Mr. Curtis said as he towed a disabled outboard boat
carrying a distraught family of four to shore. Moments later, Mr. Curtis's own
engine stopped, and he was on hands and knees with his tools. He managed to fix
the engine, even while the boat pitched and yawed wildly.

Other members of the family suggested that they might soon be dashed upon some
pilings, and the hatch cover hit him in the back of the head. For this, Josh
managed to slip his father a beer, despite Mrs. Curtis's attempts to interdict
the supply.

Mrs. Curtis, whose parents immigrated from Czechoslovakia and whose father
became a Pennsylvania coal miner, said she was surprised to find herself
''getting choked up'' when she watched the relighting of the statue on
television.

''Forget immigrants,'' said Mr. Curtis, one-upping his wife by noting his
great-grandfather was a Blackfoot Indian.

Mr. Curtis said that he believed in the American Dream and that his boat, which
he purchased for $3,000 and fixed up, is part his dream. He had a 16-footer
before this, and eventually he would like a twin-engine fishing boat that costs
$120,000. He said he believes that if he works hard, he will get it.

He quit his job with Roto-Rooter a few years ago and started his own drain- and
sewer-cleaning business, Drain Power, in North Bergen. ''I don't make a lot of
money,'' he said. ''I pay my bills. I help people with problems, and I get
satisfaction from my work.''

He described himself as ''patriotic, but not a love-it-or-leave-it guy.'' He
lost part of his right foot to a land mine in Vietnam as a member of the 101st
Airborne. His boat is named the Airborne.

''I don't belong to any veterans organizations or any of that stuff,'' he said.
''I told my boys never to get involved in a fight that isn't their fight, never
to get into wars like Vietnam, and to watch out about Central America.''

His greatest love, he said, is fishing with his sons, whom he has taught to
steer the boat, fillet the fish and fetch him a beer. He hopes that fishing will
keep them occupied and out of trouble.

Looking over the scene yesterday, Mr. Curtis said that he had been at Woodstock,
another unforgettable experience, and that he wondered if all those people from
Woodstock were in the harbor now, drinking beer on their boats and waving the
flag.

As these sons and daughters of immigrants continued to mill about the Statue of
Liberty in their pleasure boats, Josh began to look a little weary and asked,
''Are we part of history yet?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 5, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WANTED: GUARD DOGS, COURAGE A MUST

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 855 words

DATELINE: LACKLAND AIR FORCE BASE, Tex.


The Air Force, which recruits and trains working dogs for the military services
and Federal agencies, is having a hard time keeping up with a rapidly growing
demand.

Officers here said all the services wanted more patrol dogs to guard against
intruders, sniff out illicit drugs and detect explosives. The Secret Service
wants them for help in protecting the President and other officials, the Federal
Aviation Administration wants them for finding bombs and the Department of
Agriculture wants them for detecting illegally transported food.

The Defense Department's dog center here shipped 417 dogs in the 1985 fiscal
year, which ended last Sept. 30, but has provided 553 dogs to its customers
already in this fiscal year. The present backlog is 500 dogs, down somewhat from
720 two years ago.

Meantime, 300 dogs are in the Dog Center under observation by veterinarians and
300 more are at a training site on this sprawling base. Of the latter, 200 dogs
are in training; the remainder are experienced dogs used to train new dog
handlers.

They Search in Europe

Beyond the demand, the supply of dogs fit for military service has dropped so
much in the United States that the Air Force has been sending search teams to
Europe, especially West Germany, to find suitable animals.

''We were really having trouble,'' said Col. Teddy R. Lowe, who is in charge of
buying dogs. American breeders are more interested in dogs for show or hunting
while European breeders favor working dogs, he said. Competition from state and
local police forces who want dogs has added to the shortage.

German shepherds make the best military dogs, but Rottweilers, bouvier des
Flandres, giant schnauzers and Belgian Malinois are also accepted. Some dogs are
recruited locally, more from owners who send them in and the majority are
recruited by search teams on buying trips.

Tough standards also make it difficult to find suitable dogs. Of the 1,729 dogs
evaluated last year, only 383 were selected. Of those rejected, about two thirds
were disqualified because they were gun-shy, were too aggressive or not
aggressive enough or were medically unfit. Suitable dogs cost around $400 each.

Tested With Blank Shot

A prospective military dog is first tested when a handler fires blank pistol
shots. If the dog is startled or curious about the noise, he passes. If he is
afraid, he is out.

To test for aggression, a dog is agitated by a trained handler. If the dog
stands his ground, or snaps or strains at his leash to get at the agitator, he
can be used. If the dog cowers or wants to play, or if he is uncontrollable, he
is rejected.

Finally, a veterinarian measures the dog to see if he is 22 inches tall and
weighs 55 pounds, checks for parasites and, particularly, examines the dog for
the elbow and knee arthritis that is common to large breeds.

At the training site, Chief Petty Officer Lisa L. Homan of the Navy oversees the
basic training of dogs and handlers. Unlike the sentry dogs of Vietnam, which
were trained to distrust all humans but their handlers, today's patrol dogs are
taught to obey specific commands.

Much Affection Provided

Whether on the leash or loose, the dog is taught to stay, to watch his handler
if a suspect is taken, to attack on command and to break off the attack on
command. Each dog is given a great deal of affection, Chief Petty Officer Homan
says, and rewarded when he performs properly.

With that attention, a balanced diet and constant checking by veterinarians, she
says, ''military dogs get better care than 90 percent of the pets in the United
States.''

The key to teaching military policemen to handle dogs, she says, ''is to train
them to read a dog's signs because each dog is different.'' Some perk their ears
up, others lay them back when tensions rise.

Dogs with especially good senses of smell become drug sniffers. Over nine weeks,
they are exposed to the odors of four common drugs, including marijuana. When
the dog finds the drug, he is taught to sit down and is rewarded with food and
affection from the handler.

Only One Chance With Explosives

The best dogs are chosen to sniff out nine kinds of explosives. ''We put the
dogs with the best noses on explosives,'' says a handler, ''because we can't
afford to make a mistake. We can miss a drug and catch it later. You can't do
that with a bomb.''

The technique for finding drugs and bombs is the same, with the handler guiding
the search and often being able to tell where a bomb is by the way the dog
points. ''But our job is done after that,'' a handler says, ''and we get out of
there and call the bomb squad.''

Dogs that become military dogs at the age of 1 to 3 years are good until they
are about 8, Colonel Lowe says. Then they begin to slow down with age and the
fatigue of a rigorous life. Such dogs are brought back to Lackland where they
work with new dog handlers.

''We don't put dogs down,'' said Colonel Lowe, ''and we don't give them away.''
Noting protests over dogs and other animals being used for medical research, the
colonel adds, emphatically: ''And they are not used in research.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Cita, a Belgian Malinois, attacking an 'enemy' (NYT/Zigy
Kaluzny)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 5, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Pilots in Town

BYLINE: By Robin Toner and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 81 words


The Vietnam Helicopter Pilots Association was holding a four-day reunion in
Washington this weekend, and, like many veterans' groups, its members spent some
time at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. At an 8 A.M. service yesterday, the
pilots placed a wreath at the long, dark wall, and watched a flyover by two
helicopters piloted by members of their group. The gathering is a true reunion,
said Jay Elliott, adding that he had already run into a man he had not seen in
nearly 20 years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 5, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Hoang Van Thai, 71; A Vietnamese General

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 160 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 4


Gen. Hoang Van Thai, a Vietnamese revolutionary who fought against French and
American forces, died of a heart attack Wednesday in Hanoi, the official
Vietnamese press agency reported today. He was 71 years old.

The agency, in a dispatch monitored here, said the four-star general, a Deputy
Minister of Defense, was born in northern Vietnam and joined the Communist Party
in 1938.

He held top military posts after becoming involved in the organization of
Vietnam's revolutionary forces in October 1940.

General Thai was at one time chief of staff of the Vietnam People's Army, the
key military force in North Vietnam, and commander of the Army of Liberation of
South Vietnam.

After the Communist victory in 1975 against the United States-backed Government
in South Vietnam, General Thai was named Deputy Minister of Defense.

He had been a member of the Central Committee of the Vietnamese Communist Party
since 1960 and was a member of Parliament.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 5, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

LIBERTY WEEKEND/THE PEOPLE;
FOR VIETNAMESE REFUGEE, A HEARTFELT CELEBRATION OF LIBERTY

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1011 words


For a decade, Lee Truong dreamed of escaping from Vietnam. After he made it to a
refugee camp in Hong Kong in 1980, he spent two more years waiting for a sponsor
in America. And for the last seven months, living and studying in Boston, he
saved his money to visit New York and pay homage to the Statue of Liberty.

Mr. Truong and five of the friends with whom he fled Hanoi drove all night to
reach Battery Park before daybreak yesterday. Late last night, after the last of
the fireworks had died in the sky, they intended to turn around and drive the
six hours back.

''We have no money for a hotel, we have no friends to stay with,'' said Mr.
Truong, who is 23 years old. ''But we don't care. We love it.''

All of Mr. Truong's friends bought identical T-shirts displaying Miss Liberty's
face and the legend ''Forever.'' One friend took a picture of Mr. Truong and his
cousins Tran Nga and Som Nga to send to Mr. Truong's parents in Vietnam. ''So
they can see we are in freedom,'' Mr. Truong said.

After all the years, the waiting, the hoping, America had lived up to his
dreams. ''I always thought this is a beautiful country,'' he said, ''a country
where people smile with us, where we say what we think. And it is true. It is
real true. It is more than true.'' ''How many from Trinidad here?'' shouted the
soca singer Tony Ricardo to the crowd swaying to his band last night. A few
dozen hands rose. ''Any Bajans?'' Mr. Ricardo asked. ''Guyanans?'' There was
scattered response.

Then Mr. Ricardo asked the loaded question: ''Who's from Brooklyn.'' Suddenly it
seemed every arm in sight shot skyward. For New York's West Indian emigrants -
many, if not most, of whom live in the borough - the concert by Mr. Ricardo's
soul-calypso group and the Satisfier Steel Orchestra provided a raucous reminder
of what was once home.

It was arguably the hottest activity last night outside of the fireworks. When
an ambulance had to push through the audience on New York Plaza, the music
played on and the dancers parted without losing a beat. Mr. Ricardo had to be
literally pulled offstage, four bars into ''Spanish Harlem,'' to let the steel
band start its set.

For 19-year-old Heather Alleyne, who left Barbados for Flatbush 12 years ago,
the music evoked a Caribbean childhood, particularly the Bajan harvest festival
known as Cropover.

''I remember being disappointed when I first came here,'' she said, ''because
the streets weren't gold like everyone told me. I was 7 years old. What did I
know?''

But last night, Miss Alleyne made like a regular New Yorker, sampling everything
from shish kebab to daiquiris to ''something from Asia.''

''Heather,'' her friend Tracey Slade said, ''is an American girl now.''

Overheard from a forklift truck driver amid the mob downtown: ''Please move,
folks. This is not a safe thing. It would be a shame to die on a holiday.''

When Fred Golden was growing up in West New York, N.J., the son of eastern
European immigrants, he would often watch from the Palisades as ships plied the
Hudson. It was his mother's standing promise that if he behaved during the week,
she would take him on a ferry ride each Sunday.

Molly Golden had arrived from Rumania in steerage, and she often told her son
how at the end of the voyage she had waited up two days and two nights straight
to make sure she did not miss the first glimpse of Miss Liberty. When Mr. Golden
got his airplane pilot's license in 1934, his first flight was a trip over the
statue with his mother.

Mr. Golden thought back to those days yesterday as he watched the boats again,
this time hosting an Operation Sail party on the terrace of his 21st-floor
apartment in Manhattan. After a career built around the performing arts -
beginning at 15 as an usher at the Metropolitan Opera and ending as a theater
advertising executive - he felt gratitude.

''It's been a very emotional day,'' said Mr. Golden, who is 70 years old. ''I
was saying to my wife, Hope, 'I'm no youngster anymore, but I have no complaints
in this world. I look at what this country gave me, and I can say that I'm a
happy man.' ''

From the diplomacy file: Several months ago, the Port Authority of New York and
New Jersey promised a nonprofit group called the Fund for the Borough of
Brooklyn that it could use a pier on the East River for a Fourth of July
fund-raising party.

Meanwhile, the Port Authority promised the same pier as a berth for the Amerigo
Vespucci, Italy's participant in Operation Sail.

Theoretically, you say, no problem. The rub, however, is that the Brooklyn fund
sold $250-a-head tickets on the guarantee of a clear view of the Statue of
Liberty. And the Amerigo Vespucci sits 333 feet long and 180 feet high, blocking
that vista.

For two frantic days, phone calls swirled between Operation Sail officials, Port
Authority executives and Brooklyn Borough President Howard Golden. And the
solution? The Amerigo Vespucci would dock a bit further down the pier than
originally intended, leaving a window of clear space for the revelers. And the
late-afternoon docking itself would offer them some extra spectacle.

Best T-Shirt in Battery Park: ''Minnesota - Land of 10,000 Lakes, 15,264 Swamps
and 8 Fish.''

Yossi Yaniv, a businessman who emigrated from Israel eight years ago, was
strolling through the Harbor Festival in lower Manhattan. He stopped at a
sidewalk booth where a vendor had plugged in a television. At that moment, a
Hawaiian girl named Hue Cao was reading her essay on the meaning of liberty,
judged the best in a nationwide contest.

''That little girl was the same to me as the first immigrant ever to come to
America,'' Mr. Yaniv said. ''This is not just a birthday party. It is something
overwhelming, almost spiritual.''

A young woman next to Mr. Yaniv began to weep. He asked her if she was American,
and she said yes, she was from Mississippi. Mr. Yaniv found himself beginning to
break down, too, and he tried to hold back the tears.

But the woman from Mississippi put a consoling arm on his shoulder, and he let
go and they cried together.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lee Truong from boston with five friends in Battery Park
(NYT/William E. Sauro); Photo of Martha Murphy using a pocket mirror to see over
the crowd so she could relate the scene to Mike George (NYT/William E. Sauro)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LIBERTY WEEKEND/THE FESTIVAL;
A CHEERFUL CELEBRATION OF THE GOOD-HEARTED AMERICAN IDYLL

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 17, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 755 words


Amid the joyous jumble that was lower Manhattan this weekend, an Indian
immigrant named Shailesh Patel was frantically unpacking boxes of Statue of
Liberty T-shirts. He did not have a free second to look up from his newsstand
and admire the statue itself, not so far away in the harbor.

A passer-by asked Mr. Patel if he minded working while everyone else celebrated.
''No, no way,'' the 25-year-old answered. ''My business has no holiday. Seven
days. Long hours.'' What Mr. Patel's experience and his words remind us is that
this weekend America saluted an immigrant heritage that is ongoing and dynamic.
It is not some dusty museum piece, a 90-year-old from the old country trotted
out to polite applause, but a vibrant and replenishing part of society, central
to American history and American mythology.

Role as Refuge

The 1976 Bicentennial festivities may have played a more healing role, coming
with the country still divided by Watergate and the Vietnam War and New York
shaken by the fiscal crisis. But in a nation that for all its fissures exudes a
reborn confidence, and in a city renewed by a foreign-born population
approaching 40 percent, Liberty Weekend appealed to a different part of the
collective psyche, America's role as refuge.

Whatever the formal events proved to be -a spellbinding spectacle of fireworks
and tall ships, and a triumph of logistics besides -the less calculated side of
the holiday offered the most genuinely moving tableaux. When Liberty Weekend was
most lighthearted, it was most profound.

'There's a Brotherhood'

A Vietnamese refugee and his family drove overnight from Boston to get to
Battery Park for Independence Day. A Sikh man in his turban posed for a portrait
next to a war monument. A Hasidic woman strolled through a street fair, wearing
a long dark skirt, a blue kerchief and a button saying ''I H NY,'' with a
photograph of Miss Liberty inside the heart.

When one could wander through the Harbor Festival from gyros to burrito and from
polka to calypso, when one could watch a half-dozen blue-eyed blonds dance to
the sound of Puerto Rican jibaro, a music many of them had never heard before,
the easy commingling of so many ethnic pasts offered a vision of the American
idyll, a country as compassionate and good-humored as anyone could desire.

In a nation without a state religion, Liberty Weekend amounted to a convocation
of a common secular faith. And that cut two ways. Religion can be as
oppressively regimented as some of the events were. Or it can be as surprisingly
stirring as the individual discovery, or rediscovery, of devotion.

These last days have been filled with stories of newcomers who found themselves
swept with tears, of native-born families who raised their hands along with the
immigrants being sworn in as citizens, of subway passengers spontaneously
bursting into patriotic song.

Issues Remain

And what happens, it is fair to ask, when the party is over? All the old issues
remain, from the racial and sectarian strife that pit man against man to the
bitter and complex national debate about immigration policy. All the fun solves
none of the problems. But this weekend was not meant to answer any questions. It
provided a beautiful pause in such deliberations and a chance to think of how
much we share. The Statue of Liberty extended a promise, but not the guarantee
that it would be met. And that is why amid revelry some feel frustration,
betrayal and rage.

Immigrants keep the promise alive and in daylight - not only their promise, but
ours. When 25,000 newcomers all around the country recited the oath of
citizenship on Thursday night - people with names like Thanh Tran, Riva Sagalova
and Illuminada Rodriguez - they represented all who had preceded them and all
who would follow.

For the aspiration and verve and toil that every immigrant brings to America
seems to abate a bit with each generation down the line. Nobody works so hard as
his parent or grandparent who first reached this land. Nobody is ever as
selfless again. The United States will never mean quite so much to the little
American-born children one saw attending the festivities as to the foreign-born
parents who held their hands.

Mr. Patel was too busy becoming an American this weekend to toast the idea; but
he was integral to it. For the immigrant does more than work on everyone else's
day off. The Indian newsdealer, the Haitian cabby, the Greek cook - with their
energy and their dreams, they nourish and redeem a nation's soul.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Minor Leagues '86; Turner Gill;
Summer a Time for Starting Over

BYLINE: By Malcolm Moran

SECTION: Section 5; Page 6, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1340 words

DATELINE: WATERLOO, Iowa


SOON after Turner Gill arrived at Municipal Stadium to begin work on a rare
transformation from professional football to baseball, he was presented with a
reminder of his previous athletic life.

Steve Swisher, the manager of the Waterloo Indians of the Class A Midwest
League, gave his newest player a book of the theories and practices of the
Cleveland Indian organization. ''I said, 'You thought your days with a playbook
were over. Here's another one,' '' Swisher said and smiled.

The playbook was nothing like the ones Gill had known as the quarterback for the
Montreal Concordes of the Canadian Football League, a quarterback who had
completed more than 56 percent of his passes and had averaged 4.8 yards per
carry in his two seasons, and who before that had helped make the 1983
University of Nebraska Cornhuskers one of the most powerful offensive units in
the recent history of the game.

This new book was filled with defenses against bunt plays, and with cutoff and
relay plays. It was a book Gill had not planned on studying, not even after the
third and most serious of the concussions he suffered last season meant the end
of his football career.

After a medical examination by a neurologist in Omaha late last winter indicated
that another football season would present too high a risk of permanent injury,
Gill had intended to return to school, complete his work towards a degree in
psychology and sociology, become a graduate assistant at Nebraska, and work
toward becoming a head football coach at a major program.

''Why should he do that?'' said Ed Keating, his agent, who understands that an
assistant college coach has one of the few life styles even less stable than
that of a minor league baseball player. Keating thought baseball was a better
idea. ''If this doesn't work,'' Keating said, ''then he can do that.''

When baseball players were reporting to spring training and Gill was wondering
about his future in Montreal, Keating raised his idea in a telephone
conversation. ''He got off the phone,'' Gayle Gill said of her husband, ''and he
said, 'What do you think about baseball?' I could tell he was excited.''

While Bo Jackson was deciding whether he wanted to play baseball or football,
Gill had been reduced to one choice. His 24th birthday is less than seven weeks
away. In the six years between his departure from Arlington Heights High School
in Fort Worth and his first minor league game on Father's Day, Gill had played
in 48 baseball games, all in his junior year at Nebraska.

His age and inexperience did not discourage 10 teams from showing interest and
three, including the Mets, from making competitive bids. And soon after a hectic
nine-day period in late May that began with a failed physical at the Montreal
training camp and ended with an announcement of a baseball contract in
Cleveland, Turner and Gayle Gill found themselves as guests at Waterloo's Twin
Torch Inn, a downtown motel, while they looked for an apartment to rent. ''I
said to my wife, 'Welcome to the minor leagues,' '' Gill said.

Gayle Gill sits behind the home team's dugout on the third base side of the
5,400-seat ball park of wood and corrugated sheet metal while her husband works
to remaster skills that he has not used for years. As he walked from the on-deck
circle to home plate one recent night, the public-address announcer said, ''And
on your bingo cards that is N forty three. N-four-three. Number 18, Turner
Gill.''

They are about 550 miles, three steps, and perhaps two or three years from
Cleveland.

''If he can find the tools that he had when he was a senior in high school, he's
a definite major league prospect,'' said Joe Klein, a vice president in the
Indian organization. ''It's not like the guy has been at war someplace. When I
was playing, the Vietnam War was going on, and players were running off and
missing a year or two. He hasn't been inactive. He's probably as good an athlete
as anyone in the major leagues right now.''

When Klein was the farm director for the Texas Rangers and Gill was a highly
recruited quarterback and shortstop in high school, the two sat and talked for
several hours during a visit to a Rangers game. Klein considers such a late
switch in jobs very possible. He remembered his friend Tom Brown, who was once
in an Opening Day lineup for the Washington Senators and became a safety for the
Green Bay Packers.

''I remember watching the College All-Star Game on an off day,'' Klein said.
''The Packers were in it. He said, 'I've had enough. I can't take it anymore.'
He was hitting about .208 at the time, which would make you want to play
football.''

Gill had originally chosen football, in part, because of the relatively normal
life style. His Montreal contract was signed in February 1984, 10 months before
his wedding day. ''Baseball is harder on a marriage, harder on a family,'' his
wife said. ''We talked about it quite a bit, how he'd be on buses and I'd be
here, and we'd be moving, so I might not be able to get a job. We have such a
stable relationship now, it doesn't seem so hard.''

She is considering applying to Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland for
its graduate program in clinical psychology. He chose the Indians, despite an
offer from the Mets that Keating said was for about 40 percent more money,
because of his confidence in Klein and assurances included in the contract that
would help his progress, such as being included in the major league camp next
March.

''I was looking for an organization that was going to be watching me totally,''
Gill said. ''I want to know in two or three years if I'm going to make it or
not. If I'm not there, I'm going to get out. I'm not going to waste my time.
I've already wasted two or three years because I haven't been here. But I think
I can make it up in a year, and I'll be right where I should be.

''They're going to give me the best help I need to better my skills. And that's
what I want to get.

''Right here, Swisher's helping me out. They're not going to rush me. If I'm
having problems, I want to stay out of the lineup for a day just to keep myself
together. They know I've been away for a while, but I've been catching on real
quick. I don't think I'm too far behind.

''I just feel that Joe Klein is going to see that I get the best coaching, the
best hitting instructor, to better my skills. It could be a lie. Who knows? I
could be wrong. But in my heart, that's how I feel.''

He has shown them a combination of correctable flaws, a presence of mind, and a
surprising hitting ability. Gill had eight hits in his first seven games for a
.333 average, but through late last week had fallen to .250. Klein had thought
that hitting would be the most difficult skill to regain, but the problems have
been in the field, where Gill has made nine errors at shortstop, including three
in one game recently.

Gill made two errors in his first game, but also drove in two runs. In the
fourth inning of his first home game, Gill failed to come up with a slow roller,
and a deep voice from behind home plate said, ''You gotta do better than that to
make the majors.''

Soon, he did. In the top of the 10th inning, with a runner at second and none
out, a ground ball was hit to shortstop and the runner began toward third.
Instead of throwing the ball right away, Gill ran directly at the hesitating
runner to set up a rundown play. When the next batter hit a hard grounder
between shortstop and third, Gill made a backhanded stop that began an
inning-ending double play.

At 9 o'clock the next morning he was at a practice, hitting in the hot Iowa sun.
''You've got to like a guy like him, the way he goes about his business,''
Swisher said. ''He's been to the mountaintop before. I'm sure that'll always be
in the back of his mind.''

He no longer has to wait for a football week. There would be another game that
night, and another chance to relocate those skills.

''I think the thing he likes about it,'' Gayle Gill said, ''is it's 90 percent
games and 10 percent practice.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Turner Gill (AP & NYT/Paul Jensen)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 21, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 687 words


Lovejoy is back in his 10th adventure - THE TARTAN SELL by Jonathan Gash (St.
Martin's, $14.95). He has not changed. He never will change. He may be
perpetually broke, his private life is always in a mess, he is a liar and
pretends to be a coward, his business dealings are unethical, no woman is safe
from him, but he responds to antiques the way Mozart responded to the key of D
minor. Antiques set up a vibration in him, and all of a sudden this dubious
character becomes an artist.

''The Tartan Sell'' takes Lovejoy to Scotland through a combination of
circumstances too involved to go into. Heading north, he links up with a
traveling carnival and sets up an antiques scam. There is a confrontation with a
rival carnival, both sides assemble for a rumble, and Lovejoy sneaks away. In
Scotland he joins a group making fake antiques and plans a really big scam.

Perhaps ''The Tartan Sell'' is too much like previous Lovejoy capers. But Mr.
Gash has a good formula, and the book moves with confidence. Along the way the
reader, as always, will learn a great deal about the ins and outs of the
antiques world, with nuggets of information about specific items - doggie bells,
bullet-shaped teapots, Dresden china, Kandler porcelains, you name it. There
also is a good deal of fascinating and rather cynical information about how an
auction can be set up and rigged. The BBC is preparing a 10-part series on the
Lovejoy exploits. His admirers, including this one, will rejoice.

The series about Sgt. Lloyd Hopkins of the Los Angeles Police Department
continues with SUICIDE HILL by James Ellroy (Mysterious Press, $15.95). Hopkins
has an I.Q. of 170, which puts him on the genius level, though he sure doesn't
act like a genius. He is prone to violence, has emotional swings that suggest
schizophrenia and is always in trouble with his superiors.

In ''Suicide Hill'' the villain is a tough and very smart criminal just released
from jail. He discovers his girlfriend has walked out on him and is determined
to find her. To raise a stash, he recruits two thugs and starts robbing banks.
As it turns out, the criminal and the policeman are opposite sides of the same
coin, and it is just an accident that one happens to be on the side of the law.

''Suicide Hill'' is a gritty, four-letter-word example of the realistic crime
novel. With all its realism, however, it is artificial and overwritten, and it
bogs down into psychological complexities that will be far less interesting to
the reader than they were to the author.

TIGHTROPE by Teri White (Mysterious Press, $15.95) also has a Los Angeles
locale. The book brings back Blue Maguire and Spaceman Kowalski. Fairly routine
but competent in its way, ''Tightrope'' pits three Vietnam veterans against the
two detectives. The veterans are trying to get their hands on a fortune in
diamonds, and the leader of the gang is a killer. Everything is neatly plotted
except for the contrived and theatrical ending.

The seventh in the series of McGarr books is MCGARR AND THE LEGACY OF A WOMAN
SCORNED by Bartholomew Gill (Viking, $14.95). The early books in this series,
which started in 1977, had something original about them. McGarr, an officer of
the Irish Garda, was an unusual man with a wide variety of interests, including
gourmet food. Something of a philosopher, he looked on life with an
even-tempered acceptance of good and evil. Those early McGarr books had tight
plotting and a good deal of police action.

But the recent books have lacked the smooth flow of their predecessors. They
have been talky, even turgid. ''McGarr and the Legacy of a Woman Scorned'' marks
something of a return to form. But not entirely. There still is too much
conversation that does not further the action and a lack of buildup to the
conclusion.

''A Woman Scorned'' finds McGarr on vacation. He is asked to help solve a local
murder. There is a lot of talk of horses, but nothing much really happens until
about midway in the book. McGarr recruits his wife, Noreen, as an assistant, and
presently she gets into trouble. She is becoming more interesting than McGarr
himself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE

BYLINE: By Betsy Brown

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 6, Column 3; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1568 words


FREEDOM'S HOLY LIGHT by Richard H. Schneider. Thomas Nelson Publishers. 128
pages. $14.95.

Just in time for the celebration of the 100th birthday of the Statue of Liberty,
this book, with 25 photographs, tells the history of the statue and provides a
number of little-known facts about its conception and construction.

For instance, it tells of the statue's relationship to the Eiffel Tower; the
indifference of the public while the statue languished in packing crates on
Bedloe's Island; and the role of Joseph Pulitzer in gathering donations from the
''little people'' to erect the statue after prominent personages had ridiculed
it as ''a fat lady,'' or, as in being a woman, unsuited to represent the nation.

The photographs show the statue as it looked standing in Paris, with the head
and torch at street level as the torso was erected nearby; the hand under
construction, with a workman sitting on the wrist; and others that give an idea
of the statue's size that is difficult to comprehend in its present setting.

The book has a forward by President Reagan, a preface by Lee A. Iaccocca and a
benediction by the Rev. Norman Vincent Peale.  Richard Schneider has lived in
Rye since 1980 and now, among other local activities, is on Rye's Liberty
Committee. He is a senior editor of Guideposts magazine, where he has worked for
22 years after 25 years as a corporate publicity and communications director.

He is the author or co-author of 12 books, including ''The Honorable
Alcoholic,'' with former Senator Harold E. Hughes; ''Crossroads,'' with Leon
Jaworski, Watergate prosecutor; ''Strong at the Broken Places,'' with Max
Cleland, the Vietnam veteran who was head of the Veteran's Administration, and
others.

Mr. Schneider said he did most of his research on the book, which took a year
and a half to write, through the Westchester Library System, using the Rye Free
Reading Room as his base.

LOVE IN THE MIDDLE AGES by Helen Barolini. William Morrow & Company. 259 pages.
$17.95.

When Donna Scortese, a widow in her 50's who is almost reconciled to her single
state, meets Murray Buddenberg, who is in the throes of a divorce, and the two
find themselves instantly attracted, the future looks promising. But each brings
a different set of expectations and cultural values, posting barriers that seem
insurmountable. The characters, in their middle ages, also face an unexpected
conflict that is the product of the 1980's, as Donna seeks to find independence
in a new business venture, while Bud looks to her as a full-time companion who
can make up for his unhappy past.

Helen Barolini, who has lived alternately in Ossining and Italy since 1955,
began her writing career when she went to Italy in 1948 and sent feature
articles to The Herald-Journal in Syracuse, her home city. After her marriage to
the Italian author Antonio Barolini, she translated his first novel and his
short stories, which appeared in The New Yorker magazine in the 1950's.

She then began writing short stories, essays, travel articles and poetry, which
have appeared in The Paris Review, New York Review of Books, South Atlantic
Quarterly, Cosmopolitan, the Yale Review, Il Caffe, Prairie Schooner and others.

She returned to the United States in 1973 after the death of her husband and was
later awarded a grant from the National Endowment of the Arts to work on a
novel. The book, ''Umbertina,'' was published in 1979 and is a many-generational
story of Italian women and their immigration to the United States. Last year her
second book was published - ''The Dream Book: An Anthology of Writings by
Italian-American Women.'' It received an award from the Before Columbus
Foundation.

RIDE GUIDE: HUDSON VALLEY AND SOUND SHORE by Dan Goldfischer and Melissa
Heffernan. White Meadow Press. 120 pages. $6.95.

This book lists 21 routes for bicycling, 12 of them in Westchester, from 24 to
60 miles long. There is a map of each route, including other roads in the area
so a cyclist can shorten or lengthen the ride and a ''cue list'' of points of
interest. The book gives descriptions of terrain, type of traffic and road
conditions, such as whether it is a dirt road or is well-paved. All the routes
given are circuits returning to the starting point.

Among the routes are White Plains-Bedford, going by Washington's Headquarters,
crossing briefly into Connecticut and passing the Bedford Green, the Mianus
River Gorge, the Frank Lloyd Wright-inspired homes of Usonia and the Kensico
Dam. The Armonk-Purdys route goes past the Butler and West Moreland Sanctuaries,
Caramoor, the Somers Elephant and the Reader's Digest headquarters. The ''Sleepy
Hollow Special,'' passes Sunnyside, Philipsburg Manor, Lyndhurst, the Old Dutch
Church and Pocantico Hills.

Dan Goldfischer grew up in New Rochelle and has been a biking enthusiast since
the age of 14, when he made a three-week bicycle tour of New England. He wrote
his first bicycle guide book while living in New Jersey, when a fellow member of
a bicycle club complained that ''We always go to the same places.''

Last year Mr. Goldfischer, who had moved back to New Rochelle, decided the
county also needed a guide book. He was working at night as a typesetter, so he
spent his days planning new routes and trying them out. In the winter, he and
his co-author, Melissa Heffernan, drove the routes by car and recorded the
mileage.

Ms. Heffernan lives in Denville, N.J. She and Mr. Goldfischer operate the White
Meadow Press Rockaway, N.J.

PERSONAL ACCOUNTS by Robert Phillips. Ontario Review Press/ Princeton. 142
pages. $9.95.

This collection of 85 poems is a selection from the works of Robert Phillips
from 1966 to 1986. Two-thirds have been published previously, in The New Yorker,
The Nation, Southern Quarterly Review, The Hudson Review, and others. Some are
amusing, some sad, and some bitter.

They are arranged by topic rather than chronologically. There are the
''Middle-Aged Nocturns,'' introspective and sometimes humorous ponderings;
''Ninety Miles From Nowhere,'' on his family life; ''Brief Lives,'' in which he
comments on such disparate characters as William Cullen Bryant, on a French
ballet dancer who died when her tutu caught fire and on Glenn Gould, ''The
Well-Tempered Performer.'' There are comic twists of phrase and form, like a
poem on Giacometti shaped like one of the sculpture's tall, thin figures.

Robert Phillips lived in North Salem from 1967 to 1971, in Germany for two
years, and in Katonah since 1973.

He taught at Syracuse University, his alma mater, for three years, went into
advertising in 1963, and is now creative director at Batten Barton Durstine and
Osborn. In Katonah, he is director of a poetry-reading series at the village
library, a member of the Vestry of St. Luke's Church, and a member of the
library board.

He has edited six books, two on the poetry and letters of Delmore Schwartz. He
has written three books of criticism, one novel, ''The Land of Lost Content,''
and four collections of poetry, including this latest one.

He said he is able to write, despite his full schedule and commute into New York
City, because he is able to ''compartmentalize my time.'' He writes on the
train, and said one reason he has written poetry is that ''you can't carry a big
manuscript for a book, but you can write a poem on an envelope.''

THE LIFE AND LEGEND OF JAY GOULD by Maury Klein. Johns Hopkins University Press.
592 pages. $27.50.

Jay Gould is probably better known in Westchester for his Gothic mansion,
Lyndhurst, the scene of summer concerts and a destination for sightseers, than
for his outstanding role as a 19th-century industrialist and his reputation as a
robber baron.

This book describes the legend and attempts to counter it. Gould was seen as a
rapacious man who amassed wealth and power by unscrupulous means and was called
the most hated man of his time. Born in 1836, he left his family farm at 13 to
go to school; worked as a surveyor, acquired a tannery, entered Wall Street,
speculated in gold, wrested a monopoly for Western Union and assembled and
controlled a network of railroads in the Middle West. When he died in 1892,, his
fortune was $75 million, a large fortune at that time.

The book contains several vitriolic cartoons of of Gould that indicate the depth
of public hatred for him at the time. The author, however, after an exhaustive
survey, concludes that Gould's ethics were probably no worse than those of
others of his era, and that he was ''measured in the wrong ways by the wrong
instruments for the wrong reasons.'' Gould was a man of daring, talent and
vision, who took great risk, the author says.

Maury Klein, a professor of history at the University of Rhode Island, did some
of his research at Lyndhurst, where he said he went for two periods of time ''to
get the feel of it, to look at the furniture and possessions.'' While there he
went through some of Gould's few personal letters, those written to his wife
from Europe in 1879, and an extensive collection of photographs, some of which
appear in the book.

Mr. Klein is the author of ''Prisoners of Progress,'' a study of cities and
industrialization; ''History of the Louisville and National Railroad''; ''The
Great Richmond Terminal''; and a biography of Edward Porter Alexander, a
Confederate General and businessman. He is now working on a two-volume history
of the Union Pacific Railroad.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Richard H. Schneider and cover of book, and, authors Robert
Phillips and Helen Barolini (NYT/William Levitt; Thomas Victor; Whitney Lane)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Kent State Trustees Reject Design for Protest Memorial

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 183 words

DATELINE: KENT, Ohio, July 6


Kent State University trustees have rejected a design they had earlier accepted
for a memorial to the four students killed and nine others wounded by National
Guardsmen in a Vietnam war protest in 1970.

They rejected the design submitted by a team headed by Ian F. Taberner of the
University of Michigan, because he was not a citizen of the United States, as
required by the design competition, the university said.

Instead, trustees decided Wednesday to commission a team headed by Bruno Ast, a
Chicago architect, to create the memorial. Mr. Ast's team had won second place
in a design competition for the memorial. The initial results were announced
April 4.

Mr. Taberner told the university in April that he was a Canadian citizen and the
university had planned to execute the design using him as a consultant. He said
that arrangment was ended because the university disapproved of his plan to
include the names of those killed as part of the memorial, an idea suggested by
the victims' parents.

Mr. Ast was born in Yugoslavia in 1937 but became a citizen of the United States
in 1955.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SOLDIERS BID A FAREWELL TO SMOKING

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 930 words

DATELINE: FORT BELVOIR, Va., July 7


The ashtrays have been consigned to a closet at the headquarters building here,
and Sgt. Maj. Donald G. Merritt's office door is emblazoned with a brilliant
yellow ''No Smoking'' sign.

Sergeant Merritt, who usually smokes more than two packs of Marlboros each day,
had been three hours without a cigarette, and was talking this morning about
quitting for the second time since he joined the Army 28 years ago and, like so
many young men, found respite from fear or boredom in tobacco.

Smoking and soldiering are old companions. American soldiers in France in World
War I considered the cigarette one of the fine points of European culture. By
World War II, advertisers had latched onto the link, and ''Lucky Strike Green''
went to war.

Field rations in Vietnam always included a few cigarettes, and even the slang
used to announce work breaks -''Smoke if you got 'em'' - encouraged the habit.

But today the service turned about face and deserted that tradition. Citing the
health of smokers and nonsmokers alike, the Army adopted a new policy meant to
make the habit an exception rather than a rule among the troops. Around the
world today, smoking was prohibited in Army facilities, vehicles and aircraft,
with the exceptions of specially established smoking areas.

Further Restrictions Expected

The Army's new policy is part of a campaign against tobacco throughout the
military. The Navy and Air Force are expected to announce their own new rules
shortly.

A visitor to Fort Belvoir, which is home to several Army schools and engineering
activities, found most soldiers and officers who smoke feeling stoical or
skeptical, while nonsmokers, particularly former smokers, spoke favorably of the
new rules.

At Fort Belvoir, one popular location for smoking was a dimly lit stairwell,
where a cohort of senior noncommissioned officers gathered for a hurried puff
during a classroom break.

The sergeants, who had been studying demolition, were of the class of troops
most heavily addicted to tobacco. Sixty-three percent of the Army's senior
sergeants smoke, according to an Army spokesman. Fewer than a quarter of the
officers smoke, and altogether 52 percent of the Army's men and women in uniform
smoke.

The stairwell seemed to be an improper smoking area under guidelines that have
trickled down from the Army's Training and Doctrine Command, which has banned
trainees from smoking in the work day, whether at boot camp or in more advanced
courses.

''I feel sorry for the smokers, but I'm glad to be able to come out on break and
be able to breathe,'' said one nonsmoker in the class, Sgt. 1st Class Brian D.
Gibbs.

Army's New Image of Fitness

Sergeant Gibbs said he quit smoking eight years ago when he began running to
keep fit. It is a theme that recurs in conversations with soldiers: the old
image of masculinity, sold so hard by tobacco companies, giving way in the
military to a new quest for fitness that leaves no room for smoking.

But the smokers scoffed at the notion that the Army would succeed in eliminating
what has long been considered one of the soldier's few pleasures.

Back at headquarters, Sergeant Merritt said it was an unwritten Army rule that
first drew him to tobacco.

On road marches, he found that as a nonsmoker he would be assigned water duty
when the rest of his unit took smoking breaks. ''I figured it out pretty
quick,'' he said. ''I bought a pack of Camels and practiced that night. The next
day I was able to sit in the shade.''

He later quit for nine months while in Vietnam, he said, only to backslide at
the Long Binh hospital where he was recuperating after being injured in a 1969
ammunition explosion. ''The doctors smoked, the nurses smoked, the medics smoked
and the patients smoked,'' he said. ''There was a little more than mild stress
at the time.''

Sgt. Maj. Matthew Lee, the ranking noncommissioned officer at Fort Belvoir, got
a jump on the new regime by quitting on June 16, when he heard of the impending
change. He said health considerations swayed him more than the new policy, but
he viewed the new rules as a good thing for the Army.

''I perceive an individual who smokes in the military as having a discipline
problem - self-discipline,'' Sergeant Lee said.

Sergeant Lee said he hoped to urge other soldiers to quit by his example, rather
than by exercising rank. And the Army as a whole seems to be taking a civil tone
in imposing the rules.

''As caring and concerned leaders we must exercise sound and reasonable judgment
and carry out this policy in a gradual yet deliberate way,'' said Gen. John A.
Wickham Jr., the Army Chief of Staff, in a message on how the rules should be
imposed. ''Reasonableness and common sense must be guidelines in the execution
of the policy.''

Under most circumstances, soldiers will not be court-martialed for breaking the
rules. But they could face unspecified milder forms of punishment, the Army
says. For the moment, the problem is not one of enforcement but of drafting
local rules that make sense.

Each supervising officer must impose the new policy, and Lieut. Col. John E.
Ooley, a former smoker who is the post's public affairs officer, was searching
for a formula to accommodate those who have in the past resisted his
exhortations to join the ranks of the reformed. ''I'm going to write a policy,''
he said, ''but I'm not going to write it off the top of my head.''

To Sergeant Merritt, though, gentle persuasion need not be the Army's style. ''A
lot of people in this world do a good job only because they are kicked in the
rear,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of soldiers at Fort Belvoir in Washington taking smoking break
from classs (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SUPREME COURT ROUNDUP;
COURT BACKS SCHOOL ON STUDENT'S 'VULGAR' SPEECH

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1276 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 7


Taking a broad view of school officials' disciplinary authority, the Supreme
Court today upheld by 7 to 2 a school's two-day suspension of a 17-year-old
student who made what it called a ''lewd and indecent'' speech to a high school
assembly.

''Surely it is a highly appropriate function of public school education to
prohibit the use of vulgar and offensive terms in public discourse,'' Chief
Justice Warren E. Burger said for himself and four other members of the
majority.

His broadly worded opinion said ''schools must teach by example the shared
values of a civilized social order'' and must have broad discretion to punish
what officials consider ''inappropriate'' speech in classrooms and assemblies.

Metaphors and Innuendo

The decision upheld a Spanaway, Wash., school's suspension of Matthew N. Fraser,
who had used sexual metaphors and innuendo in support of his candidate for the
student government. The assembly at which he spoke was attended by about 600
students 14 years old and older, and some responded to the speech with hooting
and yelling.

Mr. Fraser described his friend as ''a man who is firm - he's firm in his pants,
he's firm in his shirt, his character is firm - but most of all, his belief in
you, the students of Bethel, is firm.'' He also said his friend was ''a man who
takes his point and pounds it in'' and ''a man who will go to the very end -
even to the climax, for each and every one of you.''

His candidate won the election by a wide margin.

While Chief Justice Burger's opinion at one point called the speech ''obscene,''
the dissenters said that the April 1983 speech contained no obscene words and
that his allusions to sex acts were metaphorical, not direct.

The Court overturned rulings by two lower Federal courts that had upheld a suit
by the student and his father, which asserted that his First Amendment right to
free speech had been violated, and awarded him $278 in damages and $12,750 in
litigation costs and attorney's fees.

The Reagan Administration, which had entered the case on the side of the school
officials, applauded the decision. Education Secretary William J. Bennett said,
''The decision reminds us that schools must possess the moral authority to
prepare our young people for citizenship.''

Justice William J. Brennan Jr. concurred in the decision that the school had not
violated the First Amendment but not in Chief Justice Burger's broad endorsement
of official power to regulate ''inappropriate'' student speech.

He said Chief Justice Burger's description of the student's speech as
''obscene'' was clearly inconsistent with the Court's narrow definition of
obscenity. Justice Brennan said the speech was properly punished as
''disruptive'' but was neither obscene nor indecent.

The speech was ''no more 'obscene,' 'lewd,' or 'sexually explicit' than the bulk
of programs currently appearing on prime-time television or in the local
cinema,'' Justice Brennan asserted. Also joining the majority but not the Chief
Justice's opinion was Justice Harry A. Blackmun.

Justice Thurgood Marshall, dissenting in the case, Bethel School District v.
Fraser, No. 84-1667, said the speech was not even ''disruptive.''

Justice John Paul Stevens dissented separately, saying the student ''should not
be disciplined for speaking frankly in a school assembly if he had no reason to
anticipate punitive consequences.'' He noted that Mr. Fraser had discussed his
planned remarks with three teachers in advance and had not been warned he risked
discipline.

Chief Justice Burger said the case was very unlike a 1969 case in which the
Court held school officials had violated the First Amendment rights of students
who were disciplined for wearing black armbands in school to protest the Vietnam
War. He stressed ''the marked distinction between the ''political 'message' of
the armbands'' and ''the sexual content of respondent's speech in this case.''

''The undoubted freedom to advocate unpopular and controversial views in schools
and classrooms must be balanced against the society's countervailing interest in
teaching students the boundaries of socially appropriate behavior,'' he said.

''The schools, as instruments of the state, may determine that the essential
lessons of civil, mature conduct cannot be conveyed in a school that tolerates
lewd, indecent, or offensive speech and conduct such as that indulged in by this
confused boy,'' he added.

''The pervasive sexual innuendo in Fraser's speech,'' he said, ''was plainly
offensive to both teachers and students.''

By ''glorifying male sexuality, and in its verbal content, the speech was
acutely insulting to teen-age girl students,'' he said, and ''could well be
seriously damaging to its less mature audience, many of whom were only 14 years
old and on the threshold of awareness of human sexuality.''

Justice Brennan said, however, ''There is no evidence in the record that any
students, male or female, found the speech 'insulting.' ''

Justice Stevens questioned whether ''a group of judges who are at least two
generations and 3,000 miles away from the scene of the crime'' were as well
qualified as Mr. Fraser to determine whether the speech would offend his
contemporaries, who went on to elect the candidate for whom he spoke.

The court took these other actions today: Death Penalty and Race The Court
agreed to hear arguments in early 1987 in an appeal that implicitly challenges
the constitutionality of the sentences of hundreds of the more than 1,700 people
on death row around the country.

The death penalty case, McCleskey v. Kemp, No. 84-6811, is an appeal by Warren
McCleskey, a Georgia murderer, arguing that the administration of the death
penalty in that state was unconstitutionally tainted by racial bias.

The appeal is based on statistics showing that killers of white victims draw
death sentences far more frequently than do killers of black victims and that
blacks who kill white victims are sentenced to death more than any other
category of defendants.

If the Court upholds the appeal, it could overturn the death sentences of
hundreds of defendants not only in Georgia but in other states, where similar
statistical arguments could be made. Many legal experts say such an outcome,
although possible, is unlikely.

The statistical studies used by Mr. McCleskey's lawyers assert that, based on a
study of all Georgia death sentences from 1973 through 1979, those who killed
white victims were 11 times more likely to receive the death sentence as those
who kill black victims.

Defenders of the death penalty have argued that such statistics are misleading
because the kinds of murders least likely to be punished by death, such as those
growing out of quarrels between family members or acquaintances, typically
involve killers and victims of the same race.

Affirmative Action

The Court decided to grapple again next year with the thorny legal questions
raised by racial preferences, and for the first time with sexual preferences, in
affirmative action plans in the workplace.

In United States v. Paradise, No. 85-999, the Court agreed to consider the
constitutionality of what the Justice Department, in its appeal, called a
''one-black-for-one-white promotion quota'' that a lower Federal court last year
ordered Alabama to use to rectify past discrimination against blacks in its
state trooper force.

In Johnson v. Transportation Agency, No. 85-1129, the Court agreed to decide
whether a public employer may promote a woman candidate over a man with a higher
test score under a voluntary affirmative action plan adopted to cure
underrepresentation of women in the workforce.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Chief Justice Warren E. Burger (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 9, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

OBSERVER;
Crying On the Outside

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 751 words


As this is written the outside temperature is 99 degrees. That's in the shade. I
stepped out there to read the thermometer. The humidity was perhaps 135 percent.
I was glad to come back into the air-conditioning.

The carpenters who are erecting a new porch scowled when I inquired if it was
hot enough for them. They have no sense of humor, I suspect. Still, after you've
spent five hours driving nails in heat deep enough to bake a camel, I suppose
most people would find it hard to smile at a pleasant jest.

And in their defense, let it be pointed out that if the temperature is 99 in the
shade it is probably 110 in the full sunshine, which is what they are working
in.

I couldn't help noticing that they were hardly working at maximum efficiency.
There was a good deal of climbing down from the porch roof and standing in the
shade of the nearby dogwood where there was a lot of unnecessarily ostentatious
shaking of perspiration from torsos.

Well, it seemed unnecessary to me. You don't pay carpenters good wages to have
perspiration shaken all over your dogwood tree. At least that's the way I see
it.

Nor do you pay them to spend all day tramping into the house asking for pitchers
of water, all the time leaving the door ajar so that they can get some of the
air-conditioning outside, I suspect.

One might expect them to realize that drinking so much water in this heat is
sheer folly, since it probably intensifies the flow of perspiration which
compels them to keep abandoning the job in order to shake sweat all over the
dogwood.

I was tempted to point this out to the crew boss last time I heard him in the
kitchen for water. In fact, I rose from my library armchair, put aside my copy
of Tax Shelter Digest and went into the kitchen intending to suggest he rethink
his philosophy of bodily fluids.

He looked so purple, however, and so incapable of grasping a summons to
cool-headed common sense that I suspected he might pour the pitcher of water
over my new slacks if I were to favor him with what he would doubtless later
tell the police had been ''a bunch of crap.''

His palpable animosity is understandable, of course. Laboring at my new porch,
he and his sweat-drenched colleagues can think only of their hardship. Why, they
wonder, should they have to toil in 110 degrees of steam while I sit in my
library armchair, cool as a tax-free million in beautifully conditioned,
dehumidified air?

I cannot blame them for being unable to think things through very clearly in
today's heat. Their anger is the anger felt by people all over the world when
they discover, too late, that they have failed to provide themselves with
air-conditioned havens for times of unbearable heat.

Outside in unbearable heat - outside in any extremely harsh environment, for
that matter - the mind does not function very clearly. For clear thinking, the
world has to rely on inside people whose comfortable amenities enable them to
think objectively and dispassionately without the emotional distractions that
handicap people who are roasting or freezing or suffering any of the other
agonies endemic to life on the outside.

I first observed this during the Vietnam War. Then, clear-thinking, inside
people who had safely sequestered their draft-age sons in draft-proof colleges
had to struggle constantly to keep their patience with improvident parents who
opposed the war because their sons were vulnerable to the draft.

The emotionalism of parents who had not been provident enough to draft-proof
their sons, who had failed to provide air-conditioning, as it were - this
emotionalism made it impossible for them to grasp the intellectual rightness of
the war. And, of course, made their dovishness intellectually worthless.

I think of this now as my carpenters gasp for mercy and unscrupulously take my
pay for wasting time perspiring all over my dogwood. As outsiders, it is their
social duty to bear up without whining.

In the same way, as an insider it is my social duty to keep cool so that I can
think clearly and, by clear thought made possible by air-conditioned comfort, to
advise these carpenters on what is good for them.

Thus, tomorrow or the next day, or whenever the heat wave breaks and the
carpenters are willing to listen peaceably to clear-headed precepts from the
inside, I shall urge them to enroll their children in finishing schools for
young fogeys, where they will acquire the respect essential for keeping the
inside delightful and the insiders comfortably in charge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

7 YEARS AFTER EMBASSY SEIZURE, IRAN STILL PRINTS U.S SECRETS

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 9


Seven years after Iranian student militants took over the United States Embassy
in Teheran, the classified documents that the students found there continue to
have implications for both sides.

Iran is continuing to publish paperback collections of the documents, which were
discovered when militants seized the embassy in November 1979, according to
Iranian officials.

The paperbacks, titled ''Documents From the Espionage Den,'' and published in
the name of the ''Students Following the Line of the Imam,'' now total nearly 60
volumes.

''I don't know if the intention of these boys is to prevent any movement toward
the United States, but it is one of the inevitable consequences,'' said Iran's
chief delegate at the United Nations, Said Rajaie-Khorassani. ''They keep the
kettle boiling.''

Country's Reserves Drained

Iran's long-stalemated war with Iraq has drained the country's reserves, and
several Iranian leaders have openly expressed frustration over the slow pace of
the war. In June, Iran's President, Hojatolislam Ali Khamenei, was quoted in the
Teheran daily Kayhan as saying, ''We must break out of this no-war, no-peace
situation, which is definitely harming us.''

But any suggestions that Iran negotiate a settlement of the war and move closer
to the West are roundly criticized by clerical hard-liners, and publication of
the secret American documents helps keep anti-American feelings high. ''Any time
there is talk in Teheran of moving toward the United States, another volume is
published as a reminder of American involvement in Iran's affairs,'' an Iranian
official said.

The books are sold openly in Teheran bookshops, and 24 of the most recent
volumes were acquired through a private distributor in the United States, the
Ketab Corporation of Encino, Calif. They include photocopies of the original
telexes, mailgrams and typed letters from the embassy, classified reports,
commentaries from the ''students,'' and complete translations into Persian.

Among the most interesting papers are shredded secret documents pieced back
together by the militants that detail attempts of the Central Intelligence
Agency to recruit high-level Iranian officials, ayatollahs and exiles, foreign
journalists and diplomats either as paid or ''unwitting'' agents in the months
after the revolution February 1979.

C.I.A. and Its Contacts

More than previous volumes, these documents illustrate a series of C.I.A.
failures, as intelligence agents found it virtually impossible to establish good
contacts with the revolutionary regime of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini after so
many years of working almost exclusively with the Shah.

The C.I.A. picked either unlikely or unreliable targets for recruitment and
inadequately protected their identities. Those targets who did agree to
cooperate wanted only one of two things: money, or a C.I.A. coup against
Ayatollah Khomeini, which the C.I.A. was unwilling to support.

The C.I.A. was reduced to using exiles in Paris identified as ''SDSlippery/1,''
a well-known Lebanese businessman, and ''SDUltimate/1,'' easily identifiable as
a Westernized Shiite ayatollah, Mahdi Ruhani, even though their ''reliability,
veracity and motivations'' were suspect, according to one shredded document.

The documents shed new light on the C.I.A.'s apparently unsuccessful attempt to
recruit the former Iranian President Abolhassan Bani-Sadr, in the months just
before the embassy takeover, when he was a member of the ruling Revolutionary
Council and head of the Central Bank.

Several Meetings Described

The documents describe several meetings Mr. Bani-Sadr held in Teheran with a
C.I.A. agent known to Mr. Bani-Sadr as an American businessman from a
Philadelphia-based consulting concern and the options that the C.I.A. considered
- from hiring him as a paid ''consultant'' to ''full recruitment'' for $1,000 a
month. Mr. Bani-Sadr has said he turned down the offer.

Although Mr. Bani-Sadr's name is not mentioned in the documents, his identity is
transparent: he is described as a member of the Revolutionary Council, the
editor of a newspaper, with a family and an apartment in Paris and his home
address in Teheran is given.

The documents, which span two decades, include details as far ranging as
combinations and instructions on how to open embassy safes, aerial photos of the
Soviet Weapons Storage Facility in Severomorsk, regulations on how to handle
walk-in defectors, a 94-page Defense Intelligence Agency report on Middle East
terrorism and detailed biographies of leading Palestinians.

As in previous volumes, the documents repeat reports of increased
anti-Americanism in Iran after the revolution, warnings that the embassy could
be seized if the United States accepted the Shah and laments over poor embassy
security.

Reports on Security Forces

In a June 1979 document, for example, the Iranian security forces for the
27-acre embassy compound are described as ''untrained, lack discipline, and are
armed with a variety of weapons'' and radio equipment taken from the embassy
during its first brief seizure three days after the revolution. Night checks
found most, if not all, the troops asleep.

Intelligence experts say they believe the embassy should have shipped out or
destroyed all documents on a week-to-week basis during that uneasy time.

''There was too much of a collection of documents that had to be destroyed in
too short a time,'' said William Colby, former director of the C.I.A. ''One of
the basic rules is burn the damn stuff before you get into trouble.''

The seizure of the documents, believed by some intelligence experts to represent
the most extensive intelligence loss since the emergency American evacuation in
Saigon in 1975, led to significant changes in information handling in embassies.

''We've learned from that experience,'' said L. Bruce Laingen, who was charge
d'affaires in Teheran when the embassy was seized. ''We have better storage and
destructive equipment, what people describe now as paperless embassies.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 19, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
EDITORS' NOTE

A United Nations dispatch on July 10 about classified documents found by Iranian
students in the United States Embassy in Teheran in 1979 said the seizure of the
papers was ''believed by some intelligence experts to represent the most
extensive intelligence loss since the emergency evacuation in Saigon in 1975.''

The extent of any intelligence loss in Vietnam after the American withdrawal is
in dispute, and the dispatch should have acknowledged this.

Dean Brown, a member of the task force that organized the evacuation of the
Saigon embassy, has asserted that the material that fell into enemy hands
included computer tapes containing the names of all Vietnamese who had worked
for the United States. The loss, he said, put thousands of lives in danger.
Other experts have also said that there was a significant intelligence loss in
Vietnam but that they cannot give a full accounting of what was lost.

On the other hand, some intelligence experts believe that the loss of classified
material in Saigon was minor, and others say there was no loss at all. Wolf
Lehmann, who was deputy chief of mission in Saigon, says that all classified
materials were either destroyed or removed before the last American diplomats
left the capital.

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE TALK OF GETTYSBURG;
AWAY FROM FAST-FOOD JOINTS, SOME FIND A SPECIAL GETTYSBURG

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SERRIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 916 words

DATELINE: GETTYSBURG, Pa., July 3


A huffy, thick-set man with a hiking staff led a half-dozen youngsters across a
field here, following the path that Maj. Gen. George E. Pickett took 123 years
ago today in the famous, failed charge of 15,000 Confederate soldiers against
the Union position on Cemetery Ridge.

As the group marched through plots of oats and corn, the man pointed his stick
to the right. This, he said, is where the Confederates came under fire from
Vermont infantry. A few paces later, he stopped the group again. There, he said,
pointing to the left, the Confederates received fire from Ohio troops.

The party resumed its charge. History must be served, even if this means
trampling someone's crops. It is, again, summer in Gettysburg. The prime
traveling season brings thousands of people to this small community in
southeastern Pennsylvania, where in July 1863, Union forces under Maj. Gen.
George Gordon Meade turned back the Confederates under Gen. Robert E. Lee,
ending the second invasion of the North and destroying forever the offensive
capabilities of the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia.

The seasonal invasion by this tourist army is lucrative, but its excesses are
many. The uniform is shorts and T-shirts, regardless of corpulence. The traffic
on a hot summer's day can be infuriating, the cars and campers clogging the
narrow roads.

Many people seem to spend little time in the cemetery, where 3,700 Union dead
are buried, or upon the haunting battlefield. They take their history in
comfortable, commercial form, trudging to wax museum, curio shop, multimedia
re-enactment. Even many who go to the battlefield do so by double-decker
sound-equipped bus or by high-speed elevator to the top of a carpeted,
air-conditioned tower.

But there is another Gettysburg -of people reverently looking at the graves, of
more than 1,000 battlefield monuments, of amateur and professional historians,
of scout troops and history classes, of parents who want to make their children
aware of this great battlefield.

Shortly before the children had a history lesson amid the corn on this
sun-splattered afternoon, two visitors encountered each other on the field. What
most people do not understand, one man said, was that General Pickett and many
of his troops had to march a long way in a short time to get here, let alone
make the charge. Yes, the other said, they made much of an arduous 25-mile march
from Chambersburg in the middle of a single day, when the heat was most
oppressive.

The historical footnotes exchanged, the two men said nothing more. They stood
for a time, then parted.

Fast-food outlets and motels crowd the western slope of Cemetery Hill, but just
a short distance away, upon areas preserved by the National Park Service,
visitors find solitude in the cemetery or on the battlefield.

To look upon the grave markers, some now almost unreadable; to see the mass
graves; to walk the Angle and the Copse of Trees, the point of Pickett's Charge;
to walk Devil's Den; to walk the shaded road on what were the Confederate lines
on Seminary Ridge - this is the moving, patriotic experience for some visitors.

At the Civil War Book Store on the town square a man asked for regimental
histories. He said he had decided to narrow his Civil War interests. Did the
store have anything on Maine regiments?

At the Horse Soldier, an antique shop, one can purchase, for $1.50, the small,
round ''grape shot'' from Civil War cannon; for $3 a ''pain bullet,'' which
wounded soldiers bit on during surgery, recovered from Gettysburg hospital
sites.

The other night there was a lecture at the junior high school. William A.
Frassanito, a Gettysburg College graduate who has done painstaking, pioneering
work with Civil War photographs, said Vietnam veterans were not the first forced
to erect their own monuments. Civil War veterans, not the Government, erected
the first monuments at Gettysburg, in the 1870's and 1880's, and at other
battlefields, he said.

Mr. Frassanito said the Gettysburg battlefield, about 3,000 acres of which is
preserved, was faced with encroachments behind Seminary Ridge, on the cavalry
battlefield east of town, and at other places.

He worries that in a few years ''Gettysburg will be a little island surrounded
by suburban sprawl.''

''I'm not against developers,'' he said. ''I'm not against developments. But,
please, not on the field of Pickett's Charge.''

The importance of this place was stressed by William Penn Mott Jr., director of
the National Park Service, earlier in the week at a rededication of the
Pennsylvania Monument, the largest on the field.

Mr. Mott said when he visited Gettysburg he realized he was ''walking in the
invisible footprints of Abraham Lincoln.''

It was Lincoln's visit in November 1863, for the dedication of the national
cemetery, that demonstrated to this community the commercial value of the
battlefield.

Lincoln's address, which took two minutes, left him unsatisfied. ''Lamon, that
speech won't scour,'' he said to his friend, Ward Hill Lamon, recalling the term
applied to early plows that failed to cut through the thick soil of his native
prairie. ''It is a flat failure.''

This was an unusual misjudgment by the normally sagacious President. The speech
scoured. And for the visitors who know and care about what went on here, for
those to whom this ''hallowed'' ground is not just another roadside attraction,
Gettysburg today - even with its crowds, fast foods, souvenir stands, motels,
traffic - scours, too.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Pennsylvania highlighting Gettysburg (NYT); photo of tourists
reading about Gettysburg Address (NYT/Marty Katz)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SUMMARY OF THE MAJOR ACTIONS TAKEN BY THE NEW YORK LEGISLATURE IN 1986

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2793 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, July 9


The 209th session of the Legislature ended its main session of 1986 at 6:30 P.M.
on July 3, with many of the most important bills of the year not passed until
the final 24 hours in a nightlong meeting.

One key issue still not resolved in this election year is a plan to subsidize
elderly people for the purchase of prescription drugs. It is possible that
lawmakers will return in the next month or two to pass such a plan if
negotiators reach agreement. In addition, legislators are expected to convene at
the end of the year to consider renewing taxes that finance the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority and to change the state tax code to conform with
expected revisions in the Federal code. These are the major actions of the
session: The Budget The Legislature passed a $41.5 billion budget that increased
spending by about 7 percent from the previous year while also putting into
effect the second of three yearly tax cuts.

For the first time in three decades, the budget reduced the state's annual
short-term borrowing, which stood at $4.4 billion last year, cutting it by
almost $1 billion under a complicated plan to restructure payments to state
employees' pension funds.

Education aid was increased 10 percent, by $600 million, to $6.6 billion,
including $95 million to be used solely for raising teacher salaries.

In the second phase of a two-year local assistance plan, the state's 1,608
municipal governments were allocated more than $1 billion, an increase of $57
million. New York City received $535 million, up from $512 million the previous
year.

Among funds for a host of programs, $9.5 million was provided for research into
AIDS, or acquired immune deficiency syndrome, and $139 million for housing the
homeless. The budget also provided for hiring more state police officers and
called for no increases in tuition at the State University or at the City
University of New York.

Details of the tax cut plan included these:

* The standard deduction for singles was increased to $2,600, from $2,500, and
for married couples or heads of households to $3,000, from $2,750.

* Thousands of low-income New Yorkers were dropped from the tax rolls. Singles
earning less than $4,000 and married couples and heads of households earning
less than $8,000 do not have to pay state income taxes. The previous thresholds
were $2,500 for singles and $5,000 for others.

* The so-called household credit was increased. Singles with gross incomes of
less than $5,000 will get a credit of $75, an increase of $5. The higher the
income, the lower the credit, with its elimination altogether for those with
incomes of more than $28,000. Married couples or heads of households with gross
incomes of less than $5,000 will get a $90 credit, plus $15 for each dependent
other than themselves. The higher the income, the lower the credit, with its
elimination altogether for those earning more than $32,000.

* Many tax bracket were widened to $2,500.

* The so-called family adjustment was increased. This applies to married couples
making less than $38,000 who file separate returns. If one spouse makes far more
than the other, the one with the higher income can transfer, for tax-reporting
purposes, $4,000 of it to the one with the lower income and the lower tax rate.

Taxes and Fees

Legislation Signed Authorizes New York City to levy a new 5 percent tax on hotel
rooms, in addition to the current fee of $2 on certain rooms, which is expected
to yield $65 million and close a gap in the budget for the fiscal year that
began July 1.

Legislation Passed

Would extend, through 1988, New York City's ability to levy other taxes,
including certain ones on corporations and cigarettes, that are worth $370
million a year.

Would renew for two years a sales tax surcharge in Nassau County.

Legislation Killed

Would have eliminated the state sales tax on articles of clothing that sell for
less than $75.

Consumer Affairs

Legislation Signed Prohibits the retail sale of raw fruits and vegetables that
have been treated with sulfite agents.

Legislation Passed

Would create the new crime of tampering with a consumer product by contaminating
it with the intent to harm.

Would require those selling kosher meat or poultry to retain records about the
food's origin and make the records available to inspectors.

Would prohibit the sale of over-the-counter drugs beyond the expiration date and
permit enforcement by the State Attorney General.

Would allow beer, wine and liquor retailers to accept credit cards for the sale
of alcoholic beverages.

Energy and Utilities

Legislation Passed Would authorize the establishment of a public authority
empowered to take over the Long Island Lighting Company.

Would prohibit the Long Island Lighting Company from charging ratepayers for the
cost of the Shoreham nuclear power plant if it never opens and operates.

Housing

Legislation Signed Sets up a $400 million plan to build or rehabilitate 24,000
low- and middle-income apartments in New York City, financed by bonds to be
backed by future surplus rent revenues of the Battery Park City Authority.

Legislation Passed

Would preclude a landlord in rent-controlled or rent-stabilized housing from
passing along the cost of improvements to tenants over the age of 62 if such
pass-along costs would raise rents above one-third of their income.

Health

And Environment Constitutional Amendment Puts before the voters a state
constitutional amendment that would permit a $1.45 billion bond issue for
hazardous waste cleanup and parkland preservation.

Legislation Signed

Provides that all solder sold have a conspicuous notice on its package stating
how much lead it contains, along with a warning when the level exceeds .005
percent.

Legislation Passed

Would allow thousands of victims of exposure to some toxic substances -such as
asbestos and the synthetic hormone diethylstilbestrol, known as DES - to file
suit for damages even though the statute of limitations had expired.

Would tighten existing law about the dumping of hazardous waste, doubling the
maximum penalty for environmental crimes to a 15-year prison term and a $200,000
fine for the most serious offenses.

Would require that all diagnosed cases of Alzheimer's disease be reported to
public health authorities.

Would require that contractors involved in asbestos removal be licensed and that
their employees be specially trained.

Would prohibit the transportation of low-level radioactive waste into, within or
through the state without a permit from the State Department of Environmental
Conservation.

Would empower the Energy Research Development Authority to establish permanent
disposal facilities for low-level radioactive waste.

Legislation Killed

Would have prevented insurance companies from requiring blood tests for the AIDS
virus before issuing policies.

Criminal Justice

Constitutional Amendment Approved a proposed amendment to reorganize the state's
courts into a unified system and to increase the number of appellate divisions
from four to as many as seven. The measure requires passage by another session
of the Legislature before it is put before voters.

Legislation Signed

Increases the penalties for those convicted of intimidating a witness to a crime
or its victim.

Creates a new category of felony for the sale of a prescription for a controlled
substance.

Provides that the court will transact no business on a Saturday, the Jewish
Sabbath, if any parties to a case observe it as a holy day.

Makes it a misdemeanor to kill or injure an animal being used by a police
officer in the line of duty.

Expands drunken-driving laws to cover private parking lots with a capacity of
four or more vehicles.

Legislation Passed

Modeled after the Federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act,
would allow people engaged in a pattern of criminal activity to be prosecuted
for the pattern as well as for the individual crimes.

Would authorize the Attorney General to institute forfeiture proceedings in
State Supreme Court in cases involving vehicles, vessels or aircraft used in
illegal drug trafficking.

Would create the crimes of computer trespass, computer tampering, unlawful
duplication of computer-related material and criminal possession of
computer-related material.

Would create a new felony of criminal sale of a controlled substance on or near
school grounds and carry a maximum penalty of 25 years' imprisonment.

Would increase penalties for a wide range of white-collar crimes.

Would add up to four years to the sentence of drivers who leave the scene of an
accident after injuring or killing a pedestrian.

Would allow a child witness to use anatomically correct dolls and drawings
during testimony in sex-abuse cases.

Would allow judges to take into account a defendant's threats to witnesses when
setting bail.

Would ban the possession, manufacture and transportation of ballistic knives,
which contain a high-compression spring that shoots out a six-inch blade.

Legislation Vetoed

Would have reimposed the death penalty for certain murders, including the murder
of a police or correction officer, and for hired killers.

Legislation Killed

Would have permitted cameras in trial courtrooms for a 30-month experiment,
making New York the 31st state to allow television coverage and still
photographers in such courtrooms.

Would have allowed holders of pistol permits from any county in the state to
carry handguns within the five boroughs of New York, where currently only guns
licensed by the New York City Police Department are permitted.

Would have allowed some murderers, including those who kill police or correction
officers, to be sentenced without the possibility of parole.

Banking and Insurance

Legislation Signed Requires greater regulation of the state's liability
insurance industry and places curbs on the payment of settlements to some
victims.

Increases state regulation of medical-malpractice insurers, sets forth the kind
of coverage that new physicians can receive and places curbs on the payment of
settlements to some victims.

Legislation Passed

Would eliminate the minimum age requirement for shareholders in credit unions,
along with other changes, including the deregulation of the rate at which credit
unions can make loans to other members.

Legislation Killed

Would have created a consumer-advocate office to monitor the liability insurance
industry.

Welfare And the Family

Legislation Signed Authorizes grandparents to commence proceedings regarding
their visitation rights.

Allows in-home day care providers to care for up to eight children if at least
two are of school age and receive care mainly during nonschool hours.

Legislation Passed

Would extend to private day care centers in New York City a requirement now in
effect for city-financed centers that employees be screened and registered.

Legislation Killed

Would have established a pilot program, known as work-not-welfare, to offer
training and employment, with state subsidized salaries, to recipients of public
assistance.

Government

Legislation Signed Allows state pension fund money to be withdrawn from
companies that do business in Northern Ireland and that discriminate against the
Catholic minority.

Legislation Passed

Would require more extensive financial disclosure by officials in New York City.

Would limit contributions to candidates for, or members of, the New York City
Board of Estimate by people or businesses with matters pending before the board.

Would extend the existing whistle-blower statute to allow an employee to
complain about any violation of the law on the part of an employer, not just
those relating to health or safety.

Would prohibit a person convicted of arson from being appointed fire department
chief or assistant chief or from completing a term if already appointed.

Legislation Killed

Would have dealt with possible corruption by state officials and would have
included a ban on practicing law before state agencies, and the establishment of
a system of public campaign financing.

Business and Labor

Legislation Signed Removes the limit of $25,000 on installment loans given by
banks or other financial institutions.

Legislation Passed

Would establish ''opportunity zones'' to attract businesses to economically
depressed neighborhoods by offering tax abatements, low-cost loans and low-cost
power.

Would exempt current members of New York City's fire, police and correction
departments who live within the state from new rules requiring residency in the
metropolitan region, while giving those living outside the state a year to
relocate.

Would allow unemployment insurance, workers' compensation and disability
benefits to be paid to musicians and other artists who work in hotels, theaters,
restaurants and nightclubs.

Would prohibit retailers from billing credit-card customers for goods they did
not reject but did not specifically order.

Would create a special task force to oversee working conditions in the garment
industry.

Legislation Killed

Would have repealed the Wicks Law, which bars the use of a general contractor on
certain public construction projects.

Would have required financial planners to pass an exam and obtain a license to
practice their profession.

Transportation

Legislation Signed Provides that all bicycles sold have an identification
number.

Requires a fine for the second time a person fails to provide safety restraints
for a child in his car.

Legislation Passed

Would require driver's licenses to contain the licensee's home address and
require every certificate of registration to contain the primary residence
within the registrant's state.

Would require car mileage to be recorded on the inspection sticker upon
inspection.

Would require that a portion of the overhaul of subway cars be done within the
state or that the contractor use goods or services provided within the state.

Would enable Dutchess, Orange and Rockland Counties to withdraw from the
Metropolitan Transportation Authority in any of the next three years.

Education

Legislation Signed Establishes 100 Empire State scholarships, worth $2,000 a
year, to be awarded to college students beginning with the 1986-87 academic
year.

Legislation Passed

Would require school buses manufactured after July 1, 1986, to be equipped with
seat belts and extra padding.

Would require schools to provide written notification to teachers and other
officials of their rights and responsibilities in reporting student drug abuse
and child abuse.

Would grant immunity from civil or criminal liability to school officials who,
without willful misconduct or gross negligence, report a belief that minor
children are alcohol or drug abusers.

Would increase to $2,850 from $2,700 the top annual grant for dependent
undergraduate students and to $2,000 from $1,800 for those who are independent,
in the Tuition Assistance Program.

Would double the maximum grant for graduate students to $1,200 a year from the
current $600.

Would authorize the City University to build a dormitory at Brooklyn College.

Would authorize the Dormitory Authority to finance and construct dormitories at
the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.

Would provide for the construction of computer and technology centers at
Columbia, Syracuse and Cornell Universities.

Would extend certain provisions of the truth-in-testing law, requiring test
agencies to inform clients at the time of registration of their right to scoring
information.

Legislation Killed

Would have taken from the Board of Regents and given to the Governor supervision
of vocational training for handicapped adults.

Would have established a study commission to examine standardized college
entrance exams for possible racial or gender bias.

Sports

Legislation Passed Would require thumbless gloves in licensed boxing matches in
the state.

Miscellaneous

Legislation Signed Bans the sale or production of counterfeit identification
cards, used primarily by underage liquor buyers.

Sets standards for fire alarms for deaf and hearing-impaired people in hotels
and motels.

Legislation Passed

Would allow joint holders of a winning lottery ticket to be paid by separate
checks.

Would create a state commission, budgeted for $250,000, to study the
readjustment problems of Vietnam War veterans.

Legislation Killed

Would have established a new category of libel, based upon comments made about a
dead person, with family members eligible for damages if their reputations or
earning capabilities were damaged.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Governor Cuomo with Dr. David Axelrod and Evan Davis (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOAT PEOPLE'S QUANDARY: 'WHAT ELSE CAN WE DO?'

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 949 words

DATELINE: PUERTO PRINCESA, the Philippines


They were sweeping the floor the other day and getting the plain wooden sleeping
platforms ready again at this refugee center on Palawan Island.

A West German ship, Cap Anamur II, had found several hundred more Vietnamese in
small craft floating in the South China Sea.

The precarious migration of Vietnamese boat people, now in its 12th year, shows
no signs of ending. In fact, figures compiled by the office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees show that in the first four months of
this year the number of boat people arriving at asylum ports from Hong Kong to
Indonesia rose 6 percent over a comparable period in 1985. In Thailand, despite
the hazards of piracy and weather, arrivals from January to May were up 18
percent.

Moreover, there are indications that the arriving Vietnamese are being joined in
flight by Cambodians, whose escape route by land has been made more difficult
and dangerous since Hanoi's troops and Phnom Penh's civilian labor brigades have
fortified and barricaded sections of the Thai-Cambodian border to keep out
anti-Vietnamese guerrillas.

Drifting to Jakarta

Vietnamese refugees say they sometimes stop to pick up fleeing Cambodians before
heading toward Thailand's Trat Province. In June a boat of exhausted refugees
who said they were Cambodians drifted into Jakarta harbor, nearly 1,200 miles
away.

It is possible that a million Vietnamese have taken to sea since April 1975,
when the North Vietnamese Army entered Saigon. More than 420,000 of them have
been resettled by the United Nations refugee agency, mostly in the United States
and China. Another 130,000 moved through Guam in the early days of the exodus.
No one knows, or can guess, how many people have been lost. Refugee officials
fear that when arrival numbers go up, casualties may also rise as more boats put
to sea.

Why do they still come? Refugee officials piece together individual stories;
diplomats look for trends. Both see new kinds of refugees arriving, people who
did not, for one reason or another, flee when the North triumphed, but made the
decision to leave later. They are leaving north and central Vietnam as well as
the south.

Here at the camp on the outskirts of Puerto Princesa city, a Filipino port town,
hundreds of refugees have arrived in the last few months.

Gold Is Passage Fee

Khnog Nang Hanh, 51 years old, paid three ounces of gold for a place in a
fishing boat packed with 101 people that sailed from the Mekong Delta on the
night of March 26. Mr. Hanh, a former major in the South Vietnamese Army, said
he had been released from a prison camp last October after 10 years of
''re-education'' and immediately began planning an escape.

According to Mr. Hanh, prison camp inmates are being released in batches of 50
or 60, reducing Hanoi's political prison population but adding new numbers to
the ranks of boat people. Many freed prisoners, Mr. Hanh said, think there is no
place for them now in Vietnam.

Dr. Van Ngoc An, 36, and his wife, Ly Bich Ngoc, 32, a teacher, left their
hometown of Nha Trang, a resort on the coast of Central Vietnam, on April 24 and
were at sea more than two weeks before reaching the Philippines. They came, Dr.
An said, ''because I am a Chinese Catholic.''

Dr. An, a 1977 graduate of Saigon University's medical school, said that he was
allowed to practice three years before being told there would be no more work
for him. Unemployed since 1980, he finally decided that escape was his only hope
of remaining in his profession. Other ethnic Chinese, particularly Roman
Catholics, tell similar stories. Among them, and their disaffected ethnic
Vietnamese counterparts, are people with skills Vietnam needs.

Poorer, Less Educated

For the most part, however, refugee officials say that people leaving Vietnam
and Cambodia now are poorer and less well educated, and therefore harder to
resettle.

There are more draft resisters among the boat people. For many Vietnamese
families, a second or third generation of young men are going to war, this time
in Cambodia. In Vietnam, there seems to be little commitment to that war among
the young, and a great sense of weariness among older people being asked to
sacrifice, once more, their hopes of a better life.

Behind many refugee stories is the plight of the Vietnamese economy. At Puerto
Princesa, boat people who fled Vietnam in the last few months say that inflation
is soaring. Pham Van Tho, a druggist who left six weeks ago, said that black
market dollars are buying Vietnamese currency, twice devalued in the last year,
at more than 125 times the official exchange rate. Rice prices rose two and a
half times since March, he said. A day's wage sometimes buys only a bowl of
soup, Mr. Hanh said.

Children Suffer

Vietnam, now one of the world's poorest nations, has health standards among the
lowest in Asia, according to international organizations and officials in asylum
nations. Children's nutritional levels have not improved in four years, Unicef
researchers recently discovered. According to Agence France-Presse, the only
Western news agency with a resident correspondent in Hanoi, Unicef found that
Vietnamese children were getting only 45 to 60 percent of the required daily
caloric intake, 65 to 70 percent of protein and 25 to 30 percent of lipids, or
fats. Meanwhile the population growth rate is 3.2 percent a year, one of the
world's highest, Vietnamese officials report.

The result, refugees say, is desperation.

''We risk our lives,'' Mr. Hanh said, but what else can we do? When I left
Vietnam, I thought to myself, 50 percent I will stay alive in this boat, 50
percent I will die. I had to take the chance.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of boat, which brought immigrants from Vietnam to Palawan Island
(NYT/Barbara Crossette)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ANTI-COMMUNISM CALLED THE THREAD BINDING GROUP THAT CAPTURED ALIENS

BYLINE: By DUDLEY CLENDINEN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1273 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, July 10


A little more than three years ago, four members of the Alabama National Guard,
frustrated by their perception of the Communist menace, unsatisfied by
individual experience with the Ku Klux Klan and the John Birch Society, and
unable to find any other organization that they felt would allow them to combat
Communism, formed their own group to supply and assist anti-Communist forces in
Central America.

They named their group Civilian Military Assistance. At first they gathered
ammunition for the government forces in El Salvador. Then when they shifted
their focus to the rebels in Nicaragua and discovered that shipping them arms
would be a violation of the Neutrality Act, they concentrated on supplying
equipment and training.

One of the four founders, Dana Parker, a Huntsville police detective, was killed
along with another member of the group and a rebel on Sept. 1, 1984, when the
helicopter they had flown across the Honduran border was shot down by Nicaraguan
soldiers.

Patrol Captures Aliens

This past weekend the organization, using the name Civilian Materiel Assistance,
a change made to help it apply for tax-deductible status, came into the news
once again. Conducting an armed patrol along the Arizona-Mexican border, 19 of
its members captured 16 illegal aliens, drawing sharp criticism from the
Immigration and Naturalization Service.

Thomas Vincent Posey, the organization's national director, interviewed
Wednesday at his home near Decatur, Ala., described the patrol as an attempt to
intercept drug traffickers whose profits go to the Communists, and said the
action made him proud.

''Dadgum right,'' he said. ''Proud as a peacock in a cornfield. Because it's
Americans standing up and doing something.''

The patrol's leader, J. R. Hagan, a repossessor of cars in Tucson, ''plans on
doing more,'' Mr. Posey said. ''He has our full backing.''

Two Members Resigning

But today, two members who had been part of the border action said they were
resigning from the group because the way the patrol had been armed and conducted
was dangerous, because it had penetrated into Mexican territory and because they
had been misled about its purpose.

''I am resigning because I feel that the well-being of civilians and C.M.A.
members was endangered,'' said Floyd Arnold Blaylock, a veteran and sometime
mercenary in Central America who said he had belonged to the group for several
months. ''Weapons were handed out to people who in my opinion were not
competent.''

Mr. Blaylock said that of the 19 people on the patrol, he thought only five were
qualified to handle firearms. He said he personally disarmed one man he felt was
unable to handle the stress.

Mr. Blaylock, who told of leading one of four patrol sorties, said the 16 aliens
the members encountered Saturday night included women and children who were
forced to stand for 90 minutes with their hands in the air and their legs
spread. He said that the patrols had placed wooden timbers in the road with
nails upright as booby traps, and that those were what had stopped the aliens'
vehicles. He said further that the patrols carried automatic weapons and
sophisticated surveillance equipment, and that at one point they advanced more
than four kilometers into Mexican territory.

Charges Denied by Leader

Mr. Hagan, the C.M.A. leader in Tucson, denied the charges, saying the mission
was only to ''observe, document and report illegal activities.'' He also said
the vehicles transporting the illegal Mexican aliens had stopped because they
experienced mechanical failure.

''We aproached what we thought were two abandoned vehicles to see if there were
any drugs in them and suddenly the illegals froze in our spotlights,'' Mr. Hagan
said.

But Brad Wright, a 25-year-old Tucson carpenter who said the patrol was his
first C.M.A. experience, disagreed with that account. Describing himself as a
former marine who went along for the excitement but would not do it again, Mr.
Wright said: ''I can't trust them. They lied about what happened. If our mission
was to report, document and observe, why do we need military codes and guns?''

Mr. Hagan, a burly 37-year-old man who said he was a former Army sergeant with
experience in training men for combat in Vietnam, pledged that the group's
methods would change.

''We don't want people in this country to think that we are a bunch of gun
nuts,'' he said. ''We are going to patrol from now on without guns and with
cameras. We don't need guns to observe.

Membership Put at 5,000

Like Mr. Hagan and his two critics from the controversial patrol, 75 per cent of
the C.M.A.'s membership are military veterans, Mr. Posey said. And like the
members of that patrol, the organization appears to be made up of frustrated men
seeking a purpose somewhere between armed vigil and the peaceful supply of
material to distant civilian and armed forces.

Mr. Posey, a former produce dealer who says he now makes a living selling coins
from a collection begun years ago, said that in the beginning the C.M.A. was
made up ''mostly'' of National Guardsmen. Now, he said, guardsmen probably
account for ''only 5 percent at most'' of the group's membership, which he put
at 5,000. The organization has active members in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps
and Air Force who are paying dues of $30 a year to the group, he said. The
current manager of its sole national office, in Memphis, is a retired Marine
master sergeant, he said, and the former executive director was ''a retired
full-bird colonel in the Special Forces.''

As many as 10 per cent of its members are in it ''for adventure,'' Mr. Posey
said, as he sat in a den lined with plaques and pictures from his Marine Corps
and National Guard service. But most, he said, are conservatives like himself,
who are concerned about the threat of Communism.

''Their ultimate goal, as everyone knows,'' he said, ''is to overthrow the
United States.''

He said C.M.A. members, all described as unpaid volunteers, mostly spend their
time gathering boots, ponchos and other clothing and equipment for shipment from
the New Orleans airport to ''the freedom fighters'' in Honduras and Nicaragua.

Tells of Witnessing Action

But Mr. Posey has been to Central America to visit the forces he is supplying
''about eight times,'' he said. He has been amidst gunfire and the wounded, he
said, and his involvement clearly gives him a satisfaction he did not find
elsewhere.

''In my younger days I did know Klansmen,'' he said. ''I've even been to a
couple of Klan meetings. But I got tired of them. I was even a John Bircher,''
he said, ''but their way of stopping Communism and mine were different.''

The experience of Lee Fuller, the Georgia director of the orgnization, echoes
that of Mr. Posey. Mr. Fuller, a carpenter by training, came from Louisiana,
from a blue-collar culture where the Klan was strong. He knew the local leader
as a boy of 15, Mr. Fuller said. In the gas station that served as the Klan
headquarters, he said, ''You had handcuffs and sawed-off shotguns and all that
baloney all over the wall. And they seemed so hateful and ignorant. I found very
quickly that wasn't the area I wanted.''

The death of Representative Larry P. McDonald of Georgia, a John Birch Society
member killed in the downing of a Korean Air Lines jet by a Soviet fighter in
1984, moved Mr. Fuller to join the C.M.A. His garage is full of clothing and
other non-armament goods ready for shipment to Central America, he said. ''We're
basically honest in what we're trying to do,'' he said. ''And we're trying to
stay within the law if it's humanly possible.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Thomas Vincent Posey (NYT/Scott Henry)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
A Familiar Spiral

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 735 words


The Soviet Union has apparently supplied Nicaragua's Sandinista Government with
15 more M-17 helicopters, bringing its force of these crucial weapons to 22 or
23. Nothing could suggest more dramatically the futility and dangers of
President Reagan's course in Central America.

The new helicopters began arriving at Corinto and Bluefields too soon to be a
direct response to approval by the House of Representatives of $100 million in
additional aid to the ''contras'' - the military force organized and financed by
the Reagan Administration to overthrow the Sandinistas.

There can be no doubt, however, that the helicopters have been delivered in
response to the Sandinistas' long-held conviction - which can only have been
strengthened by the House vote - that Washington is determined to bring down
their regime.

As a result, the contras obviously will need more antiaircraft weapons - perhaps
Stinger missiles - to counter the Sandinistas' enhanced air power. Stephen
Kinzer of The New York Times has reported that discussions already are being
held in Washington as to what kinds of antiaircraft weapons must now be sent.

The consequence of that, of course, will be more Soviet aircraft delivered to
Nicaragua in the future, to overcome the contras' added firepower; and so on and
on, in the familiar spiral of other Soviet-American arms races.

''Both superpowers seem to be stepping up their military aid at the same time,''
a Latin American military officer in Managua told Mr. Kinzer. That was as
predictable as the cycles of the moon.

Sooner or later, moreover, in this lethal game of international leapfrog, Moscow
may decide to send fighter planes instead of helicopters. Then the fat will be
in the fire, because Mr. Reagan already has said that the United States will not
tolerate the acquisition of Soviet fighters by the Sandinistas.

So the futility of the Reagan policy lies in the ability of the Sandinistas to
match, with aid from the Soviet bloc, whatever added military strength the
Administration and Congress provide to the contras. And the danger is that at
the end of a fruitless spiral of escalation, Mr. Reagan will see no other way to
accomplish his purpose than the direct use of United States forces - no doubt
under some such cover as responding to the arrival of Soviet fighter planes, or
to some real or proclaimed border incursion into Honduras or Costa Rica.

The risk of another costly and protracted war like the one in Vietnam is not all
that's at stake here - although that risk is real. Such a gringo military
intervention in Central America would be a political disaster for the United
States throughout this hemisphere and in most of the world. And nothing would be
more likely to sustain the support of the Nicaraguan people for the ever more
repressive Sandinistas.

The United States populace not only does not want such a war; by large margins,
every poll shows that North Americans do not even support increased aid to the
contras. And despite superheated White House rhetoric, Mr. Reagan's militaristic
policy is not the only course open to his Administration.

As often pointed out here, he could state publicly and forcefully that the
United States would not accept (a) a Soviet or Cuban military base in Nicaragua,
and (b) any Nicaraguan military movement against its neighbors. These verifiable
and enforceable policies would be welcomed and supported by other Latin
countries and would clear the way for the Contadora nations to conclude a
regional peace treaty acceptable in both Managua and Washington.

It's nonsense to insist, as the President does, that only military pressure from
the contras can force the Sandinistas to sign such a treaty. Contadora officials
know it's the other way around; the contra war is the prime barrier to such a
treaty.

This policy, of course, would leave the Marxist Sandinistas in power; even with
their external reach circumscribed by treaty and by United States policy, this
no doubt would be bitter medicine for Ronald Reagan. But the United States has
no more obligation to install democracy by force in Nicaragua than it does in
Chile, or South Africa.

This country has every reason, however, to heed its own lectures to the world on
the values of self-determination and non-intervention. And it's not yet too late
to stop the spiral toward an unwanted, unnecessary and unjustified war in
Central America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, JULY 11, 1986

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 864 words


International Two Israeli soldiers died and nine were wounded in a battle with
four Palestinian guerrillas, who also died in the fighting, on the coast just
north of the Lebanese border. Hours later, Israeli aircraft attacked what were
described as Palestinian bases in Lebanon. [Page Al, Column 5.]

An Italian jury sentenced a Palestinian to 30 years in prison for the murder of
an invalid New Yorker aboard the liner Achille Lauro last fall, but rejected
prosecution demands for a life term. The jury did order a life sentence for
Mohammed Abbas, the fugitive Palestinian leader. [A1:4.]

A political duel in Italy appeared to have stymied the Christian Democratic
Party's attempt to form a cabinet. Foreign Minister Giulio Andreotti, who has
led five previous governments, was asked by Italy's President to try again, but
Socialist representatives criticized the move, saying it ''made a solution to
the crisis even more distant.'' [A6:1-3.]

A bomb exploded in Johannesburg at the stock exchange, but there were no
injuries and little damage, the Government said. The incident came as the
country's biggest black-led labor federation announced plans for a day of
protest strikes. [A4:1-3.]

Ending the ''siege mentality'' of South Africa's leaders should be an aim of
United States policy, said the senior Administration official on African
affairs. He urged that ways be found to ''rekindle prospects for negotiation and
dialogue'' between whites and blacks, but appeared to rule out the kind of
severe economic sanctions backed by the House of Representatives. [A4:1.]

The U.S. and Cuba ceased talks on reviving an immigration agreement. State
Department officials said the talks foundered over Cuba's demands for
unobstructed channels to beam radio broadcasts into the United States. [A3:1-2.]

Le Duan died in Hanoi. The head of the Vietnamese Communist Party, who was one
of the chief architects of victory in the Vietnam War, was 78 years old.
[D18:3-6.]

National

The Federal Reserve cut the crucial discount interest rate to its lowest level
in nearly eight years, 6 percent, citing a ''relatively slow'' economy and low
inflation. The reduction on loans to banks is likely to bring lower loan rates
for consumers and businesses, in turn encouraging more borrowing and more
spending. [A1:6.]

Mixed results for the President came in the Supreme Court term that ended
Monday. President Reagan won a significant reaffirmation of Presidential primacy
in executing the laws, but was defeated on many issues at the heart of his
social agenda. [A1:1-2.]

Hundreds of inmates set fire at a prison complex near Washington. Nine guards
and 29 inmates were injured. The rioting placed mounting pressure on the
Washington Mayor, Marion S. Barry Jr., who is running for re-election. [A1:1.]

Cocaine-related deaths and injuries have increased dramatically in recent years,
said the National Institute on Drug Abuse. A Federal drug expert also said that
most deaths that are in fact linked to cocaine use are reported as something
else, such as heart failure. [A1:3-5.]

A citizen group that captured illegal aliens along the Arizona-Mexico border
last weekend consists of ''Americans standing up and doing something,'' a leader
of the organization said. The group, whose action drew sharp criticism from
Federal authorities, also assists anti-Communist forces in Central America.
[A8:1-3.]

Leadership by women in the West is a strong tradition whose origins are
provoking spirited discussion, particularly since the two major parties in
Nebraska nominated women for Governor, over whether the frontier experience of
earlier generations is a factor. [A32:1-4.]

Metropolitan

Doctors sought to hospitalize a man three days before he fatally stabbed two
people on a Staten Island ferry, but the physician treating him allowed his
release, said a senior physician at Presbyterian Hospital. According to several
psychiatric experts, someone who rants such things as ''I'm going to kill, God
told me so,'' as the man did, suffers from ''command hallucinations'' and should
be regarded as posing a high risk of danger to others. [A1:2-3.]

''A minimal effort'' to fight cocaine by the Federal Government is coinciding
with an epidemic of the drug that is overwhelming the New York area, charged an
angry Robert M. Morgenthau. ''You have a lot of talk but no Federal commitment
that I can see,'' the Manhattan District Attorney said. [B1:4-5.]

New York's highest court set aside the conviction of a man in the killing of a
New York City police officer 12 years ago, saying he should not have been denied
his right to defend himself, even though his legal strategy in the trial was to
''remain mute.'' The court ordered a new trial. [B3:1-2.]

Ties to Puerto Rico are stronger than any desire to assimilate for many of the
people living in El Barrio in Manhattan. It is one of the few remaining
neighborhoods in the city that still reflects its ethnic history, which is
distinctly Hispanic. [B1:3.]

The Triborough Bridge is 50. Two billion vehicles have traversed the bridge
since its opening. [B2:5-6.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

LE DUAN, VIETNAMESE COMMUNIST CHIEF, DIES AT 78

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1291 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 10


Le Duan, the head of the Vietnamese Communist Party and one of the architects of
victory in the Vietnam War, died today in Hanoi. He was 78 years old.

He had proved to be a faithful and able executor of the ''political will'' of Ho
Chi Minh by managing to maintain the collective leadership that Ho left as a
legacy on his death in 1969.

The death of Mr. Duan, who had clearly seemed to be first among equals in that
durable leadership group, leaves a gap that will probably be filled at the sixth
congress of the Communist Party, tenatively scheduled for late this year.

Le Duan (pronounced lay zwan) was one of the most important North Vietnamese
leaders who oversaw the war against South Vietnam from the late 1950's until
reunification of Vietnam was achieved in 1975 with the collapse of the South
Vietnamese Army and Government.

Military as Well as Civilian

Like all members of the Vietnamese Politburo, he was a military as well as a
civilian official, but his specialty was in the ''strategy of political
struggle,'' the organization of the population for revolutionary warfare.

His death was announced by the Voice of Vietnam radio, which said he died after
''a period of serious illness.'' No cause of death was given, but some experts
on Vietnamese affairs said there had been many reports that he suffered from a
kidney ailment. He had traveled to the Soviet Union in December 1985 for medical
treatment and made a brief appearance in January at the Soviet Communist Party
Congress.

The broadcast said a state funeral would be held Tuesday in Hanoi.

Mr. Duan and his leadership colleagues showed a greater aptitude for war than
for the problems of peace. Severe economic problems overtook Vietnam in the
years after 1975, including a serious decline in rice production and
distribution, according to analysts of the area.

Economic Incentives Tried

As secretary general of the party, Mr. Duan seemed to have been a leader of a
recent move to use economic incentives to encourage greater productivity, a step
that had some success but has fallen far short of the kind of market tools used
in China and some other Communist nations.

Mr. Duan also took part in the decision to invade neighboring Cambodia and to
replace the Khmer Rouge Government of Pol Pot with a more compliant regime.

''He shared with the other members of the Politburo a rather martial outlook, a
tendency to attack problems with the application of violent force,'' said
Douglas Pike, the author of many works on Vietnamese Communism and director of
the Indochina Studies Program at the University of California.

During his period of leadership, there were also large-scale border clashes with
China, an expulsion of many ethnic Chinese citizens from Vietnam and a great
exodus of ''boat people'' as refugees from the south.

In the labyrinth of Communist Party politics and bureaucracy, Mr. Duan had a
reputation for subtle maneuver in ''bung di,'' a Vietnamese slang phrase loosely
translated as faction fighting. But like his mentor Ho, in public he tried to
''stay above the dust of faction fighting,'' intervening only at critical
junctures, Mr. Pike said.

Shared Power With 4

Although the size of the Politburo varied from 14 to 17 members in recent years,
Mr. Duan essentially shared power with four other major figures: Prime Minister
Pham Van Dong; Le Duc Tho, who negotiated the abortive peace treaty with the
United States in 1973; Truong Chinh, a ideological theorist often at odds with
the more pragmatic Mr. Duan, and Pham Hung, now a state security chief but
during the war the on-scene leader of Communist forces in the South.

Prime Minister Dong is also reported to be very ill, and his retirement at the
sixth party congress has been widely rumored. All of the top leaders are
veterans of the first Indochina war against the French, and all are in their
70's.

The party congress had originally been scheduled for this spring, then for
November and most recently for December. What changes it will bring are
difficult to predict, several experts said.

Born Near Old Capital

Le Duan was born on April 7, 1908, in Quang Tri Province in Central Vietnam just
north of the former imperial capital of Hue. Several Central Intelligence Agency
biographies complied during the Vietnam War make no mention of a wife or family,
but some Vietnamese believe he was married and had a son who flew with the
Vietnamese Air Force.

Distinguished by a thick shock of hair and by an open, sturdy countenance, he
called himself a peasant but probably came from a literate, land-owning farm
family. He was able to get the equivalent of a high school education, relatively
rare in that period of French colonial administration.

He became a clerk in the Vietnam Railway Company in Hanoi. With only a tiny
proletariat in Vietnam, railway workers were an early organizational target for
Moscow-directed party organizers, and Mr. Duan became a zealous Communist in the
1920's.

When anti-French nationalist mutinies and unrest swept much of the country, Mr.
Duan was imprisoned in 1930 on Con Son, a penal island off the southern coast.
He was released in 1936 when the left-wing Popular Front Government came to
power in France.

Jailed During World War

But he was imprisoned again in 1940 by the Vichy authorities in Vietnam and
imprisoned at Son La prison in the north until World War II ended.

A member of the party Central Committee, Mr. Duan worked from 1946 onward in
what later became South Vietnam, ostensibly as a member of the broad nationalist
coalition called the Viet Minh but actually as a Communist organizer and
lieutenant of Ho. Cochin China was a relative backwater in the French Indochina
war, but Mr. Duan helped put in place a party structure in the south that could
not be eradicated by the non-Communist Government when Vietnam was partitioned
in 1954.

In the late 1950's he worked in North Vietnam on agricultural production. He
eventually carried through the collectivization of agriculture that had
initially led to riots and protests and for which Truong Chin was blamed and
briefly expelled from public life.

When active guerrilla war began against the South Vietnamese Government around
1959, Mr. Duan oversaw the formation of the People's Revolutionary Party, the
Communist ''vanguard party'' of the coalition called the National Liberation
Front.

Many Vietnamese and foreign experts on the country believe that Mr. Duan was one
of those who argued for the kind of full-scale, implacable prosecution of the
war against South Vietnamese and American forces that led to the Tet offensive
in 1968 and the final offensive in 1975. In this he was opposed by advocates of
a more ''protracted war,'' which was also favored by China.

Broad Role in War

Although Pham Hung created and led the Central Office for South Vietnam, a
political and military headquarters situated in the South and Cambodia, Mr. Duan
had much broad responsibility for the war. But he seemed to care less for
doctrinal, strategic and theoretical arguments than some of his colleagues.

He was close to Ho and read his ''political will'' when the President and party
chairman died. The post of chairman was never filled, and Mr. Duan remained the
secretary general of the party. Though self-effacing, in Mr. Pike's words, Mr.
Duan could not match the avuncular image of ''Uncle Ho'' as a national symbol.

Although he published at least eight books, they were primarily compilations of
speeches and reports, and he never achieved a reputation as a party theorist.

''His main achievement was that he completed the defeat of the South and
unification,'' said Stephen Johnson, an expert on Vietnam at the State
Department.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Le Duan (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 12, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

C.I.A.'S PARAMILITARY OPERATIONS: THE RECORD SINCE THE 50's

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 636 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 11


Until the mid-1970's, the Central Intelligence Agency had extensive capabilities
for waging paramilitary operations, including warehouses full of arms and a
network of secretly owned companies that could ship equipment around the world.

Much of that capability was dismantled as the agency largely abandoned covert
operations after Congressional investigations in 1975. The present Director of
Central Intelligence, William J. Casey, has made rebuilding of the paramilitary
program a top priority, according to Administration and Congressional officials.

In the 1960's and 1970's the agency's paramilitary operations took a variety of
forms, ranging from delivery of arms to active direction of field operations.
For instance, the C.I.A. built an army of Hmong tribesmen in Laos who fought in
that country while American forces were committed to South Vietnam. In
Guatemala, the agency engineered the coup in 1954 in which a small army of
rebels ousted President Jacobo Arbenz Guzman.

In 1958 the agency became involved in training and advising rebels fighting
President Sukarno in Indonesia. This effort included a C.I.A.-financed air force
with C.I.A. pilots, one of whom was shot down after accidentally bombing a house
of worship and killing most of the congregation. Shortly afterward, the
operation was ended.

Now Aiding Angola Rebels

In 1975 the agency was involved in an unsuccessful program of support for the
National Union for the Total Independence of Angola and the National Front for
the Liberation of Angola. Both lost the Angolan war, although the former group
has continued to fight under Jonas Savimbi and is again the recipient of covert
American aid funneled through the C.I.A.

The most spectacular failure of the agency's paramilitary operations came at the
Bay of Pigs, when a C.I.A.-trained force of rebels was decisively defeated in
their attempt to retake Cuba from Fidel Castro. The agency bore the brunt of the
criticism for the Bay of Pigs, and many intelligence officers have argued ever
since against involving the agency in paramilitary operations.

Stansfield Turner, President Carter's Director of Central Intelligence, said
that in his view, the agency was best suited for paramilitary programs. ''The
Pentagon is just not good at doing anything stealthily,'' he said. ''It's a very
bad idea to put this in the Pentagon. It's just ill-equipped to do this.''

That view is shared by Mr. Casey, who has been a forceful advocate both publicly
and privately of the doctrine of supporting rebels who challenge Soviet-backed
governments. Under Mr. Casey, the agency has initiated or expanded a range of
covert programs, including support for insurgents in Angola, Afghanistan,
Ethiopia, Cambodia and Nicaragua.

Mixed Record Is Seen

According to Administration and Congressional officials, Mr. Casey's record in
building an effective system for arming and training American-backed guerrilla
forces has been mixed.

In the initial phases of the covert program to aid the Nicaraguan rebels, for
instance, the agency was embarrassed by the revelation that a contract employee
had written a guerrilla manual that advocated assassinations. It also came under
heavy criticism in Congress for C.I.A.-directed mining of Nicaraguan harbors.

Members of Congress of various ideological persuasions have also criticized the
agency for inadequacies in the program to aid the Afghan rebels.

And some former Nicaraguan rebel commanders have complained that C.I.A. advisers
refused to heed their complaints about corruption among the movement's leaders.

At times, Pentagon officials have sought to become more involved in the agency's
paramilitary operations, but Administration officials say the C.I.A. has
consistently defended its position of sole control over such operations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 12, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi's Leader, From Victory to Defeat

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 361 words


Le Duan, the Vietnamese Communist leader who died Thursday at the age of 78, did
not enjoy the renown of his predecessor, Ho Chi Minh, and never assumed his
title of party chairman. But he was a major figure in our history. Le Duan
played a principal role in organizing the victory over the forces of South
Vietnam and the United States and then presided over the brutal reunification of
North and South. In 17 years at the helm, he also waged an armed conflict with
China and sent Vietnam's army to conquer and occupy Cambodia.

Mr. Duan's military successes, however, must be measured against a fearful cost:
diplomatic isolation, economic stagnation and appalling suffering throughout
Indochina. His victories were bought at a price normally paid only in defeat.

After outlasting a superpower, Le Duan's Vietnam was unable to achieve normal
relations with either the United States or China, its ancient enemy. Inexorably,
it became more dependent on the Soviet Union than its nationalistic leaders
would have preferred.

Devastated by years of war, Vietnam then cut itself off from foreign aid and
investment by occupying Cambodia, and further compounded its problems with
mismanagement and persecution of an entrepreneurial Chinese minority. While most
of Southeast Asia prospered, Vietnam's economy stagnated. Recent shake-ups of
personnel suggest an effort to recoup, but significant revival remains a task
for Mr. Duan's successors.

The bitterness of a long war may have made some retribution against the defeated
South Vietnamese forces inevitable. But Hanoi's ''re-education'' net was cast
much wider and cruelly swept up even neutralists who had actively opposed
Saigon's war effort. Then came the persecution of the Chinese minority and the
occupation of Cambodia and the desperate escapes of nearly a million boat
people, completing the picture of a ferocious, martial nationalism run amok.

Not all these failures are fairly attributed to Le Duan alone. But his regime
demanded heroism and sacrifice without ever delivering triumph or peace. His
successors have surely been taught about the victories. If wise, they will also
study his defeats.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Going On in the Northeast

BYLINE: By Joan Cook

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 30, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 565 words


FLYING AS IT USED TO BE - Airplane buffs should find the New England Air Museum
in Windsor Locks, Conn., just the thing for a summer weekend. Its 130 craft
include an early Bleriot XI Monoplane (1909), a Marcoux-Bromberg racer, the
plane used in the 1938 film ''Test Pilot,'' starring Clark Gable, a Republic
Thunderbolt fighter from World War II, and a Thunderchief fighter from the
Vietnam War.

All are welcome to test flying skills at the controls of a F-1000 jetfighter
cockpit simulator - 1955 vintage -or experience takeoffs and landings by
listening to radio communications between aircraft and the control tower at
nearby Bradley International Airport.

On ''Open Cockpit Weekends,'' visitors may climb aboard 16 aircraft. The next
such weekend starts Aug. 9.  The museum is open daily, except holidays, from 10
A.M. to 5 P.M. Admission is $4.50 for adults, $2 for children 6 to 11. Take I-91
to Exit 40 and Route 20 West to Route 75 North. The entrance is about three
miles ahead on the left. For information call (800) 243-1685. In Connecticut the
number is (800) 842-7492.

'SILK STOCKINGS' BY NIGHT

Paris in the 1950's will be the subject of open-air musical theater starting at
8 P.M. Tuesday when the Catonsville Community College Summernight Theater
presents Cole Porter's ''Silk Stockings'' at War Memorial Plaza in Baltimore.
Performers include students from the college and community residents. Admission
is free.

The show follows the 1957 movie version of ''Silk Stockings,'' itself a rewrite
of ''Ninotchka.'' A limited number of cafe tables will be provided, along with
an additional 500 seats. Patrons are encouraged to pack a picnic supper.

The War Memorial Plaza is in front of City Hall at Gay and Fayette Streets. No
raincheck. For information call (301) 837-4636.

PEARL BUCK'S HOUSE ON VIEW

Pearl Buck's 1835 stone farmhouse in Perkasie, Pa., with its antique furnishings
and some of her belongings, is open for two guided tours daily, Monday through
Friday at 10:30 A.M. and 2 P.M. and on Sundays at 1:30 P.M. and 2:30 P.M.

Miss Buck wrote ''The Good Earth,'' published in 1931, and was awarded the
Pulitzer Prize for it. Later she was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature. Her
Bucks County property, Green Hills Farms, is a national landmark. Ten of its 19
rooms are on view.

Admission is $4 for adults, $3 for senior citizens and children. Proceeds help
maintain the house. The estate is about 30 miles north of Philadelphia and a
day's trip from Manhattan, New Jersey or Delaware. For information call (215)
249-0100.

ONE MAN'S 'TEMPEST'

Fred Curchak, the San Francisco-based actor known for imaginative performances
of Shakespeare, will appear at 8 P.M. tonight in ''Stuff As Dreams Are Made On''
at the Fine Arts Center of the State University of New York at Stony Brook. His
version of ''The Tempest'' offers a blend of masks, dolls and special effects.

He will be followed Thursday by La Troupe Circus, a Canadian company offering
tricks, physical feats and comic scenarios with actors, acrobats, jugglers and
trapeze artists. La Troupe Circus will remain through Sunday, July 20.

Admission is $8, $7 for matinees. Performances are at 8 P.M., Thursday through
Sunday, with a matinee at 2 P.M. Saturday. The center is off Exit 62 of the Long
Island Expressway going east. For information call the box office at (516)
246-5678.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
DOWN-HOME DRAMA THRIVES IN ATLANTA

BYLINE: By JAMES FLANNERY; James Flannery, who has written extensively on the
Irish theater, is founder of the Department of Theater Studies at Emory
University in Atlanta.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1519 words


For many Atlantans, including some 100 backers who flew up to attend this
spring's Off Broadway opening of Sandra Deer's ''So Long on Lonely Street,'' the
mainly negative reviews the play received were hard to swallow. What was at
stake was far more than a financial investment. ''So Long On Lonely Street'' was
the first home-grown play to grace the main stage of Atlanta's 18-year-old
Alliance Theater, where Ms. Deer is literary manager. There, it became a smash
hit, breaking all box-office records and filling people throughout the city with
great communal pride. The possibility of a New York production fueled the
excitement. It was as if ''So Long on Lonely Street'' symbolized a cultural
coming of age for Atlanta.

The positive feelings stirred by ''So Long on Lonely Street'' reveal much about
how regional theaters can help foster what William Carlos Williams called ''the
achievement of locus,'' a conscious regard for the traditions and character of
one's environment. However, its poor critical reception in New York also
underlines the difficulties involved in trying to treat theater as if it were an
economic commodity that can easily be exported from one area of the country to
another.

Compared to the great novelists and short story writers of the Southern literary
renaissance, the accomplishments of dramatists from the South have been
relatively slight. Only Lillian Hellman and Tennessee Williams can be considered
major figures. While their work provides an accurate and at times deeply
disturbing picture of life in the South, from a contemporary perspective they
seem to belong to another age. This is particularly true of Williams and his
gallery of genteel, charming, sexually repressed and ultimately self-destructive
Southern belles. No doubt, their struggle to survive in a callous, graceless
modern age is both touching and true.

Still, what lies behind their over-elaborate vocabularies and over-great
expectations is a dependency that can too easily become exploitive. The Atlanta
poet and playwright Pearl Cleage considers Williams's affection for such
characters a sign of his nostalgia for the Old South, a feeling that as a black
is obviously alien to her.

In ''Hospice,'' a recent work of hers, Ms. Cleage provides a striking contrast
to Williams in portraying two strong, self-determining women, a mother and
daughter, who, after being estranged for many years, attain a hard-bitten
reconciliation. The play is an exploration of the contradictions between the
ideals and reality of the civil-rights and feminist movements as seen from a
black woman's perspective.

Several other Atlanta dramatists have also won major national awards for work
that is deeply rooted in the mores and manners of the contemporary South yet
contains a wider social, political and religious dimension. ''Wasted,'' by Fred
Gamel, concerns an explosion of racial violence that erupts in Vietnam on the
day of Martin Luther King Jr.'s assassination. Shocking in the brutal frankness
with which black and white soldiers express their normally hidden feelings about
one another, ''Wasted'' achieved something rare in Atlanta by openly confronting
the racial suspicion and prejudice that continue to polarize this city. Yet it
is clear, based on its successful run this year at New York's W.P.A. Theater as
well as its choice by the American Theater Critics Association as the best new
play produced outside of New York in 1983-84, that ''Wasted'' speaks to a sadly
ubiquitous American condition.

''Two Masters,'' by the Atlanta poet and playwright Frank Manley, which won
praise when it was presented at the Actors Theater of Louisville Humana Festival
of New American Plays, is scheduled for a New York production next season at the
Theater for the New City. Mr. Manley's work exhibits a deep awareness of the
poetic possibilities of colloquial speech coupled with an almost mystical
religious sensibility. These qualities are captured in the character of Oletta
Crews, a gargantuan high priestess of talk who, in the first of the two plays
that make up ''Two Masters,'' relates a spellbinding tale directly to the
audience about an escaped convict who has come to her trailer home for
sanctuary. Early in the play we learn that Oletta and her husband have killed
their guest. But as their story unfolds we gradually discover the contradictions
between the biblical axioms quoted by Oletta to justify the murder and the
avariciousness that is her actual motive. In this and in his other beautifully
crafted one-act plays, Mr. Manley displays a great capacity to identify with the
outcasts of society.

No Atlanta theater has had a more sustained commitment to promoting the
indigenous cultural values of the South than the Academy Theater. Founded 30
years ago, the Academy has sought to avoid the dangers inherent in provincial
self-absorption by balancing original and company-developed plays with classical
and modern works from the international repertory.

Barbara Lebow, a director and playwright originally from New York, illustrates
the virtues of this approach. Ms. Lebow has written over 20 plays, several of
them in collaboration with groups such as inner-city children, the physically
handicapped and residents of a home for the aged. One of her group creations,
entitled ''Windows,'' deals with the experience of battered women who have been
jailed after rebelling against their oppressors. It was performed on the Academy
stage last year by the prisoners themselves.

Ms. Lebow now considers herself a Southerner, and she shares with many of her
playwriting colleagues from Atlanta a vivid sense of characterization, an ease
in handling vernacular dialogue, a poetic fluidity of structure and an unabashed
willingness to tackle in a direct and open manner themes of profound moral
seriousness. ''A Shayna Maidel,'' another Lebow work, concerns itself with the
reconciliation of dislocated forces and the suffering human beings that embody
them. The play focuses on two Jewish sisters separated as children in Poland
before World War II and reunited in New York in 1946 after one of them has
endured the horrors of a concentration camp. Yet, as audiences at the Hartford
Stage Company discovered when it was staged last fall, ''A Shayna Maidel'' is
less a lament for the victims of the Holocaust than a threnody on the enduring
bonds of family and love.

If the work of Ms. Cleage, Mr. Gamel, Mr. Manley and Ms. Lebow draws upon
traditional conventions to express new ideas, the Southern Theater Conspiracy
plays with those conventions in a gleeful spirit of irreverence. Like
shamanistic medieval tricksters, Levi Lee and his partners Larry Larson and
Rebecca Wackler have careened about the fringes of the Atlanta theater scene for
several years, building a small but devoted audience for their wildly
iconoclastic satires on the most sacred shibboleths of Southern life and
culture. Last year, their production of ''Tent Meeting,'' which focuses on the
excesses of fundamentalist religiosity, was the hit of the Louisville Humana
Festival and went on to receive further acclaim at the Spoleto Festival in
Charleston, S.C., the Kennedy Center in Washington and the Dublin Festival. The
success of ''Tent Meeting'' was repeated at this year's Humana Festival with
another play of theirs, entitled ''Some Things You Need to Know Before the World
Ends: A Final Evening With the Illuminati,'' which held up to ridicule virtually
every perverse creed - political, economic as well as religious - that bends
mankind into submission.

Some 20 other professional and semi-professional theaters have developed in
Atlanta over the last decade and are chiefly responsible for the great upsurge
of local playwriting. Most of these theaters are struggling simply to survive,
but their commitment to produce new work, even at the risk of economic and
artistic failure, is remarkable.

What gives one hope in the future of theater in Atlanta is, ironically, the very
condition that prevented it from flourishing in the past - a condition of defeat
linked to poverty, guilt and suffering that, until the civil-rights movement,
caused Southerners to have an overwhelming sense of cultural inferiority. This
condition has, however, produced a historical awareness that man is a fallible
creature who functions best in a society that measures his ambitions with an
equal reckoning of his limitations.

A visitor to Atlanta would be hard pressed to find any remnants of the glamorous
plantation life depicted in ''Gone With the Wind,'' but could easily encounter
people who stubbornly, proudly cling to a sense of place and an understanding of
who and what they are. William Faulkner, in his Nobel Prize acceptance speech,
declared: ''Man is immortal because he has a soul, a spirit capable of
compassion and endurance.'' It may be difficult for critics elsewhere to grasp
all the tribal nuances of the Southern idiom, but it would be alarming to think
that only in the South could sentiments like these be considered, in the phrase
of another more familiar Atlanta export, ''the real thing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Review; Photo of Levi Lee and Rebecca Alworth in ''Tent Meeting'';
Photo of Suzi Bass and Pat Hurley in ''Two Masters''; Photo of Levi Lee and
Larry Larson in ''Some Things You Need to Know Before the World Ends'' (Kavid S.
Talbott (Page 26)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

MODERN TWISTS SPICE A MOZART OPERA

BYLINE: By WILL CRUTCHFIELD

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1751 words


The approach to Pepsico Summerfare by car is not inviting - the Performing Arts
Center of the State University of New York at Purchase looms up prisonlike, a
clump of massive windowless boxes in dull brick. But within its three theaters
sprites cavort and notions both challenging and frivolous are given play.

Last year the Summerfare centerpiece was a trio of Handel operas, one staged
with attempted period authenticity, one in an English translation and
straightforward, low-profile staging - and the third, ''Giulio Cesare'' directed
by Peter Sellars, in a kaleidoscopic, laugh- and thought-provoking modernization
set at and around the Cairo Hilton. Caesar was (vaguely) an American President,
Cleopatra a petulant poolside preener.

This year it is Mr. Sellars who has been brought back. Pepsico's sole operatic
offering, opening Wednesday, will be Mozart's ''Cosi Fan Tutte,'' done by the
young director and his regular musical collaborator Craig Smith. Controversy is
assured.

Mr. Sellars objects vehemently to complaints that his operatic approach begins
and ends with modernizing the stories and packing in the sight gags, but it
unquestionably begins there. Don Giovanni snorting cocaine and chomping Big
Macs; Handel's ''Orlando'' set on Cape Canaveral and Mars; Julius Caesar and his
advance man setting up a press conference; Haydn's ''Armida'' in Vietnam, all
with lotsa laffs - though the director emphasizes that scene-shifting and
gag-writing is only a starting point, and wants his work judged on the substance
that follows, the opening gambit sends a strong message.

The message has met with a critical reception sometimes described as ''mixed,''
but that is a misleading term in this instance: It has been polarized, with only
scant mixing of the extremes. Some critics have called Mr. Sellars a genius,
seen an operatic Balanchine at work in his detailed choreographic staging,
thought him the most musical of directors for his close attention to the score.
Others have damned his productions as sophomoric, emotionally false and
unconvincing, at best (and some don't grant them that) only intellectually
interesting, musically destructive in their busy visual antics and far too
addicted to the easy laugh.

Mr. Sellars's ''Cosi'' occasioned that kind of division when it was first
offered at Castle Hill in Massachussetts last year. The revival will be
significantly different, though, the director said during rehearsals at
Purchase: ''The concept is the same'' - that is, the time is the present, the
setting is a neon-lit diner, the war for which the lovers are said to depart is
in Nicaragua - ''but it's a much deeper show. I've gone through crossing out
jokes. There will still be a lot of laugh-out-loud moments'' - one must
understand that many, many jokes could be crossed out of a Sellars production
and still leave a lot of laugh-out-loud moments - ''but it is darker now. The
ambition is to make the production as funny and scary as the piece itself.''

There will also be a surprising musical change, based in part on the view of the
story that Mr. Sellars and Mr. Smith have developed. (''The opera is about one
couple, Fiordiligi and Ferrando, finding true love, and the other couple not
finding it,'' the director says.) In place of the carefree-sounding aria, ''E
Amore un ladroncello'' (it might be translated ''Cupid's a little thief''), in
which Dorabella seems to make light of an exchange of lovers with her sister,
this production will have ''Vado, ma dove?'' (''I'll go, but whither?''), a
serious aria written by Mozart and Da Ponte at the time of ''Cosi'' but for
Continued on page 000 another opera.

That aside, however, the musical performance will be orthodox -which is not
quite the same thing as conservative. Mr. Smith's approach to ''Cosi''
participates in the general growth of historically informed musical performance
(authentic Classical instruments will be used, and certain vocal practices of
Mozart's time will be observed), but within the context of the 20th-century
ideal of a polished and unified ensemble performance. The Sellars-Smith team,
each partner enthusiastically engaged with the other's ideas and concepts, works
in a curious imbalance, producing operas with the visual and gestural components
radically transformed while the aural component is worked out entirely within
familiar, unchallenged boundaries.

One result is that, although Mr. Sellars clearly looks to his conductor for
artistic guidance and describes their collaboration as unequal in Mr. Smith's
favor, audiences and critics have uniformly experienced the basic interpretation
of each opera as coming from, or at least through, Mr. Sellars's staging. The
musical treatment has been found admirable by some and flat or nondescript by
others, but hardly stimulating or worthy of extended comment.

Mr. Sellars in person is a diminutive, fast-moving elf, as quick to laugh as his
audiences always are. His hair is still the punkish shock that has become
familiar in pictures as his fast-paced career has unfolded around the country
(he is not yet 30). His discourse is a compound of formidable erudition, whimsy
and a kind of egotistical naivete that can be at once endearing and startling.
He is capable of averring with a straight face that he finds the practice of
updating operatic stories ''a cheap trick'' in general and offering barely a
minute later that he does it ''because we need images that we can respond to
instinctively, out of our own experience'' - an insight hardly unguessed by
previous perpetrators of the trick.

At times one has the impression that he and Mr. Smith do not think anyone, ever,
has taken ''Cosi'' seriously before. (And on Handel the director is quite
explicit: ''I wanted to do 'Cesare' because this is a composer that nobody has
even touched, dramatically. I mean, no one has even been in the ballpark.'') Mr.
Sellars eagerly expounds on the purposes he expects updating to serve. ''I am
not interested in realism; all of my work is full of anachronisms and
divergences. Any time you do an opera from an earlier period you have an obvious
diachronism: It was written then; it's being performed now. Moving the action
onstage to ''now'' is a cliche, a one-liner. But I tend to do operas that last
four or five hours; you are not left with the one-liner. You announce the cliche
and then you move away from it. The one-liner is what the people who didn't see
it talk about. What is important is to set the human emotions and their
sociological repercussions in a context that is intelligible to the audience
without a sort of triple-think process.''

Why, then, perform it in Italian, especially since the Sellars-Smith shows use
light, clear voices and small auditoriums that are ideal for English
intelligibility? Mr. Sellars: ''Basically because there's no acceptable English
version. Approximately the same meaning is not close enough.'' Mr. Smith: ''The
standard American translation is horrible, and the others sound like a high time
at Oxford.'' Mr. Sellars: ''This way you can have the performers meaning each
word, and you feel that in the audience, even if you don't speak Italian.'' (Mr.
Sellars doesn't.) Mr. Sellars is also the kind of director who shapes and
supervises every detail of movement, a practice which takes on heightened
dimensions given the sheer density of movement in his shows (''I make the
staging as difficult as possible,'' he has written). Some performers find it
stifling. ''We were all totally sapped of our spirits and were just sort of
meister-puppets that had been moved around,'' said Tommy Tune in an interview
after Mr. Sellars was forced out of the Broadway revival ''On Your Toes,'' of
which he was the original director.

''There are some performers,'' Mr. Sellars counters, ''who do not lose
themselves because they are doing something they have been told to do.'' Mr.
Smith: ''In mature Mozart, you cannot have singer-controlled expression. It must
all be worked out. The ensemble has to come first.''

And in the operas that work in different ways, the team declares no interest.
The director: '' 'Don Pasquale' was intended as a simple piece of popcorn. It's
not too buttery, it's not too salty, but it isn't the kind of work we do. What
would be the point?'' The conductor: ''For me, Puccini has no existence as
music. It's simply stage direction. The score tells you in each bar what's going
on. But Mozart has an independent symphonic life.''

So although Mr. Sellars will go to the Metropolitan in 1988-89, traditionalist
audiences need not fear a ''Tosca'' set in the contemporary Kremlin. He will go
instead for a triple bill of Schoenberg's ''Erwartung,'' Bartok's ''Bluebeard's
Castle'' and Debussy's ''Martyrdom of St. Sebastian.'' ''It's a great chance,''
Mr. Sellars says, ''to show what the real composers were doing when Puccini and
Strauss were taking over the operatic repertory, and what it might have been
like if that kind of writing had entered the opera house. It's the kind of thing
we should look at as we try to go on from here, to pick up the tradition of
opera.''

For that, he asserts, is his principal interest: ''In the future I'll be doing
more and more contemporary opera, and the old operas will be the exception.'' He
has already done Peter Maxwell Davies's ''Lighthouse'' in an enthusiastically
received production in Boston; next year he will stage two pieces in whose
formation he is collaborating: John Adams's ''Nixon in China'' for the Houston
Grand Opera, and ''The Electrification of the Soviet Union'' by Nigel Osborne
for the Glyndebourne Festival.

More such collaborations are in the offing, but Mr. Sellars is reluctant to
discuss them (it has already become a motif in his short career that not every
project that is launched will float). Several overtures from opera companies for
standard works, meanwhile, he has turned down, for reasons ranging from
rehearsal time and casting (some of the proposals, he says, ''amounted to
artistic irresponsibility'') to collaborators (''I have to be able to choose the
conductor'').

But there will be more controversial shows in store - a whole Mozart cycle for
Summerfare, for one thing, in annual installments. ''I don't say I'll stop doing
old operas,'' he says, ''because I think there's a particular contact with them
I have that is worthwhile. But my goal is to create within my lifetime a
20th-century performing tradition of opera, in whose image we can re-create the
past.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An interview with Peter Sellars in the Arts and Leisure section today
misidentifies a revival of a Broadway musical he was engaged to direct. The
production was ''My One and Only,'' not ''On Your Toes.''

GRAPHIC: Photo of Frank Kelley, James Maddalena and Sanford Sylvan in ''Cosi Fan
Tutte''; Photo of Peter Sellars (NYT/Alan Zale) (Page 21)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE SPLIT MILITARY PSYCHE

BYLINE: By Arthur T. Hadley; Arthur T. Hadley, a former editor of The New York
Herald Tribune, is the author of ''The Straw Giant,'' published last month by
Random House.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3367 words


SINCE 1947, THE YEAR Congress created the Department of Defense and the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, there have been repeated efforts to restructure both
organizations. However, as each Congressional session adjourns, the reform
legislation, like an old soldier, simply fades away.

This year, the outcome may be different. After four years of hard work, the
House Armed Services Committee, ably headed by Representative Les Aspin of
Wisconsin, has led the drive to reform the military command structure. The
Senate has approved an amended version of the House reform legislation, with
important bipartisan support from two powerful legislators, Democrat Sam Nunn of
Georgia and Republican Barry Goldwater of Arizona, both of whom are respected
authorities on defense issues.

The new legislation takes aim at one of the military's most serious and
intractable problems: deep and often bitter rivalries between the different
branches of the armed forces. The costs of these rivalries -which center on
issues such as budgets, tactics and manpower - are most often measured in terms
of redundant bureaucracies and wasted spending. But they can also cause
life-threatening crises in battle, as they did during the United States invasion
of Grenada in 1983.

In one instance, when troops wounded in the invasion were evacuated to ships
offshore, Navy officers refused to let Army rescue helicopters land aboard ship
because the Army pilots had not been trained in Navy flight procedures. In
another case, Army troops pinned down under enemy fire were unable to call in
support from Air Force planes because their communication systems were
incompatible with those of the Air Force. The stranded Army unit received air
support only after a quick-thinking soldier appealed for help by using his
telephone credit card to call the Army base at Fort Bragg, N.C., from a local
phone.

The new legislation will try to reduce the worst of these problems by changing
the structure of the Pentagon's top military command. In service argot, ''the
wiring diagrams are going to change.'' But what about the faces inside the boxes
on the Pentagon's organizational chart? Will they change? Need they change?

Seeing the nation's top admirals and generals seated at a table, bemedaled and
stern of face, an outsider is apt to assume that they hold a rather uniform view
of the world. Yet that is far from the case. In nearly 40 years of covering
military issues, I have been struck by the fundamental differences in attitude
and perception that separate the men who lead the various branches of the United
States armed forces. The experiences stamped on young Army, Navy, Air Force and
Marine officers during their early assignments, together with the deeply
ingrained history of their services, combine to give senior officers profoundly
different outlooks.

These differences are, of course, inherently difficult to define or quantify.
But they are often apparent to the most casual observer, and even seemingly
simple questions of operations or tactics can elicit vastly different responses
from officers who come from different service backgrounds. Taken together, these
intellectual and psychological differences represent a key source of conflict
and competition within our armed services. And until steps are taken to
understand and overcome them, it seems unlikely that any bureaucratic
reorganization will greatly improve our defenses.

IT SHOULD COME AS NO SURPRISE THAT THE personalities, beliefs and abilities of
officers differ by service. Throughout the American work force, professional
personalities and work attitudes are formed largely during early job
experiences. For example, reporters of my generation who learned their trade
when news was more accessible, and when public officials and the press felt that
they were part of a shared process, have different job standards, practices and
expectations than those journalists whose apprenticeship spanned the
controversial years of the Vietnam War and Watergate. Similarly, a woman who
runs her own computer research firm reports that she can tell from two or three
minutes of conversation whether the executive with whom she is talking received
his or her early training at I.B.M., Hewlett-Packard, Digital Equipment, Apple
Computer, or some other well-known computer firm. No matter where they are
employed now, she says, their thought processes and styles have retained the
distinct imprint of their first employer.

So it is within the armed services. The newly minted Army lieutenant soon learns
that he can make no large decisions without coordinating them with other units.
Within his limited sphere of command, he has a certain amount of freedom. But in
the wider area he cannot go right, left, backward or forward without informing
units near him, artillery, tanks, supply trains, his superiors - all in detail.
If he advances too aggressively, for example, his own artillery may fall on him
or the enemy may sneak between him and the next unit to attack his rear. He is,
for all his authority, a rather restricted part of a whole. His unit's success,
indeed its survival, rests on the efforts not just of himself but of outsiders.
This tends to make the Army officer more conscious of the needs of others, more
supportive of ''teamwork'' than officers in the other services.

The new Army officer's decisions are also open to continuous scrutiny. He is
seldom off by himself for any length of time, and on maneuvers his unit is
usually surrounded by the civilian environment. His superiors repeatedly drop by
to inspect him. He sees that his battalion and regimental commanders, even his
division's commanding general, are themselves parts of a whole. All of them are
restricted in certain ways and must combine their functions and talents to
produce success.

Even when, after 10 or 15 years, the Army officer reaches the rank of major or
lieutenant colonel, and commands a battalion, he still finds teamwork as
important to his job as leadership. So early habits of coordination and
attention to the abilities of those around him are reinforced. This may be why
Army officers, even when they lack the skills or talent of officers from other
services, seem to perform better in high Defense Department positions and allied
commands.

THE YOUNG NAVY LIEUTENANT, on the other hand, experiences a completely different
psychological environment. He is part of a self-contained unit, his ship, that
can and often does go off by itself for long periods of time. He does not have
to worry that his ship might run over a baby carriage or that his crew will
steal someone's apples. While his own functions aboard ship are rigidly
prescribed, he sees that his superiors have tremendous leeway. The commander of
a ship puts the wheel to the right, or commands a starboard turn, and, contained
within the ship, the whole paraphernalia of battle - ammunition, men, food, fuel
- turns also. There is little coordination necessary, no requesting permission,
no letting people know.

Though his ship must return to base or conform to formation if it is maneuvering
with a task force, it remains independent in ways no Army unit can. It may be
months before a superior comes aboard for an inspection. This combines with a
sense of isolation from other parts of the military - indeed from the world
itself. For the Navy officer generally puts in more time away from his family
than those in the other services. All this makes him, in my experience, more
strongly independent than officers in the other services.

Watching his seniors, the future admiral sees that they glory in solitary action
rather than relishing cooperation and coordination with larger units. They like
to be off by themselves, or perhaps with a few other ships, putting themselves
''in harm's way.'' Traditionally, Navy officers, more than officers in the other
services, fight assignments to the Pentagon. They tend to regard shore duty,
including study at civilian colleges for graduate degrees, as time wasted. This,
unfortunately, is also true of service even on the Joint Chiefs of Staff. At the
close of a National War College tour, when Air Force and Army officers look
forward to joint-service assignments as a path for promotion, Navy officers fear
them as the road to early retirement.

Sadly enough, their fears are often well-founded. Of the many interservice
command structures that exist within the United States military, the most
important is the Joint Staff, the group of 400 officers that serves the three
Joint Chiefs of Staff at the Pentagon. Testifying before Congress, Adm. Thor
Hanson said that in 1979 and 1980, when he was director of the Joint Staff, the
Navy, which includes the Marines, did not ''promote early'' a single officer
serving on the staff. Early promotion, or promotion ''below the zone'' as the
services call it, is the most coveted award the military can give to those
officers it deems to be exceptionally able. In the same period, Admiral Hanson
reported, the Army and Air Force had from one to four officers on the Joint
Staff who were promoted ''below the zone.'' Further, of the Navy and Marine
Corps officers on the Joint Staff, the number that were promoted ''within the
zone'' - that is, at what is considered to be a routine interval for officers of
a given rank - lagged behind the similar figure for the fleet as a whole. In
other words, the Navy and Marine Corps are not even assigning their average
officers to the Joint Staff - they are assigning below-average officers. In
contrast, the percentage of Air Force and Army officers on the Joint Staff
promoted ''within the zone'' equals the percentage in the Army and Air Force at
large.

These feelings of psychological isolation and a reverence for dogged
independence may account for the phenomenon that while the Navy officer corps is
at least equal in overall quality to that of the other services, it seldom
produces senior commanders with the breadth found in the Air Force and the Army.
Nor, to judge by the Navy's poor record in winning and keeping interservice
posts, do Navy officers do as well in positions of joint or allied command.

MARINE OFFICERS are nominally part of the Navy officer corps, and share many
characteristics of their naval sponsors. But over time, the Marine Corps has
developed its own strong identity, and Marine officers have their own special
traits.

On board ship, where Marines spend much of their time, the young Marine officer
feels almost an orphan, separated from the rest of the Navy crew. He works
different hours and in different parts of the ship than the crew, has totally
different duties, will be called on to risk his life in dirtier and more
intimate ways.

In this lonely, self-contained environment, Marines develop a sense of machismo
and toughness that sets their service apart. In time of war, they recruit ably
from the prestigious universities along both coasts, and this gives the Marines
an elan that carries over into peacetime. However, officers from such
backgrounds are often least likely to consider a military career at the close of
battle.

The Marine Corps has traditionally been a small and elite force, often starved
for equipment and lacking the large bureaucratic substructure that typifies
other branches of the military. This gives Marine officers an important hard
edge that is honed, on one side, by the early feelings of alienation from their
naval parent and, on the other, by what many marines regard as the somewhat
intimidating size and diversity of the Army. This
our-guts-against-the-rest-of-the-world perspective is at least as disdainful of
interservice staff duties as that of other naval officers. And it can also
encourage a tendency toward conservative anti-intellectualism.

Shortly before they graduate from Annapolis, Navy midshipmen are interviewed by
officers from many different specialties within their service - fliers,
engineers, surface-ship officers, submariners and Marines - about where they
wish to serve. Those with the highest academic standing get to choose first.
This year, one officer interviewing candidates for the Marine Corps stated that
while he hoped for some bright students, he was also looking for men graduating
near the bottom. ''Those are the ones I want,'' he said. ''They are the
strugglers. They've had to cope with adversity.'' It is doubtful that an officer
from any other part of the Navy would have defined his branch of the service in
that fashion. THE EMOTIONAL FORCES THAT mold a young Air Force officer are more
complex and difficult to discern. First, the Air Force is so new a service that
the psychological profiles of its members are less defined. Moreover, the
experiences of bomber and fighter pilots, to say nothing of the missile
engineer, are often markedly different.

Still, in my experience, there are certain psychological constants that mark
most Air Force officers. They are more exuberant; they have about them more of
the feeling that the future is theirs for the taking. They are apt to have a
more passionate attachment to machinery and a very different sense of time from
that of men from the other services. After all, pilots can be in Moscow for
lunch. An Army officer measures an hour's progress in yards, a Navy officer in
miles, an Air Force officer in continents.

Even the way officers in the Army and Air Force use the same metaphor is
indicative. When an Army officer says, ''down among the weeds,'' he means flat
on his belly in the mud with nicks in his helmet, not able to see what is going
on, and the weapons' fire cracking so close overhead that the very sound seems
to wound. When an Air Force officer says, ''down among the weeds,'' he means
flying very low, with his wingman missing, with those awful red balls of
antiaircraft fire zapping up at him from unseen places, and with his little
''sweat, you're on hostile radar'' light flashing urgently. Neither situation is
pleasant; but a military man comes out of each one, if he does, with different
perceptions of time, distance, strategy, technology and warfare.

Air Force officers are, like Navy officers, more removed both physically and
psychologically from combat than their counterparts in the Army or Marine Corps.
Air warfare is often more devastating in its effects than land or sea combat,
and Air Force pilots face extreme danger for short periods of time. But an Air
Force officer's life is, on the whole, more pleasant; and in his moments of
danger, he can rely heavily on machinery, on technology to see him through.
(Experts in flight safety believe that the reason some pilots fail to eject from
the cockpit of a damaged fighter is not just a refusal to admit failure but also
a psychological identification of the cockpit with the womb.) Finally, Air Force
officers from the beginning of their careers are more intimately involved with
nuclear weapons than officers in the other services - with the exception of the
submariners - and are trained almost daily on how to use them. As a result, what
seems important to officers in the other services often appears to Air Force
officers as unimportant, or ''Mickey Mouse.'' It tends to make them impatient.
They have the airplane and often the bomb, they use science, they have conquered
distance, even space itself. What else besides themselves can be necessary for
victory? As Churchill is said to have joked: ''With the atom bomb, the air
forces of the world have achieved their final goal: They can destroy the entire
human race without the loss of a single pilot.''

Churchill's humor was obviously extreme, but like many jests, it contained an
important barb of truth. The brutality of air warfare, combined with the pilot's
distance from the destruction wrought by his bombs, tends to make Air Force
officers - and Navy fliers - the most self-confident and aggressive officers in
the armed services. At the same time, pilots know that they must return after a
short period to a vulnerable base where they are entirely dependent on those who
service their planes. This tends to mitigate against the feeling of total
independence they experience while airborne.

The Air Force officer's love affair with speed and machinery can encourage an
anti-intellecualism that, while less noticeable than in the Marines, remains a
factor in the service's outlook. Air Force officers also tend to be more
conservative than their counterparts in other services. At the high point of
detente in 1974, for example, it was found that more than 50 percent of the
cadets at the Air Force Academy did not approve of detente, while that policy
was supported by the majority of students at Annapolis and West Point.

At the same time, because of their involvement with strategic warfare, science,
procurement of complex weapons and the new frontier of space, outstanding Air
Force officers are often quite thoughtful and reflective. Of all the services,
Air Force officers are the most uneven lot.

WHAT CAN BE DONE TO mitigate against the negative effects of these differing
service attitudes and outlooks?

First, those officers who attempt to rise above their institutional backgrounds
and to adopt an interservice outlook should be rewarded. At present, such
officers place their futures in jeopardy. The promotions of those serving in
interservice assignments are now controlled by their superiors in their services
rather than by their superiors in the interservice hierarchy. When a courageous
colonel or commodore argues on behalf of the national interest, rather than that
of his service, he knows that he is likely to forfeit his chances of promotion.
Almost any knowledgeable Pentagon insider can name a list of outstanding
officers who were forced into early retirement because their services considered
their action in some joint matter to be disloyal. Here we have marched backward
from the days of World War II, when Gen. George C. Marshall, the Army Chief of
Staff, made interservice experience a criterion for promotion.

Secondly, successful duty on an interservice staff should be a criterion for
promotion to flag rank - that is, to general or admiral. As currently organized,
the staffs of the theater commanders, possibly excepting NATO, do not benefit
from our nation's best military talent, despite the crucial role such staffs
play in our national defense. However, if successful interservice duty becomes
the route to promotion, the ball game changes. Able officers will bid for
interservice work, and the services will make certain their best officers get
joint assignments. The British had begun to carry out just such a change in
their system at the time of the successful Falkland Islands campaign, giving the
chairman of their joint military staff a greater voice in senior promotions in
all three services.

Additionally, there should be far more opportunity for the ambitious junior
officer to take tours of duty with another service - for example, Army
helicopter pilots flying from Navy ships, Navy pilots in Air Force fighter
wings, Marine engineers with Army engineering units, communications officers
from all three services rotating freely. As officers go up the ladder of
promotion, more of them should attend the staff and senior colleges of services
other than their own, or receive truly joint education at such places as the
National Defense University.

Portions of the legislation currently before Congress move in the direction of
encouraging and protecting those who take an interservice outlook. These
initiatives are important because the damage done in the past by interservice
rivalries may amount to little compared to similar disasters in the future. The
more accurate and complex weapons arriving today, moreover, transcend service
boundaries. For example, it seems likely that the most effective way to track
Soviet submarines hiding behind the Arctic ice is through a combination of Army
helicopters flying above the ice cap and Navy submarines operating below. To
create, fund and command such a combined force requires not just organizational
realignment, but a truly unified outlook on the part of all officers, from the
most junior to the most senior.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing; photo of U.S. Army troops landing on Grenada, October 1983
(Randy Taylor/Sygma) (Pages 30-31)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RETHINKING THE REVOLUTION

BYLINE: By Robert Shaplen; Robert Shaplen is a staff member of The New Yorker
and the author of ''Bitter Victory,'' a forthcoming report of his 1984 trip to
Indochina.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 17, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1251 words


THE VIETNAMESE GULAG By Doan Van Toai and David Chanoff. Illustrated. 351 pp.
New York: Simon & Schuster. $18.95.

TEN years after the Communists' almost unopposed but dramatic capture of Saigon,
the Vietnam War continues to produce shelves of books, mostly written by
Americans. Only recently have the Vietnamese begun to write of the war and,
perhaps more significant, of its aftermath.

A few Communist authors have published military accounts, notably about the ''Ho
Chi Minh campaign,'' which has as its climax Saigon's fall; a considerable
number of novels and short stories as well as diaries and essays have appeared
in Vietnamese, some of which have been translated. Very few Southerners,
however, except for a handful of old-regime officers, have written anything of
consequence since they fled Vietnam after April 1975. And even less has come
from those who believed in the revolution and initially stayed behind.

This gap is beginning to be filled, and Doan Van Toai's first-person narrative,
''The Vietnamese Gulag,'' done with David Chanoff, who collaborated with Mr.
Toai on ''A Vietcong Memoir,'' may be the most important contribution to date.
Mr. Toai, a radical student leader jailed several times by the South Vietnamese
Government before its defeat, was 30 years old when the war was over. Two months
later, on the night of June 22, 1975, he was arrested while attending a concert
in downtown Saigon (now Ho Chi Minh City). He never makes clear whether his
seizure by the bo dois, the Communist military, was the result of mistaken
identity - they apparently were after a former anti-Communist student leader
named Ngo Vuong Toai - but, mistake or not, Mr. Toai was thrown in jail for
''suspicious acts.''

On Nov. 1, 1977, he was finally released, and five and a half months after that
he received permission to leave for France, where his wife and children had
gone. Subsequently, the family moved to Berkeley, Calif., where the Toais now
live. His account of his long months in Saigon jails is both a horror story and
a human one, written with wit, satire, anger and compassion. It is reminiscent,
at its best, of E. E. Cummings's ''Enormous Room'' and Arthur Koestler's
''Darkness at Noon.''

Despite the wealth of detail about the miserable life he endured in the two city
jails, named after the streets they were on - Tran Hung Dao and Le Van Duyet -
Mr. Toai's title is somewhat misleading. He has not written about a ''gulag,''
or a chain of political prisons throughout the country, although such places,
sometimes lumped together with ''re-education camps,'' are known to exist. The
Vietnamese admit to holding 8,000 to 10,000 prisoners -the State Department
claims the real figure may be four or five times higher - but no one knows how
many additional former regime members, including army officers, government
officials, and private citizens accused of a variety of nonpolitical crimes, are
still being kept in a dozen or more camps in remote areas of the countryside.
Initially, several hundred thousand were believed to have been ''sent up for
re-education,'' and while many have been released, many others have never been
seen or heard from, some are known to have died, and the majority have been made
to do harsh agricultural labor.

Mr. Toai's father was a longtime member of the Vietminh, precursors of the
Vietcong, in the Mekong Delta. His son makes clear from the outset that as a
student in Saigon he himself quickly became a sympathizer of the National
Liberation Front, formed in 1960, but that he never joined the N.L.F. or the
Communist Party. He was, in fact, a self-styled attentiste, defining one who
waits because he can't make up his mind. Even when he was serving as a contact
man for the N.L.F. while working as a banker, he writes: ''Before the
overmastering complexity of events, I had remained indecisive. 'Wait,' I had
told myself. 'Buy time, and eventually the situation will clarify itself.' . . .
Most of all, I had wanted the revolution to justify my indecisiveness - to
reveal itself finally as complex and ambivalent, but in essence good and
constructive.''

During several interrogations in prison, though he is never officially told why
he was arrested or held for so long, Mr. Toai is, in fact, accused by his
questioners of being unable to ''commit himself.'' Being a sympathizer was not
enough. Being a prisoner, however, including periods in isolation, turns out to
be the best education he ever received, and much of it comes from veteran party
members with whom he exchanges whispering conversations and confidences. If he
manages to talk himself into being a doctor's aide, a kitchen worker and a
barber, in each case he has more leeway, more opportunity to find out what is
going on around him. His brash behavior, for which he is frequently chastised or
physically punished, eventually also leads to his freedom. One feels the
Communists simply wanted to get rid of him, vaguely hoping he might somehow
still be of service to them, particularly abroad.

Following his release, Mr. Toai indeed travels to France and then to the United
States, but no longer as a sympathizer. He sees himself as ''the first
articulate messenger from the new order, and one, moreover, who had experienced
its working in his flesh.'' He concludes: ''I knew that my anger was in part due
to the cold-blooded way in which the revolution had victimized my ideals. . . .
Now I understood it was not that my motives had been wrong, but that my
understanding had been woefully incomplete. The passion of my ideals had led me
down a trail at whose unforeseen end lay terror and destitution for the
nation.'' MR. TOAI credits the Vietnamese Communists with successfully
developing ''people's war'' techniques unique to Communist movements, based as
they were on Ho Chi Minh's ''finely honed sense of human psychology and almost
preternatural guile'' as well as his intimate knowledge of Marxism and
Stalinism. In his final mea culpa, Mr. Toai warns that these techniques should
be ''studied with the greatest care by the world's democracies and the world's
emerging nations, for whom the Communist road to national liberation is in fact
a road to national desolation.''

As an apostate's story, Mr. Toai's book falls into a not unfamiliar genre. Its
value derives from his having been one of the first Vietnamese to write
effectively of his experience, and to describe what he calls ''the method of the
betrayal'' of his revolutionary hopes and ideals.

Shortly before he leaves prison, Mr. Toai has a final talk with his closest
mentor, a veteran party man, whose doom was sealed when he ran afoul of the
system. He is admonished to ''be careful'' and is told, ''You have to stay
alive, so you can tell our story one day. It's over for me. . . . All I can do
is try to keep my dignity.''

''The Vietnamese Gulag'' is, according to the title page, ''based on the English
translation from the French by Silvie Romanowski and Francoise Simon-Miller'';
in this version, it is indeed well written and graphically told, though with
more indignation and injured pride than dignity. Having bought a different kind
of time, he is purged of his attentiste predilections. But like many Vietnamese
now in the United States and elsewhere, he admits to ''a longing to return'' to
Vietnam, knowing that ''to live in a land that will always be half alien, with
our children who belong to this land as much as they belong to us, that is the
burden of our failure.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT'S WRONG WITH THE MILITARY MIND

BYLINE: By Drew Middleton; Drew Middleton, the author of ''Crossroads of Modern
Warfare,'' writes about military affairs for The New York Times News Service.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1214 words


THE STRAW GIANT Triumph and Failure: America's Armed Forces. A Report From the
Field. By Arthur T. Hadley. 314 pp. New York: Random House. $19.95.

AS the French would say, ''Arthur T. Hadley deserves well of the Republic.'' At
a critical moment in the history of the American military he has written a
clear, incisive account of its strengths and many weaknesses. The author has two
advantages: he served in the United States Army in World War II, and since then
he has been tireless as a reporter and as a consultant to the Joint Chiefs of
Staff - attending NATO exercises, visiting ships, air bases and remote Army
posts. Few writers have as profound a knowledge of the armed services, their
virtues and faults, as Arthur Hadley.

''The Straw Giant'' does assume that the average civilian reader knows more
about the services than is likely. But one of Mr. Hadley's basic themes is that
a prime cause of the national military problem is what he calls ''the Great
Divorce'' - the separation of the military from the country's financial,
business, political and intellectual elite. The armed forces, he comments, are
close to becoming ''the Other America of Defense.'' Anyone with any experience
with the services will confirm this. The people you meet are well educated, many
of them better educated than the commuters on the train from Stamford. But they
live outside the mainstream of American life. There is nothing new about this.
The divorce proceedings started in Thomas Jefferson's day.

The author cites five other basic causes of the military ineffectiveness that
led, for example, to the 1980 fiasco of the mission to free the American
hostages in Iran and the destruction of the Marine barracks and the garrison in
Beirut, Lebanon, in 1983. All of them, says the author, ''will be present at our
next defeat.''

Interservice and intraservice rivalries have been recognized for years as prime
contributors to military ineffectiveness. They are silenced - no one has ever
eliminated them - only when command is held by a man of extraordinary character,
a George C. Marshall, for example. They flourish today. The Navy battles the Air
Force and, as the author points out, within the Navy the submariners battle the
carrier admirals.

Then there is flawed organization. Mr. Hadley finished his book before the
Senate, on May 7, approved a sweeping plan to reorganize the nation's military
hierarchy, enlarging the advisory role of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff while giving field commanders more control over forces in combat. This
last provision may end what the author calls overcontrol, or ''Russification,''
of the armed forces - too much interference from outside commanding officers and
headquarters.

Another basic cause of ineffectiveness singled out by the author is a lack of
balance - the old tooth versus tail debate. In his view, rear-area support
forces, the tail, are too large, and combat forces, the teeth, too small.
Finally, he notes the services' KAFCA complex, which, spelled out, means
''Keeping the Able From Contributing to the Action.''

After identifying these main flaws, the author is able, as the book progresses,
to illustrate how one or more, sometimes all, contribute to military
ineffectiveness. But ''The Straw Giant'' is not one long diatribe against the
armed services.

The author is excellent in evaluating precision-guided munitions - those
nonnuclear weapons that can be carried by a variety of missiles and shells and
whose accuracy can be measured in feet at a distance of 300 kilometers. He sees
them as offering ''a way out of our present Russian roulette choice of being
defeated in conventional warfare in Europe or going to nuclear holocaust.'' I
only wish he had gone farther and explored the field of nonnuclear strategic
weapons, which - with an accuracy measured in feet and even inches -will be able
to knock out a target at intercontinental range without killing a million
people.

The author's view of the American nuclear arsenal is unlikely to cheer the
military or reassure the civilian. He notes some ''disturbing questions'' about
the Minuteman missile. The diesel generators that maintain the temperatures in
the Minuteman silos and also keep the missiles' computers functioning were built
in the late 40's. And he is extremely doubtful about the validity of the
Strategic Air Command's tests of these and other missiles.

Like other advocates of military reform, Mr. Hadley offers some solutions. None
will be easy to attain -certainly not ending the Great Divorce. But some
progress might be made by establishing what the author calls ''a fair and just
draft.'' Although debate over the draft would be poisoned by the memories of the
notoriously unfair draft during the Vietnam War, Mr. Hadley argues that the
armed forces do not represent, as they should, a cross section of American
society. One out of five Army soldiers is in category four, the lowest
acceptable category for enlistment. Moreover, ''the middle class, both black and
white, is conspicuously absent, as are the sons and daughters of the 'elites.'
'' THE author also reports that young officers after a three-year tour with
troops often are emotionally and physically drained ''by trying to maintain
discipline and lead and train men of whom the majority are uneducated and
unmotivated.'' Here I feel Mr. Hadley goes too far. What he writes certainly was
true of the Army of the 70's. But education and motivation, especially in the
Seventh Army in West Germany, clearly have improved significantly in this
decade.

But this is a minor point. The author writes so well and from such a wide
knowledge that he illuminates many facets of the military only dimly understood
by the public. For example, women entering the services usually are better
educated and more intelligent than men. But they are being used in headquarters
and anti-aircraft sites that would certainly be prime targets for the Russians.
Hence, whether or not the Pentagon wants women in combat roles, a lot of them
will be killed and wounded in any future major war.

Rotation, the constant shifting of officers from assignment to assignment, is
another of Mr. Hadley's targets, and rightfully so. He points out that Brig.
Julian Thompson, who headed the victorious British commando forces in the
Falkland Islands, had been with his command almost all of his service life. In
contrast, Col. James Terry Scott, who was in charge of the airborne brigade
invading Grenada, had enjoyed the command for four days, which may help explain
the poor execution of that exercise.

One hopes that ''The Straw Giant'' will be read by members of the military, even
if many stir under its lash. But, basically, this is a book that should be read
by the general public - because it is the public's forces that are in danger
and, with them, the Republic.

Let Mr. Hadley sum it up: ''The defense of Western Europe now rests on
conventional forces that are lacking and a nuclear threat in which it is
becoming more difficult to believe. . . . After billions of dollars spent on
defense and on NATO, we are back with the choice we sought all along to avoid,
the choice between relying on ground and air forces that cannot win and starting
a nuclear war that is not winnable.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 14, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
'Boat People' Flow To Hong Kong Surges

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 91 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 13


More than four times the number of so-called boat people arrived in Hong Kong in
June than in the corresponding month last year, according to refugee officials
in the British colony.

The officials said last week that 337 Vietnamese reached Hong Kong in June this
year, compared with 83 in June 1985. So far, 1,134 Vietnamese have arrived in
Hong Kong in 1986, more than the total for all of 1985.

Refugees reaching Hong Kong are confined to prison islands by British
authorities as a means of dissuading other Vietnamese from following them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 15, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM NAMES A NEW PARTY LEADER

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 905 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 14


A 79-year-old official with a reputation as an ideological hard-liner was chosen
today to succeed Le Duan as Vietnam's Communist Party leader, the official Hanoi
radio announced, The post is the most important political office in Vietnam.

The new Vietnamese leader, Truong Chinh, had been the second-ranking party
Politburo member after Mr. Duan, who died last Thursday. Mr. Chinh is also the
State Council Chairman, a position roughly equivalent to a ceremonial president.

In the 1950's, after North Vietnam gained independence from France, Mr. Chinh
led an attempt at sweeping land redistribution that historians say may have
resulted in the deaths of tens of thousands of Vietnamese. In the 1960's, Mr.
Chinh was among those who advocated sending North Vietnamese forces to fight in
the South.

In June, diplomats based in Hanoi said they understood that Mr. Chinh had
already assumed some, if not all, of the powers of Mr. Duan, whose health was
rapidly deteriorating.

Reported in Failing Health

Mr. Chinh, who is also reported to be in failing health, is expected to remain
in office only until the end of the year, when it is expected that the sixth
party congress will name a new generation of leaders, the first such sweeping
change in Vietnam's post-colonial history.

Mr. Duan's funeral is scheduled for Tuesday in Hanoi. According to Vietnamese
diplomats in Bangkok, only Laos, Cambodia and the Soviet Union will be
represented at a high government level. Foreign journalists have been barred
from covering the funeral.

The Vietnamese said Moscow's delegation to the funeral would be led by Prime
Minister Nikolai I. Ryzkhov, not the party leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev. Under
Mr. Duan's leadership, the Vietnamese party maintained close relations with
Moscow.

This evening, Vietnam's Southeast Asian neighbors heard the news of Mr. Chinh's
promotion from Tass, the Soviet press agency, before it was announced by Hanoi.
Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, was in Moscow over the weekend, and
it was unclear if had returned to Hanoi.

Little Speculation by Diplomats

Asian and Western diplomats in Southeast Asia are being very cautious in
predicting what kind of new leadership Vietnam may choose this year. Hanoi
remains one of the most secretive capitals in which to work, ambassadors based
there say.

Outside Vietnam, there has been a tendency to look for a loosening of ideology
and a movement toward change, particularly in the Vietnamese economy, which is
in shambles even by Vietnamese assessments.

In June, radio broadcasts from Hanoi were reporting that Le Duc Tho, who
negotiated the peace agreements with Henry A. Kissinger that led to American
withdrawal from Vietnam, was charging that some party officials were guilty of
''corruption, bribery, smuggling, enrichment, dissoluted and depraved living''
and ''adopting a vulgar lifestyle.''

Diplomats and scholars who have been observing Vietnam over many years suggest
that Hanoi's statements, often reflecting pronouncements under Mr. Gorbachev's
leadership in Moscow, seem to be calling for a ''renovation'' rather than a
''reform'' of the Marxist-Leninist economic system.

No Sign of Major Change

There has been little official indication in the Vietnamese party press that
anything as sweeping as Chinese-style innovations will occur in Vietnam. Rather,
the official publications, led by the Communist Party daily Nhan Dan, have
harshly criticized the bureaucracy and the labor force for failing to make the
present system function efficiently.

Since 1979, Vietnam has instituted a series of economic changes designed, the
party journals say, to reinvigorate the economy by allowing a certain amount of
individual initiative to dictate agricultural and some industrial production.

But the country's leadership has been ambilvalent about how much private
enterprise to allow. This has led to radical swings back and forth, from
tolerance to suppression, of small ventures like restuarants and shops, the
proprietors say. Taxes have been alternately encouraging and punitive.

The result has been a cynicism, increasingly boldly voiced, among ordinary
Vietnamese, coupled with a lack of confidence in the country's currency. For
many transactions, the American dollar has become the standard of exchange.

Some Economic Officials Out

In June, at least eight officials involved in the managing of the economy were
dismissed, including a Deputy Prime Minister, To Huu. Left in place were several
people considered economic pragmatists, led by Vo Van Kiet, the country's
economic planner.

But diplomats say that until a new party leadership is in place - later this
year at the earliest - it would be premature to predict the direction Hanoi will
take in future economic development.

The country is now almost entirely dependent on the Soviet bloc, whose aid has
done little to improve the standard of living of the Vietnamese people. Eastern
European and Western diplomats in Hanoi say it is an open secret that Vietnam
wants better ties with the West, including the United States, because of the
developmental expertise such ties might unlock.

But all such links are now blocked by the Vietnamese occupation of neighboring
Cambodia and, in the case of the Reagan Administration, a failure on Hanoi's
part to resolve to American satisfaction the cases of servicemen missing in
action since the Vietnamese War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Truong Chinh (UPI, 1975)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 15, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SENATOR REQUESTS HEARING ON C.I.A.

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 763 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 14


Senator Alan Cranston of California, the Democratic whip, called today for a
Congressional investigation into reports that the Central Intelligence Agency is
planning to take control of the insurgent campaign against the Nicaraguan
Government.

Republican leaders responded positively to the suggestion and said such hearings
were likely.

Mr. Cranston said at a news conference that the Administration seemed intent on
conducting ''a vastly expanded war'' against the Nicaraguan Government, and
warned against deepening United States involvement in Central America.

''This could be a rerun of Vietnam,'' Senator Cranston said. ''First American
money, then American advisers, then American control of the war, then American
troops.''

Support for Hearings

Senator Richard G. Lugar, the Indiana Republican and chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee, is ''not indisposed'' to holding hearings on the ''overall
question'' of American aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras, according
to Mark Helmke, Mr. Lugar's spokesman.

Senator Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming, the Republican whip, said he favored
hearings and added, ''There will be more probing in the area of the role of the
C.I.A.''

Mr. Helmke said, however, that neither Senator Cranston nor any other lawmaker
should be surprised by Administration plans to utilize the intelligence agency
in the Nicaraguan war. The White House has long wanted to give the agency a
greater role in Central America, but for the last few years Congress has placed
strict limits on that role.

Legislation approved by the House last month would allocate $100 million in aid
to the insurgents, $70 million for military purposes and $30 million in
nonmilitary assistance. The vote, 221 to 209, attached the aid package as a
rider to a bill appropriating money for military construction.

Limit on Intelligence Funds

In addition, the legislation would virtually cancel existing limits on the
agency's operational role in Central America. But it would bar the use of secret
intelligence funds beyond the $100 million authorized.

The Senate is due to take up the aid package issue this summer. The Senate
already approved a similar package once this year, but has been forced by a
complex parliamentary situation to consider the matter again.

In his call for Congressional scrutiny of the Administration's policy, Mr.
Cranston cited an article in the The New York Times on Saturday that quoted
Administration officials as saying that the intelligence agency would receive
''day to day responsibility'' for managing the military campaign against
Nicaragua. The plan would become operational as soon as Congress gave final
approval to the aid package, the report said.

Mr. Cranston argued that Congress had been kept in the dark about the
Administration's plans and said: ''They have not directly informed Congress.
They're just talking to the press.'' 'Some New Ammunition'

The odds still favor Senate approval of the Administration's aid request, but
the Democratic leader said that the intellignce agency's role gave critics
''some new ammunition'' in their fight to block direct military support for the
rebels.

''This throws a new light on the whole plan and raises some new questions,'' Mr.
Cranston said. He said the situation was complicated by the Administration's
plan, which would give the State Department overall supervisory responsibility
for the Nicaraguan mission, while the intelligence agency would run the field
operation.

The Senator called the plan a ''hydra-headed monster'' that would make it more
difficult for Congress to monitor the use of American funds in the battle zone.

Serious questions have been raised in Congress about the way the contras used
$27 million in nonmilitary aid last year. The General Accounting Office, the
investigative arm of Congress, has reported that about half of the money cannot
be adequately accounted for. Investigators asserted that millions of dollars had
instead been funneled into offshore banks, paid to the Honduran military or kept
in the United States.

The C.I.A. had operational responsibility for the war against the Nicaraguan
Government in the early 1980's. But Congress voted to bar the agency's
involvement after reports were published about the mining of Nicaraguan harbors,
and the preparation of a manual on assassination techniques.

Asked why Congressional attitude toward the agency had apparently changed, Mr.
Cranston said that the stories about its indiscretions were now several years
old. ''People don't remember anymore,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 15, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT EDUCATION;
POLITICAL SHIFT ON 'VULGAR' SPEECH

BYLINE: By FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1029 words


MATTHEW N. FRASER was hit by the swing of the political pendulum. The Supreme
Court agreed that his school was within its rights when it disciplined him for
using what it considered disruptive, lewd and indecent words in a school
assembly; only 15 years ago, those words would not likely have raised any
judicial eyebrows. The case, Bethel School District No. 403 v. Fraser, may
reflect more significantly on the administration of the public schools than on
freedom of speech.

In 1983 Mr. Fraser, now a student at the University of California at Berkeley,
made a six-sentence nominating speech in behalf of a fellow student's candidacy
for office in a high school in Spanaway, Wash.

Speaking in the student-run assembly he called the candidate ''a man who is firm
-he's firm in this pants, he's firm in his shirt, his character is firm - but
most of all, his belief in you, the students of Bethel, is firm.'' He also
characterized the candidate as one ''who will go to the very end - even the
climax'' in pursuing an issue.

His candidate won but Mr. Fraser was briefly suspended and his name was taken
off the ballot by which student graduation speakers were chosen. After a Federal
District Court struck down the school board's assertion that the assembly speech
had been disruptive of the education process, Mr. Fraser was allowed to speak at
graduation, but the school board appealed the decision.

The appeals court upheld the lower court's ruling so Bethel officials took the
case to the Supreme Court, which ruled 7 to 2 last week that the school
authorities did have the right to discipline students for using ''vulgar and
offensive'' language. The Court said the protection of adults' First Amendment
rights to free speech was not automatically given ''to children in a public
school.''

Such rights were first extended to students in the 1960's. Civil libertarians
linked students' rights to the expansion of civil rights generally and, on the
whole, the public supported their efforts.

The school authorities' power to suspend students, civil liberties advocates
argued, had often been abused to get rid of anyone critical of school
authorities. Some civil libertarians asserted that disciplinary action was taken
more often against black students. Sometimes, they said, unwanted students were
wrongly assigned to schools for the emotionally disturbed.

As such views began to prevail in the courts, school authorities complained that
it was becoming increasingly difficult to rid schools of genuinely disruptive
students. As a result, they said, the right of the majority of children to an
uninterrupted education was in jeopardy. In recent weeks, for example, Sandra
Feldman, president of New York's United Federation of Teachers, has urged that
principals be empowered to assign disruptive students to special, perhaps
smaller, schools.

In the matter of obscene language, the 1960's also set a new record of
permissiveness. College rebels led the way with unprintable slogans in their
attacks on university authorities. At the University of California at Berkeley,
where the rebellion began in 1964, the ''Free Speech Movement'' quickly
deteriorated into the ''Filthy Speech Movement.'' As campus takeovers and
disruption proliferated in the era of the Vietnam War, collegiate rebellion
spilled over into some high schools.

Viewed against that background Mr. Fraser's words seem tame, and his actions
hardly seem disruptive. Challenging his ''lewd and indecent'' speech in the
Supreme Court would have been viewed as laughable 15 years ago.

Yet Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, writing for the majority, said, ''Surely it
is a highly appropriate function of public school education to prohibit the use
of vulgar and offensive terms in public discourse.'' He held that ''schools must
teach by example the shared values of a civilized social order.''

Education Secretary William J. Bennett called the decision ''an important
victory for American schools,'' adding that ''there is no constitutional right
to disrupt the learning process.''

Mr. Fraser may wonder how his little speech to a student assembly disrupted the
learning process. So did Justice Thurgood Marshall, one of the dissenters. But
the Court's majority took the issue beyond those six sentences, which otherwise
would not have been long remembered. It dealt with the constitutionality of
school policies to regulate speech.

In the process it appeared to give school authorities a rather narrow definition
of what is ''lewd and indecent.'' Chief Justice Burger said that by ''glorifying
male sexuality'' Mr. Fraser ''was acutely insulting to teen-age girl students.''
The Chief Justice may have been motivated by old-fashioned chivalry; but in the
contemporary context, he has a sexist ring. Should high-school girls be sent out
of the room when Shakespeare's ''lewd'' ways of dealing with male sexuality and
his frequent sexual metaphors and innuendo appear in literature classes?

When John Dewey many years ago urged schools to be an ''embryonic society,'' he
angered many who wanted schools to be untouched by a flawed society. Dewey
called it ''useless to bemoan the departure of the good old days of children's
modesty, reverence and implicit obedience, if we expect merely by bemoaning and
exhortation to bring them back.''

Dewey did not reject modesty and reverence in children; but he thought it
better, first, to put society in order, as an example to children. He might have
wondered about the Supreme Court's concern over a student's use of sexual
innuendo when such innuendo is a major ingredient of television aimed at the
whole family.

Justice John Paul Stevens, in his dissent, wondered whether ''a group of judges
who are at least two generations and 3,000 miles away from the scene of the
crime'' were qualified to determine whether Mr. Fraser's speech offended his
contemporaries.

Will the Court's ruling encourage school boards and administrators once again to
clamp down on students' speech? Will this eventually send the pendulum once
again swinging radically to another rebellion, with demands for such
''freedoms'' as disgraced students' speech in the 1960's?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 15, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SCIENCE WATCH;
'YELLOW RAIN' ASSERTIONS CONTESTED

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 244 words


EVIDENCE collected by British and Canadian scientists has largely refuted
charges by the United States State Department that the Soviet Union and its ally
Vietnam used chemical warfare agents in Southeast Asia, according to a report in
the journal Science.

Since 1980 the State Department has repeatedly accused the Soviet Union and
Vietnam of poisoning civilians in Laos and Cambodia with a toxin called T-2,
which is supposedly derived from fusarium fungus. The poison, said to have been
dropped from aircraft in the 1970's and early 1980's, was dubbed ''yellow
rain.''

The accusation has been challenged by various Western scientists, most of whom
assert that yellow rain is actually a natural deposit of bee feces in which T-2
is normally present. In the latest rebuttal, Science cites Britain's Chemical
Defense Research Establishment as confirming that some 50 supposedly
contaminated samples from ''battlefields in Southeast Asia'' were found to be
entirely free of poisons. And in a study authorized by Canada's Ministry of
External Affairs, Science says, investigators found T-2 in the urine even of
residents of Thailand who had never been in battle zones.

A State Department spokesman who was asked about the new findings on fungal
toxins was quoted as replying, ''We never argued that they don't occur
naturally; what we said was that they do not occur in the high concentrations
and in the unusual combinations we've seen'' in Southeast Asia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 16, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOLIVIA PLAN: LEGAL DOUBTS;
MILITARY-POLICE SPLIT IS SEEN TO BE ERODED

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 963 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 15


The plan, made public today, for United States Army personnel to help Bolivian
anti-drug forces appears to advance the erosion of laws and traditions
separating the military from law enforcement.

Reagan Administration officials have said such operations are permitted by law
and are justified by what President Reagan, in a national security directive in
April, described as the threat to the national security posed by the drug trade.

But critics warned today that breaking down the traditional separation of the
military from law enforcement raises legal concerns and potential dangers for
civil liberties and military readiness alike.

They also expressed concern about the Administration's increasingly broad
invocation of ''national security'' as a basis for unilateral Presidential
actions.

These critics, including the American Civil Liberties Union, did not assert that
operations by United States military forces such as that planned in Bolivia were
clearly illegal. Some conceded that the probability that any court would rule
them illegal approaches zero.

But they questioned the Administration's position that such actions are covered
neither by the Posse Comitatus Act of 1878, which generally bars using the
military to enforce the laws, or by the War Powers Resolution of 1973, which
mandates a Congressional role in sending military forces into situations where
hostilities are likely.

More Weapons for Drug War

Since about 1980, heightened concern about increased narcotics trafficking and
the inability of ordinary law enforcement techniques to stop it has created
great pressure in Congress and the executive branch to throw the vast resources
of the military into the fray.

Congress has responded cautiously by authorizing limited use of Navy ships and
military surveillance planes to help law enforcement authorities track suspected
drug smugglers, mostly through ''passive assistance,'' or the sharing of
information picked up during normal military operations.

There have also been calls to involve the military in stopping the flow of
illegal aliens - for example, by patrolling along the border with Mexico.

But Barry Lynn, a legislative counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union
here, asserted today that it was ''inappropriate'' and arguably unconstitutional
for the military to be involved in any way in civilian law enforcement
operations.

Mr. Lynn also stressed what he called the danger to civil liberties posed by
involving military personnel, who are not trained in law enforcement or in
respect for civil liberties, in such operations.

The Posse Comitatus Act, as amended over the years, makes it a crime to use the
Army, Navy or the Air Force ''as a posse comitatus or otherwise to execute the
laws.'' Translated from the Latin as ''power of the county,'' posse comitatus is
the right of the authorities to summon citizens to help enforce the laws.

Increasing Number of Exceptions

Congress has created various exceptions to the act over the years, authorizing
use of the military to quell riots, protect the President and perform some other
domestic functions. Another exception was made in 1981 when Congress, seeking to
stem the flow of illegal drugs, authorized use of military equipment outside the
United States, operated by military personnel, ''as a base of operation by
Federal law enforcement officials to facilitate the enforcement'' of the laws.

The 1981 law limited such actions to ''emergencies'' jointly declared by the
Attorney General and the Secretary of Defense. It was strenuously resisted by
the military services, according to one former Justice Department lawyer
involved with the issue. He said the military leaders were concerned about
pouring their resources into a ''bottomless pit,'' as well as the danger of
military personnel being injured or killed performing tasks for which they were
not trained.

Administration officials have indicated that the 1981 law made it clear that
operations such as the one planned in Bolivia do not violate the Posse Comitatus
Act.

But Michael Ratner, an attorney with the Center for Constitutional Rights in New
York, and Jules Lobel, a professor at the University of Pittsburgh Law School,
both said today that a case could be made that the Act might bar military
participation in raiding narcotics opertions abroad.

The War Powers Resolution

They also said such an operation could be covered by the War Powers Resolution
of 1973, if the circumstances indicated that the military personnel might be
shot at.

The War Powers Resolution was passed by Congress in the last stages of the
Vietnam War to prevent the President from involving the nation in foreign wars
without Congressional assent.

It requires the President to take specific steps to consult with Congress
whenever he introduces ''armed forces into hostilities, or into situations where
imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances.''

While acknowledging that Congress was thinking about conflicts with foreign
nations rather than joint law enforcement operations when it passed this law,
Mr. Ratner and Mr. Lobel said its broad language would be applicable whenever
there was a danger of any kind of armed conflict.

Allen Adler, another legislative counsel with the Civil Liberties Union,
questioned President Reagan's assertion that a military role is justified
because the international drug trade threatens national security by
destabilizing democratic allies through the corruption of police and judges.

''This Administration in particular, and its predecessors as well, have
continued to expand the concept of what can be regarded as a national security
interest,'' he said, as a basis for ''invocation of broad Presidential
authority.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Bolivia highlighting La Paz (NYT)

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 16, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ACCUSED, A 2D REPUBLICAN LEAVES MASSACHUSETTS RACE

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 819 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, July 15


Gregory S. Hyatt, a Republican candidate for Governor, announced today that he
would drop out of the race, following charges that he had accepted money from a
reputed organized crime figure.

His decision left his party with the names of two gubernatorial candidates on
the ballot for Sept. 16 both of whom have now withdrawn, Embarrassed leaders of
the party are now seeking a replacement, who would have to run in the primary as
a write-in candidate. Whoever wins the primary will oppose the popular Governor,
Michael S. Dukakis, a Democrat.

Mr. Hyatt, a 32 year-old lawyer, said in a brief statement that he was
abandoning the primary race but gave no reason. He said he had planned to make
the announcement in any event and that it was not related to a report in The
Boston Herald today. In the Herald article he said he had accepted money for his
campaign from a man identified by the Federal Bureau of Investigation as a
leader of organized crime in northern Massachusetts and New Hampshire.

Last week Mr. Hyatt said he would remain in the contest despite calls by
virtually all Massachusetts Republican leaders for him to withdraw.

A Curious Campaign

His decision today is the latest twist in an unusual Republican campaign for
Governor.

Andrew S. Natsios, chairman of the state Republican Party, said this afternoon
that ''I think the party has suffered harm'' from the conduct of Mr. Hyatt and
the other candidate who dropped out, Royall H. Switzler. Mr. Switzler, a State
Representative from suburban Wellesley, withdrew last month after admitting he
had said falsely that he had been in the Special Forces in Vietnam. He served as
a sergeant in the peacetime Army in Korea.

It is unclear whom the Republicans can now find to run against Governor Dukakis,
who is finishing his second term. Mr. Natsios said that a special panel of
Republicans was examining six or seven names. But several leading possibilities,
including Raymond Shamie, a wealthy business executive who has twice run
unsuccessfully for the Senate, and former Gov. Edward J. King have both declared
they are not interested.

Names Will Be on Ballot

Whoever accepts faces a further obstacle: because the legal deadline for
withdrawing has passed, the names of both Mr. Hyatt and Mr. Switzler will remain
on the Republican primary ballot; any new challenger will have to be a write-in
candidate.

There had been calls for Mr. Hyatt to withdraw since April, when one of his
former employers charged at a news conference that Mr. Hyatt had appeared in the
office naked and talked on the telephone to himself.

More recently, after accusations by the state Democratic Party, Mr. Hyatt
admitted that a large number of signatures on his nomination papers were forged.
But a state agency allowed him to remain on the ballot after ruling that the
Democrats had not given Mr. Hyatt enough notice before challenging the
forgeries.

The confusion surrounding Mr. Hyatt's candidacy comes at a time when the
Massachusetts Republican Party is in transition. For years the party of oldline
moderate Yankees like Henry Cabot Lodge and Leverett Saltonstall, it has become
a new conservative coalition of wealthy business executives with strong
ideologies and disgruntled former Democrats from blue-collar and ethnic
communities.

Party Strength Wanes

At the same time Republican strength here has waned. No Republican has won a
statewide race here since 1972, and this year the Republicans are fielding
candidates for only a third of the 200 seats in the two houses of the
Legislature, the lowest total in years.

According to The Boston Herald, Mr. Hyatt, who got his start in politics by
leading a drive to reduce property taxes, asked George Kattar to raise funds for
his campaign. Mr. Kattar, whom Mr. Hyatt described as a family friend and a
fellow Lebanese, is scheduled to go on trial in Federal District Court here this
week on charges of extorting money from the Church of Scientology.

Mr. Kattar has been linked to organized crime since hearings before a United
States Senate subcommittee in 1971 when an admitted swindler identified him as
running a loan-sharking business. According to the witness, the organization was
known as the Piranha Company, after a man-eating fish Mr. Kattar kept in his
office.

Mr. Hyatt told The Herald Mr. Kattar had given him a ''trifling amount'' of
money, but no contributions from Mr. Kattar appeared on his campaign finance
reports.

Law enforcement authorities stumbled onto the connection between the two when
Mr. Hyatt was recorded on a Federal wiretap last spring when he went to Mr.
Kattar's office to ask for contributions, according to The Herald. In April, the
F.B.I. seized weapons and ammunition on a raid at Mr. Kattar's office and summer
home, reportedly as part of an investigation into arms smuggling to Lebanon.

Mr. Hyatt's office did not return phone calls today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 16, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Some Veterans Deserve a Day in Court

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 376 words


A veteran who feels shortchanged by the Veterans Administration as it
distributes $15 billion in benefits each year cannot normally take the agency to
court. Many veterans accept the denial of judicial review in the belief that the
Veterans Administration's internal review process is fair enough. But Vietnam
veterans call it unfair. Congress should heed their complaint.

Judicial review for veterans' benefit claims was prohibited to hold down
Government costs during the Great Depression. A veteran who seeks to secure
benefits goes first to a regional board. If no satisfactory settlement is
reached, the case goes to the Board of Veterans Appeals, which approves fewer
than 14 percent of the 45,000 claims it hears annually. Only claims raising
constitutional issues may go on to court.

The Veterans Administration, however, may sue veterans who receive excessive
benefits, a right that it invokes against 35,000 veterans each year. Even
defending against such suits amounts to lopsided justice. A Federal law dating
to the Civil War limits lawyers' fees in veterans' cases to $10.

Nevertheless, traditional lobbies like the American Legion and Disabled American
Veterans defend the current system. They say most cases are settled well before
they reach the final appeal stage. Review by Federal courts, they fear, would
turn the present informal system into a more adversarial and costly process.

The Vietnam Veterans of America, however, presses for the right to go to court.
It believes recent veterans now fare worse than older veterans, particularly on
claims for post-traumatic stress disorders. Their plea has met with considerable
sympathy in Congress. Bills that would honor it have passed the Senate three
times, but have been blocked by the chairman of the House Veterans Affairs
Committee, G.V. Montgomery.

Several members of the House Committee propose a law that would codify the
regulations now relied on by the Veterans Administration and permit the courts
to reverse the agency only when its decisions are judged arbitrary. They would
retain the $10 fee limit when lawyers represent veterans before the Veterans
Administration but permit more reasonable fees for representation in court. That
sounds like a fair compromise.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 16, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LIFE IN THE 30'S

BYLINE: By Anna Quindlen

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 3; Living Desk

LENGTH: 822 words


WE met when we were both 15. She went to the beach with my family that summer,
and when she stepped out of the bedroom we shared, wearing a two-piece bathing
suit, I watched my father and one of his friends almost pale beneath their ruddy
tans. As I lay on the beach in my own suit, its top boned into the facsimile of
a bust, I could lift my head and in the gap between my sternum and the fabric I
could see a sliver of gray-green water. For the first time in my life I was
aware of sex, not the act, nor the mechanics, but the essence of it. And a gulf
began to open between my friend and me.

But she was my best friend, and hard as it may have been to figure by the looks
of us, she was the good girl, I the bad. I suppose everyone has at least one
friendship like this in their lives: We were dialectical, she the thesis, I the
antithesis. She was direct, trustworthy, kind and naive; I was manipulative,
selfish and clever. She laughed at all my jokes, took part in all my schemes,
told everyone that I was the smartest and the funniest and the best. Like a B
movie of boarding school life, we stole peanut butter from the refectory,
short-sheeted beds, called drugstores and asked them if they had Prince Albert
in a can. Whenever I hear a mother say, ''If so-and-so told you to jump off the
Brooklyn Bridge, would you do it?'' I think of her. On my order, she would have
jumped. She hatched only one plot in all our time together, and it had such
staggering simplicity that I jumped at it, sneaking down the fire escape in the
middle of the night to meet our boyfriends at an all-night diner. It wasn't her
fault that we got caught, that I got expelled, that she stayed on to become May
Queen. It was the mid-60's, so all we had done was to eat cheeseburgers and feel
naughty. But as the bad girl I got the blame and as the good girl she was
assumed to have followed my lead. It was a time when good girls still got the
breaks. It seemed terribly unfair then but seems exactly right now. And the gulf
widened. I went to a college that had a reputation, and she went to one with a
football team. She was in the Middle West and I was in the Northeast. She cried
when I told her I was on the pill, and she goggled at the suggestion that I was
opposed to the war in Vietnam and wore overalls to class. I was a middle-of-the
road milquetoast at a school with its fair share of campus radicals, but she
made me feel like Jane Fonda.

I drove eight hours to her parents' home the summer after our freshman year to
be the maid of honor at her wedding. Where she came from, a girl didn't wait for
her B.A. to get her Mrs., particularly if the person who proposed was eager,
older and very rich. I wore purple organza and looked like an eggplant. There
was a fountain full of whiskey sours. Within a year she had her first baby.

The 70's turned out to be a good time for bad girls, for the kind of girls who
got A's in algebra and F's in conduct. I graduated from college and became a
writer. I could always tell when she'd just had a haircut because she'd call to
say she'd seen one of my stories in a magazine in the beauty parlor. Right after
one baby she had had another: son, daughter, daughter, son. Four children in
seven years.

One night she called and asked me the kind of questions about life and love that
you expect from your teen-age sister, and I cried after we hung up. She was
flabbergasted when I got married, incredulous that a man with whom I had been
living for years would buy the cow when he could get the milk for free. She sent
me stationery with my new initials, not knowing I would not change my name. She
and her husband flew in for the wedding in their private plane. The chasm was
complete. A year went by before we spoke again.

Along came the 80's - a time of synthesis, thank God. No bad girls, no good
girls, just women trying to get by as best we could. She finally stopped living
in the past and I finally started paying attention to the present. She realized
that she deserved more than the man to whom she was unhappily married, and I
realized that I needed more than the work that I adored. She got divorced. I had
a baby. She went back to college. I had another baby and quit my job. She got
her bachelor's degree with honors, started the first real job she ever had, and
moved away from the town where she was born. I worked hard to sink roots in the
city I'd adopted, and went back to work part time. Last month we talked on the
telephone for an hour about real estate, business clothes, family size, private
schools, salary levels, divorce settlements, marriage, money and men.

It's been almost 20 years now. Everything has changed. And yet some things never
do. She never lost her figure. I never lost my edge. We've never been closer. In
the last analysis, even at the best of times, there was never much more between
us than love. But as the Beatles once said, it's all you need.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 16, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS: BOMBING GENIUS

BYLINE: By Drew Middleton

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 591 words


IRON EAGLE: The Turbulent Life of General Curtis LeMay. By Thomas M. Coffey.
Illustrated. 449 pages. Crown Publishers Inc. $18.95.

CURTIS LEMAY was an

American original. He came from the wrong side of the tracks. He was always
laconic, often rude. He held strong, right-wing opinions. He was also a genius
in aerial bombardment who played a leading role in devising the tactics that
enabled American day bombing to succeed over Germany and the B-29's to reduce
Tokyo and other Japanese cities to ashes.

The author, while clearly an admirer, makes no attempt to hide General LeMay's
faults. He also reminds us what the general did from his early days as a pioneer
aerial navigator through his reorganization of the Strategic Air Command into
one of history's most powerful forces. He presents in detail, perhaps too much
detail, General LeMay's long, complex contest with Defense Secretary Robert S.
McNamara over the building of the B-70 bomber. Mr. McNamara won.

Some of General LeMay's best and worst traits appeared in his fight with Mr.
McNamara, his Pentagon civilian advisers and the civilians in the White House
directing the Vietnam War.

The general had no use for the strategy of flexible response and gradual
escalation espoused by Gen. Maxwell Taylor, then chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff. To him there was only one course in war: Throw everything you have at the
enemy and win. He wanted to attack North Vietnam with air and naval power and
thus force Hanoi to end its intervention in the south.

''We should stop swatting flies,'' he supposedly told a State Department
official, ''and go after the manure pile.''

General LeMay entered the Army Air Corps, as it then was known, after leaving
Ohio State University. His years in that small, proud service and his earlier
years in a poor, hard-working family are well told. His chance, and that of many
others, came in World War II.

As a commander of B-17's in Britain, he became known for his devotion to both
ground and air training. He also flew missions with his squadrons, as did many
other officers. Those squadrons, although many people may have forgotten, were
not always successful. Losses were high. General LeMay was one of the leaders
who devised new tactics, demanded a better fighter, the P-51, and led the Eighth
Air Force to victory.

The general's greatest contribution to the war effort surely was his performance
in Japan. There, he commanded B-29's. This was a fine bomber, but its gas
consumption reaching altitude was so high that the bomb load was often reduced.
When the B-29's began bombing Japan, it was found that the high winds over that
country often made accurate bombing impossible.

General LeMay studied the problems. The winds over Japan were much reduced at
lower altitudes. Japanese antiaircraft was less accurate. Japanese fighters had
proved ineffective in defense. So he stripped the B-29's of guns and gunners,
added more fuel and sent them after Tokyo and the other cities at low altitude.
This was one of the most innovative and successful campaigns of the air war.

There are many who believe that if this bombing had been continued and the naval
blockade tightened, Japan might have surrendered without the use of the atomic
bombs.

Unlike many leaders of the war years, General LeMay's postwar career was not
anticlimactic. He had a hand in organizing the Berlin air lift. He rebuilt the
Strategic Air Command. As Chief of Staff, he fought for air power, not always
wisely or successfully, but with unstinted devotion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Thomas M. Coffey

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 16, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ROBERT C. RANSOM

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 129 words


Robert C. Ransom, a member of the corporate legal staff of the International
Business Machines Corporation, died of cancer Saturday at his home in Williston,
Vt. He was 66 years old.

Before joining I.B.M. 31 years ago, Mr. Ransom was a member of his father's law
firm in Manhattan, Whitman, Ransom & Coulson.

In the 1960's and 70's, he was active in the movement protesting the Vietnam War
as a member of Clergy and Laity Concerned, a social-action organization based in
Manhattan.

He was born in Manhattan, and was a graduate of Amherst College and the Yale Law
School.

He is survived by his wife, the former Louise Bristol; five sons, Lawrence, of
Seattle; Mark, of Burlington; Matthew, of Williston; and John and Daniel, both
of Manhattan, and three grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 17, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SENATORS PLAN FILIBUSTER ON CONTRA AID

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 504 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 16


Senators opposed to sending military aid to the Nicaraguan rebels said today
that they would stage a filibuster against the legislation when it reached the
Senate floor, probably later this summer.

''The people in the group are adamantly opposed to contra aid,'' said Senator
Jim Sasser, Democrat of Tennessee and a leading opponent of President Reagan's
plans in Central America. ''They think it's improper and counterproductive to
the interests of the United States.''

When the Senate considered aiding the rebels earlier this year, 53 Senators
voted in favor of support. Sixty votes are needed to break a filibuster, so the
opponents say they have a ''reasonable shot'' at stopping or altering the aid
request, according to Alan Cranston, the California Democrat.

President Reagan has proposed, and the House has approved, a plan to send $70
million in military aid and $30 million in nonmilitary support to the insurgent
forces, known as contras. Supporters in the Senate say they face a tough fight
in trying to push the bill through.

'Won't Be an Easy Time'

''We'll just try to break the filibuster,'' said Mark Helmke, a spokesman for
Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, chairman of the Foreign Relations
Committee. ''It won't be an easy time.''

The politically charged nature of the Nicaraguan debate was highlighted today
when Senator Bob Dole, the Kansas Republican and majority leader, said those who
filibustered against the aid request would have to ''take responsibility'' for
the establishment of a ''beachhead for Moscow and Cuba on the North American
mainland.''

Senator Cranston said both sides in the dispute were taking political risks, and
pointed out that most public opinion polls showed that voters strongly opposed
American intervention in Central America.

''This could be another Gulf of Tonkin resolution,'' Mr. Cranston said,
referring to the Congressional resolution that approved large-scale American
involvement in Vietnam.

Strategy for Filibuster

The filibuster strategy was formulated Tuesday at a private meeting in the
office of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, the Massachusetts Democrat. Most of the
Senators involved in the strategy are Democrats, but one, Lowell P. Weicker Jr.,
is a Connecticut Republican.

One factor that may help the delaying tactics is that Congress is facing a very
long agenda, and lawmakers want to get home early to start campaigning for the
November elections.

''It's late in the session and there's a lot to do,'' said Mr. Cranston.
''That's the time a filibuster could be most effective.''

The lawmakers also point out that Senate debates are now broadcast on
television, and they hope to use the exposure to stir up public resentment
against the contra aid proposal. ''We can talk to a lot of American people
through the TV set,'' Senator Sasser said.

Even if the opponents of the aid request cannot halt the proposal entirely, they
hope to win concessions that would water down the package and place tighter
restrictions on the aid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT LEAST 70 PEOPLE ARE DISMISSED AT CBS NEWS

BYLINE: By PETER J. BOYER

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 892 words


After weeks of tense anticipation, CBS News yesterday dismissed at least 70
employees, ranging from veteran on-air correspondents to program executives to
secretaries, in the latest round of job eliminations at the network. Further
dismissals are possible in coming weeks.

Among those dismissed yesterday, according to CBS News employees, were George
Herman, a correspondent who was with the organization 42 years; Gary Schuster, a
White House correspondent; Nadine Berger, a West Coast reporter, and Sam Ford, a
general assignment reporter based in Washington. Sandy Gilmour, an Atlanta-based
correspondent, was released by the network as part of the layoffs three weeks
ago, and Carlos Aguilar, a Dallas-based reporter, will be offered a reporting
job at the CBS station in Los Angeles, KCBS.

The news division actions are part of a major reduction in expenses across the
CBS Broadcasting Group because of declining advertising revenues. More than 700
jobs are being eliminated, about 525 by dismissing people.Besides the 70
dismissals yesterday, further job cuts in the news division are possible on two
precarious programs - the prime time ''West 57th'' and the overnight news
broadcast ''Nightwatch.''

After a trial spring-and-summer run, ''West 57th'' still has not won a permanent
place on the CBS schedule. If the show is not renewed, one CBS executive said,
''very, very few'' of the program's staff members will remain at the network.
''Nightwatch,'' which is getting a new executive producer, among other changes,
is expected to lose up to 20 of its roughly 45 employees within two weeks.

The Personal Histories

The people losing their jobs include some who have covered major world events
for CBS News for the last quarter-century and longer.

Mr. Herman, 66 years old, who began at CBS News in the era of Edward R. Murrow,
was one of the journalists who helped to establish the organization's reputation
for excellence. He joined CBS in 1944 as a mathematics graduate of Dartmouth and
began work as a news writer. He later was a war correspondent in Korea and a
White House correspondent during the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations. His
most recent work has been on the ''Sunday Morning'' broadcast and as the anchor
of afternoon news briefs.

''I have a contract that runs to Jan. 27, and they have told me that as of Jan.
27, I'm fired, laid off, not renewed, call it what you will,'' Mr. Herman said.
He said he was seeking work elsewhere.

Don Webster, the CBS Middle East bureau chief, was also dismissed. Mr. Webster,
52, was at CBS for 25 years, 15 of them as a correspondent. He spent seven years
in Vietnam for the network and was briefly held by the Vietcong. He was also
imprisoned for several weeks in Angola while covering the civil strife there.
Recently he has been based in Amman, Jordan, and his dismissal essentially
closes that CBS bureau. ''I've said to them it looks like you're no longer
serious about covering the Arab side of the Middle East, other than
hijackings,'' Mr. Webster said in an interview from London yesterday.

But he added: ''They had to cut back. The crisis is real in television news,'' a
reference to industrywide economy efforts in the face of dwindling ad revenues.

'A Lot of Folks on Line'

Those same factors have made it a tight market for television journalists
seeking work. ''There are a lot of folks on line out there,'' said one CBS
employee who was dismissed yesterday. ''For a lot of these folks, it is going to
be tough.''

The cutbacks did not hit all areas of the news division evenly. The ''CBS
Evening News'' had no dismissals, but two producers' jobs now vacant will go
unfilled, according to officials. ''Sixty Minutes'' also remains intact.

The hardest hit program was ''Sunday Morning,'' which lost two producers and E.
S. Lamoreaux 3d, the executive producer of the broadcast, who designed the
successful program with Robert Northshield, the senior executive producer, in
1979. Mr. Lamoreaux has held many jobs in 28 years at CBS.

The Sunday broadcast also lost Heywood Hale Broun and Mr. Herman, who were
featured reporters on the show. Mr. Broun was categorized as a contributor to
the program. Additionally, recently vacated producer slots will go unfilled on
the program. ''They did a job on us,'' said one ''Sunday'' staff member. ''We
lost good people, people who know how to write for television.''

The ''CBS Morning News'' lost five news producers, two in the Washington bureau.


'This Is a Sad Occasion'

In a memo to the staff, Van Gordon Sauter, president of CBS News, said that
yesterday was ''the date that distresses all of us.''

''This is a sad occasion and our regret and sympathy go out to those who over
the next few weeks will be ending their work here,'' the memo said. Speaking of
the network's financial situation, Mr. Sauter added, ''There is no real
alternative to the steps that the Broadcast Group is taking this morning.'' CBS
refused any comment beyond the memo.  The cutbacks came after weeks of tension
as employees waited to find out which of them would be dismissed.During this
time, several tentative lists of those to be dismissed changed, were leaked to
employees and changed again. The news yesterday brought a kind of grim relief to
some staff members whose jobs were saved. Others were simply stunned.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

OPERA: MOZART'S 'COSI FAN TUTTE'

BYLINE: By JOHN ROCKWELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 766 words

DATELINE: PURCHASE, N.Y., July 16


Well, Peter Sellars is at it again, with a semi-new production of ''Cosi Fan
Tutte,'' part of a Mozart cycle he's embarked on at the really quite wonderfully
vital Pepsico Summerfare on the State University of New York campus here.

The production is semi-new because Mr. Sellars and his musical partners, the
conductor Craig Smith and his Boston-based ensemble of singers, tried it out at
the Castle Hill festival in Massachusetts in 1984. That version occasioned some
extravagant raves and equally extravagant denunciations. This one will, too. But
it's apparently different and deeper than its predecessor, and the sold-out
house at tonight's first performance - there are five more scheduled between
Friday night and July 27 - responded with heartfelt ovations.

The production is different for two reasons. Most strikingly, Mr. Smith has
adopted original instruments. And Mr. Sellars and his team have apparently
reconsidered the drama, underpinning the patented Sellars gags with a stronger
emphasis on the darker implications of the drama.

Any Sellars production raises two issues. One is whether a given observer will
accept the very premise that it's not only proper but also imperative to
counterpoint Mozart's music with a wildly modernized visual realization. And the
second, if one has accepted the first premise, is whether Mr. Sellars, over all
and in every detail, has made the best choices.

The first question hangs on the second: opera is a long way from a theoretically
pure art form. If a stage director demonstrates a sensitivity to the spirit of
the music and the drama, and his or her choices of action and decor make sense
in themselves and in relation to the score, then a little dialectical
counterpoint can be profoundly stimulating.

But that counterpoint - more daring and extreme than usual here, with the period
musical performance and the text sung in Italian - always operates within the
magic that any opera must create. Even in 20th-century music theater, a
successful production imposes itself on a willing listener. It's a compact,
created by the artistry of the composer, the musicians and the director, and
subject to rupture with any false step.

What Mr. Sellars has done for ''Cosi'' is attempt to rescue it from its
still-prevalent reputation as a silly farce. Instead of a bet between Alfonso
and the two men as to whether the two sisters will remain faithful, we have a
very modern sexual roundelay (set in a present-day diner) in which the women
take as active a role as anyone else in confusing the amorous issues. Here,
everyone is in on the transparent masquerades from the start. And although
Fiordiligi and Ferrando seem more in love at the end than the sexually
venturesome Dorabella and Guglielmo, everyone is profoundly confused and
disturbed.

Mr. Sellars solves the final pairing-off question - do the lovers configure in
the their original or revised couplings? - by having all six characters
crisscrossing hysterically, winding up with everyone apart, flapping like broken
dolls. It's an image straight from Pina Bausch, and it's brilliant.

Earlier, however, one could legitimately complain that Mr. Sellars still goes
over the top a few times too often. He's like some late-Modernist composer,
thinking so hard that he clutters up his emotional effects with cleverness.

Most of the time, however, this staging works very well indeed, the humor
softened and enriched by a darkening - literally, with lights dimmed and clouds
lowered from the flies - of mood when things turn serious. There is a striking
unit set by Adrianne Lobel. And Mr. Sellars's choreographic approach to
movement, with the pairs moving in ritualized synchronization, only looks
mannered about 10 percent of the time; the other 90 percent, it seems inspired.

Musically, this is a fine performance, uncut and with the substitution of a more
serious second act aria for Dorabella, composed at the same time as ''Cosi,''
perfectly plausible. Mr. Smith is not the most effervescent of conductors. But
he's sensitive and intelligent, and he had the excellent Boston Early Music
Festival Orchestra playing very well, some horn troubles aside.

The cast, all of whom act with full involvement in Mr. Sellars's ideas, offers
Susan Larson as Fiordiligi, a litle thin of tone but otherwise the master of
this treacherous role; Janice Felty, a warm and engaging mezzo, as Dorabella;
James Maddalena as a bracing Guglielmo; Frank Kelley as a sweetly sung Ferrando;
Sue Ellen Kuzma as a pert and decently sung Despina, and Sanford Sylvan as the
Vietnam War-vet Alfonso.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Janice Felty (Peter Krupenye)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Veterans Hold Vigil

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 21, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 177 words


A group of Vietnam veterans who marched from Washington arrived yesterday at
Grant's Tomb for a vigil for 2,400 Americans still missing in Southeast Asia.

Fewer than three dozen veterans made the full march, and only about 100 people
greeted them upon their arrival in Manhattan - far fewer than the 1,000
organizers had hoped to draw.

''There's only a small amount of us who care, but we do care, and we care a
lot,'' said Anthony Torres, march organizer for the New York-New Jersey POW-MIA
committee. ''People saw us marching. Truck drivers saw us. This is about public
awareness.''

Outside the monument, the marchers and their supporters gathered a half-block
from a row of tents where many said they planned to stay in a 24-hour vigil.

They expressed a mixture of frustration and hope that prisoners of war and
Americans missing in action would eventually be returned to the United States.

Vietnam, which has cooperated for more than a year in the return of remains of
Americans missing in action, has repeatedly denied that it is holding prisoners.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FEWER WHALES SIGHTED AS TINY FISH DISAPPEAR

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 30, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 646 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, July 19


The multimillion-dollar whale-watching industry off Massachusetts is being
threatened by an exodus of whales that scientists suspect has been caused by a
depletion of a tiny, pencil-shaped fish that the whales eat by the ton.

Dozens of companies have profited in recent years by ferrying people on
whale-watching excursions to Stellwagen Bank, a sandy shoal that runs from north
of Cape Cod to north of Cape Ann.

But beginning in May, there was a sharp decline in sightings of humpbacks and
50-ton finbacks, which had been commonplace on nearly every outing. Where one
trip in past years sometimes produced sightings of more than 150 whales, boats
have recently been returning with only a couple of sightings and sometimes with
none.

Whales Have Moved East

Dr. Charles (Stormy) Mayo, director of cetacean research at the Center for
Coastal Studies in Provincetown, said the whales had moved to an area 40 to 60
miles east of Cape Cod near the western edge of George's Bank.

''That's really beyond the reach of the whale-watching boats,'' he said.

''The whale-watching captains will tell you there are plenty of whales around,''
Dr. Mayo said. ''I would take that with a grain of salt. The concentrations have
dropped drastically.'' He estimated that there were less than 1,000 whales near
Georges Bank.

Marine biologists say a break in the food chain has caused the exodus.

Dinner, by the Ton

Dr. Steven Murawski, a biologist and supervisor of fishery research at the
National Marine Fisheries Services in Woods Hole, said the supply of sand
launce, which are a staple of the diet of humpbacks and finbacks, had been
declining since 1982. Each day a humpback eats more than a ton of the
pencil-shaped, 8-inch-long fish, he said.

Dr. Murawski said the sand launces' decline might have been caused by an
increase in other fish in the area.

He said a similar change took place in the mid-1970's when the whales fed on
herring in George's Bank. Foreign fishing fleets depleted the herring stock,
forcing the whales to move to Stellwagen and its sand launce.

Speed of Change Called Unusual

''What's curious is that it all happened all of a sudden,'' instead of a decline
in population proportional to the gradual decrease of sand launces, said Dr.
Murawski.

Dr. Mayo said such factors as changes in currents and sea-surface temperatures
could have added to the rapid retreat.

Dr. Mayo said he believed the whales will eventually return.

''If this area has been suitable in the past, it will be suitable again,'' he
said.

But he added the return could take anywhere from several weeks to several years.
And a long time without abundant whales near the shore could spell trouble for
the whale-watching industry.

''If it gets much worse it's going to get pretty desperate,'' Dr. Mayo said.

NO PROBLEM OFF LONG ISLAND

Whale populations are not drastically diminished in Long Island Sound, where the
whale-watching industry is much smaller.

John Wadsworth, who runs whale-watching expeditions out of Waterford, Conn.,
said he had heard about the infrequent sightings off Cape Cod.

''But knock on wood - we've been fortunate so far here,'' he said.

Alan Desbonnet, special program coordinator at Mystic Marinelife Aquarium in
Mystic, Conn., confirmed that large numbers of finbacks were being sighted off
Montauk.

Discussing the Cape Cod problem, he said: ''It's hard to say whether what's
occurring up there will occur down here in a year or so. Most of the animals
don't eat only one thing. They're fish-eaters and if there's loads of sand
launce, they'll eat those. But if the sand launce is scarce, they'll either turn
to another fish or go to another area where food is more available.''

Judy Raab, an officer with Okeanos Ocean Research Foundation based in Hampton
Bays, N.Y., said sightings of finbacks appeared to be up this year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A TRAGEDY IN SOUTH GEORGIA

BYLINE: By ALBERT SCARDINO

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 4446 words

DATELINE: KINGSLAND, GA.


THE disintegration of the space shuttle Challenger last Jan. 28 was not the
first catastrophic accident for Morton Thiokol Inc. On a cold, damp morning 15
years earlier, another disaster, this one caused by negligence on the part of
both Thiokol and the United States Government, left 29 people dead and more than
50 injured in this isolated corner of southeastern Georgia.

While the official story of the Challenger is just unfolding, the last chapter
on the earlier disaster is being written this summer in the Federal district
courthouse in Brunswick, Ga., 35 miles north of here. After 15 years of
investigation and litigation, the last of the victims of the 1971 tragedy and
their families are expected to receive judgments against the Government within a
few weeks.

Even without the odd parallels between the two explosions, the story of the 1971
tragedy would be worthy of a place in industrial history. It is a tale of the
vulnerability and carelessness of ill-educated, untrained workers; it is a story
of callousness in the military-industrial partnership. Wrapped in its layers of
suffering are the hopes of escape from the remnants of a 19th-century plantation
economy - and warnings of the frustrations awaiting those who are unprepared for
the litigious, impersonal society that often replaces it.

Though the Georgia victims may yet appeal the size of their awards - and Joseph
Jones Jr., the Atlanta lawyer who has handled more than half the 65 cases that
were filed, said last week that some of them will - the decisions will bring an
end to the Government's resistance to their right to any claim at all. That
resistance began soon after the cases were filed a decade and a half ago, as the
victims and their families struggled to reorganize their lives.

The morning of the disaster, Feb. 3, 1971, a concussion rolled through the
country towns and pine woods of Camden County from a Thiokol munitions factory
12 miles east of here. A fire had broken out in a small building where 60 people
were assembling magnesium flares. When the fire reached the storeroom where four
tons of magnesium and sodium nitrate were spread on racks and 56,322 flares were
stacked, it touched off a process known as deflagration, an extremely rapid
burning that, in the enclosed environment of the storeroom, erupted as an
explosion.

Pieces of the building were blown four-fifths of a mile away. The shock wave
shattered windows in houses 11 miles back down Harrietts Bluff Road, a county
highway that provides the only access to the plant. The sound of the disaster
carried as far as Jacksonville, Fla., 40 miles south.

The accident made Thiokol a familiar name up and down the Georgia coast - just
as the Challenger disaster has made Thiokol's name familiar to the rest of the
country.

Thiokol manufactured the booster rockets that failed and caused the shuttle to
blow up 73 seconds into its flight, killing the seven astronauts aboard.
According to the Presidential commission that investigated the tragedy, the
seals between segments of the rockets burned away, allowing flame to spurt
through the joint and burn through the shuttle's large external fuel tank.

Foreshadowing the Challenger tragedy, the accident in 1971 also began with a
small flame that led in a matter of seconds to the eruption of a fireball. And
in both cases, Thiokol and the Government were found to have contributed to the
disaster through a series of communications failures, managerial mistakes and
negligence that began long before the day of the accident.

A 1977 Federal court decision found both the Government and Thiokol liable for
damages arising from the 1971 explosion. Under Georgia workers' compensation
laws, however, Thiokol's exposure was limited to $17,000 for each person killed
and a lesser amount for those injured. The Government has been forced to pay the
bulk of the damages awarded so far, more than $7 million, though it has done so
only after dogged resistance in the courtroom.

In the Challenger disaster, the roles are somewhat reversed. The Government may
be protected against liability in the deaths of the five crew members who were
Federal employees, although last week, lawyers for the family of Michael J.
Smith, the shuttle's pilot, filed a claim for $15.1 million against the space
agency. The families of the two civilian astronauts have a right to sue the
Government, and all of the seven families may make claims against the
contractors, including Morton Thiokol.

The volumes of official documents published in the aftermath of the Challenger
disaster and the hundreds of thousands of pages of transcripts from 15 years of
litigation in the Georgia case allow detailed reconstruction of the events that
took place. With both the Challenger's seals and the Georgia magnesium flares,
Thiokol and the Government had failed to alter either the manufacturing process
or the product after numerous brushes with disaster in the months prior to the
explosions.

Workers in Thiokol's Georgia plant had little, if any, previous experience in
industrial jobs, and they testified they received almost no training in
manufacturing the flares, much less in safety procedures to follow in the face
of an accident.

Many of those who were killed had safely left the building when the fire
started, but because they were unaware of the explosive nature of the materials
they were handling, they had stood outside near the building waiting for help to
arrive. The explosion blasted some of them to bits, and the firestorm that
followed killed many others.

Local officials had participated in no disaster planning, and the scale of the
accident overwhelmed the only hospital in the county, a small facility more than
20 miles from the plant.

For the victims of the explosion and for their families, the disaster uncovered
the deficiencies in state workers' compensation benefits and the weaknesses of
the legal system in resolving conflicts between poor people and the Federal
Government.

The disaster unfolded in about two minutes, but it has taken nearly 15 years for
the lawsuits that arose from it to grind their way through the courts. The
victims first had to await a trial on the liability issue in Federal district
court, then hang on through an appeal to the United States Court of Appeals, a
side trip to the Supreme Court of Georgia, a rehearing at the Appeals Court and
another round of hearings at the district court level to determine the size of
awards.

The Government so far has settled 44 of the cases. Carolyn Louise Waye, who
believes she caused the spark that started the fire and who suffers from
blackout spells and dizziness, received $72,000. The last person to leave the
building before it exploded, Thomas F. Aretz, a quality control supervisor who
tried to extinguish the fire, asked for about $1 million and was awarded
$522,000. He lost an arm and suffered severe burns after being blown 175 feet
through the air.

In sum, the victims asked for more than $717 million in compensation, demands
even their lawyers agreed were inflated. The settlements are expected to total
less than $20 million, and the lawyers who filed the suits are entitled by
Federal law to 25 percent of the awards.

The Thiokol Chemical Corporation (the name was changed to Morton Thiokol Inc. in
1982 after a merger with Morton-Norwich Products Inc.) came to this depressed
corner of southeast Georgia in 1964 with a warm welcome from the state. The
company had obtained a Government contract to make solid-fuel rockets as part of
the Saturn I missile program, and state officials said it would lead to the same
kind of growth that the Florida coast had experienced after the opening of Cape
Canaveral.

Announcements proclaimed that Thiokol would bring 500 jobs to Camden County,
including many for poor, black women who had never been able to find work other
than as field hands picking tomatoes, maids in the motels along U.S. Hwy. 17 or
shrimp pickers in the seafood-processing plants in Brunswick. The county, a flat
plain of sand and wetlands between the Okeefenokee Swamp on the west and the
wilderness of Cumberland Island on the east, had only one other heavy industrial
operation, a paper mill in the town of St. Marys.

The company bought what had been a cotton plantation until the early years of
this century, a 7,000-acre tract of pine forests and marsh on a thumb of land
that sticks out into the tidal rivers of coastal Georgia.

The rockets Thiokol contracted to build there could be assembled in small
buildings around the compound, then shipped down the Intracoastal Waterway to
Cape Canaveral.

The company tested the rockets by turning them nose down into a silo on a bluff
overlooking the marsh, then igniting them, sending flames hundreds of feet into
the air. Military officials sometimes joined Thiokol engineers on the causeways
and islands 10 miles across St. Andrew Sound to watch the flames from the
firings.

When space agency officials decided in 1965 against the use of solid- fuel
rockets for the Apollo program, Thiokol scrambled to find other uses for the
plant. Part of it was already being used to make pesticides, but the isolation
of the plant and its layout, with small buildings somewhat separated from each
other, made it ideal for munitions production.

Among its other Government contracts, Thiokol had obtained an order in December
1969 from the United States Army to manufacture flares for use in Vietnam. The
company assigned the contract, an order for 754,000 magnesium trip flares, to
the Camden County plant.

Thiokol contracted with an anti-poverty agency here to train workers to assemble
the flares and to work in other parts of the plant. ''It was just like going
back to school,'' said Lillian Dawson, who last month received a judgment of
$126,000 to end her case. ''They brought in teachers from Brunswick to teach us
reading, writing and arithmetic and to test our horse sense.'' They never
discussed how to handle explosives or what to do in the event of an emergency.

In her first year at Thiokol, Mrs. Dawson assembled mortar shells. She moved to
the flare production line two months before the explosion.

The flares were to be used to identify enemy troop movements at night. A soldier
would trip a wire strung across a jungle path, igniting the flare and allowing
United States or South Vietnamese troops to identify his position and open fire.

Production of flares began at the plant in 1970. The company installed the
assembly line in a one-story structure designated Building M-132, a windowless,
concrete block and metal facility supported by T-shaped pillars of reinforced
concrete. The building measured 37 feet by 135 feet, with the interior divided
into eight bays of 12 feet by 15 feet.

To prepare the materials used in the flares, workers mixed 500-pound batches of
illuminant composed of sodium nitrate and brilliant-burning magnesium. They
ground the mixture twice to make a grainy powder, then spread it on trays. The
trays were placed on racks in a cure room attached to the south side of the
building. The room was kept at 110 degrees to dry and preserve the powdered
illuminant.

A similar process was used to manufacture ''first-fire'' material, the extremely
flammable ignition compound that helped to ignite the illuminant when the flare
was tripped.

To create the flares, these two powders were pressed into pellets that were
assembled in a foot-long tube.

To make the ignition pellets, a worker on the assembly line poured a small
scoopful of loose illuminant into a metal die. Another worker then placed the
die onto a conveyor belt. At the ''first-fire addition station,'' one worker
would remove the partly filled die from the belt and place it on a plywood
board. Another would add a scoopful of first-fire material to the die and the
first would return it to the conveyor belt. Machines pressed the combined
materials into pellets and ejected them. Illuminant pellets were made the same
way without the addition of the first-fire material.

On a parallel line, other workers assembled three illuminant pellets and one
ignition pellet into a casing, which was then wrapped to complete the flare.

All but a handful of the 60 people working in Building M-132 earned less than
$18 a day. Most of them were women, most of them black and most of them had held
menial jobs irregularly before they came to Thiokol.

The project had not been going well. By the end of 1970, barely a year into the
contract, Thiokol was already losing $1 million on the job. And according to
employees' testimony, work was interrupted frequently by fire, at least five
times in the two months before the explosion.

''When we had a fire, someone from the maintenance department would come put it
out,'' said Lydia Cobbs, who started work in the plant three months before the
explosion. ''When they did, we would go back inside and go back to work, so we
never went very far.''

In its decision, the appeals court later described the assembly area as
''sloppy,'' with combustible material stacked here and there throughout the
building, but a Department of Defense inspector who visited the plant for an
annual safety survey in January, a month before the disaster, raised no
objections.

What the inspector did not know -and what no one else in Building M-132 knew -
was that both Thiokol and the Army had conducted tests that indicated the
materials were not just combustible, as they had been rated by the Army, but
were explosive. Thus, the materials were much more dangerous than their official
classification would indicate.

In October 1970, less than four months before the accident, the Army's Picatinny
Arsenal in New Jersey recommended to the Department of Defense that the
materials used in the flares be reclassified to reflect their more hazardous
character. On Nov. 16, Army officials in Washington approved the change. But no
order went out to the Camden County plant - for reasons no one ever explained
adequately, the district court noted in its decision.

Thiokol's general manager at the plant, Joseph B. Galloway, testified that if
the Army had told him how explosive the materials were, he would have ''had no
choice'' but to shut down the flare production line to protect the workers.

Precisely how the fire started that Wednesday morning was never determined. Miss
Waye said it seemed to grow ''right from the board'' on which she was working
with the metal dies, pouring in ignition material in production bay 104. She may
have touched two dies against each other, creating enough of a spark to ignite
the loose powder in front of her.

The fire raced up the ignition pellet assembly line as if the conveyor belt were
a fuse, hopping from die to die until it reached an accumulation of pellets at
the end of the line. It jumped to a corridor, igniting a pile of 100 pellets,
then a rack of loose illuminant, then several cans of illuminant pellets.

Mr. Aretz, a 53-year-old quality control officer who had worked at the plant for
three years, grabbed a water hose ''that was put there to help put out a fire
from time to time,'' but almost immediately realized that the fire was out of
control.

As he turned to run, the fire burned through the door of the cure room where
8,000 pounds of loose illuminants were stored, along with 1,400 pounds of
ignition pellets, 56,000 flares that were already assembled and about 100 pounds
of other material. Just as Mr. Aretz stepped through the doorway, the building
exploded.

Some minutes later, he woke up in a ditch across the road from the building.
Magnesium had burned away the bone on his right arm and much of the calf on his
left leg. His left eardrum was ruptured, and his left foot and leg were
shattered.

Across the road, 23 people were already dead and dozens more were trying to run
away from the fire that followed the explosion. Parts of bodies hung in trees
hundreds of feet away. One worker was blown with such force into a metal fence
that ''he melted into it.''

Mrs. Cobbs, 22, was lying on her back when she realized flame was pouring across
her face. A flying piece of metal had punctured her back. As she struggled to
her knees, fire burned her right leg. She tried to stand but fell backward on a
red-hot metal drum that burned her forearm.

She stayed there until she realized her hand was resting in the open intestinal
wound of one of her fellow workers, who was dead. She eventually found her way
into a maintenance shed, where some of her co-workers helped extinguish her
burning clothing. Trees around the edge of the clearing had been uprooted, and
the roadbed ''seemed to be a sea of hot, bubbly tar.''

Rescue workers began to arrive at the isolated site within a half-hour, using
helicopters and small planes to fly into a landing strip three miles away. Six
more people died in the days that followed the explosion, while others, like Mr.
Aretz and Mrs. Cobbs, began years of medical treatment to repair some of the
damage.

Mr. Aretz went first to a hospital in Brunswick, where he remained for two
months, undergoing surgery numerous times for arm, leg and head injuries. While
there, he contracted meningitis and had his first skin graft operations. In the
next seven years, he was operated on at least five more times. His doctors
removed his right arm in 1972, cut some of his leg nerves to relieve pain in
1973, and realigned his left foot and toes into a more comfortable, though no
more useful, position in 1978.

Mrs. Cobbs, who had dreamed in high school of becoming a nurse, instead became a
long-term patient. During her first month in the hospital, she received multiple
skin grafts, then three times returned for surgery to relieve the pain caused by
her scars. In 1974 she found work at a sewing factory in Kingsland, but she
could not use her right leg well enough to keep the job.

After three years of not working, she enrolled in a training program to become a
licensed practical nurse, but was unable to complete the training. In 1980 she
worked for three months for the Census Bureau, and in 1983 she found a temporary
job at the King's Bay Naval Station, a new submarine base just south of the
Thiokol plant. Occasionally she filled in as a substitute teacher. Now she works
as a clerk in a discount store in St. Marys to support her five children.

The lawsuits began in 1972. Mr. and Mrs. Aretz retained a Savannah firm,
Brannen, Wessels & Searcy, which filed a claim for just over $1 million. Because
Georgia law limited Thiokol's liability, the lawyers sought to find the Federal
Government jointly responsible for the accident.

''If the Government contributed to the accident, then Mr. Aretz could recover
for damages no matter what he received from workers' compensation,'' said Frank
P. Brannen, who handled the case. ''If not, he would get the maximum disability
payment, about $50 a week, for seven years, and that would be the end of it. He
would have to live on his Social Security and pension benefits.''

Deannie Frazier, an N.A.A.C.P. organizer who had grown up in Camden County,
talked to some of the victims and their families who had not filed suit. She
steered them to a firm of young civil rights lawyers who were fast gaining a
reputation for trial work. Joseph Jones Jr., a partner, filed 36 suits on Feb.
2, 1973, the day before the victims' right to sue expired. Lawyers representing
29 other victims and families had filed earlier.

The Government and the plaintiffs agreed to let Judge Alexander A. Lawrence, the
Federal judge whose district included Camden County, conduct a trial on the
liability issue in the case of Mr. Aretz. If Mr. Aretz failed to establish the
Government's liability in the explosion, all of the cases would be dismissed. If
he won, the court would hold individual hearings to determine what damages the
plaintiffs would be entitled to get.

Hearings were held in the summer of 1974. Three years later, in June 1977, Judge
Lawrence found that although Thiokol had been negligent in its careless
operation of the Georgia plant, the Government was also negligent in failing to
notify Thiokol of the change in hazard classification of compounds used to make
the flares. The judge ascribed the three-year delay to the death of the court
reporter who had been responsible for transcribing the trial testimony. Without
a transcript, the judge said, he had to review the evidence document by
document, including more than 7,500 pages of reports.

Later that year, the Government asked for a postponement of the second part of
the trial, the hearings to determine what damages Mr. Aretz had suffered, to
give time for an appeal of the liability decision; Judge Lawrence refused.

On July 5 and 6, 1978, in Federal district court in Brunswick, the lawyers for
Mr. and Mrs. Aretz presented their evidence.

Mr. Aretz was totally disabled, they said. He had suffered indescribable pain
and would suffer more in the future. He would never work again. He had
accumulated tens of thousands of dollars in medical bills and would face more.
He and his wife had suffered a loss of consortium.

Mr. Aretz blamed his losses, in large measure, on the Government's failure to
notify Thiokol about the explosive nature of the materials used to make
magnesium flares.

The Government's lawyers, led by William T. Moore Jr., the United States
attorney for the district, argued that Mr. Aretz had been negligent in staying
behind to try to extinguish the fire. While they acknowledged the Government's
failure to notify the company of the change in classification, they said Thiokol
should have known anyway. The company, in fact, had mishandled the small amount
of ignition material that was already classified as explosive, the Government
said, and would not have performed differently if it had learned of the change.

Government witnesses suggested that Mr. Aretz would be able to hold some
sedentary jobs. Any award he received, they said, should be reduced by the
amount paid under the workers' compensation program and his military disability
benefits.

Eight weeks later, on Aug. 30, Judge Lawrence rejected most of the Government's
arguments, awarding Mr. Aretz $521,663.80 for damages he had already suffered
and for those he was expected to endure in the future, discounted to their
present value. Mrs. Aretz received $72,608.70. The Government decided to appeal
on the liability question.

In 1979, a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth
Circuit rejected the Government's arguments again. The court noted that the Army
waited until three weeks after the explosion to notify Thiokol that the company
should reclassify the illuminant as an explosive. The reclassification order
that had been issued from the Picatinny Arsenal in November 1970, three months
before the disaster -the one never received by Thiokol -was found sometime after
the explosion in the desk drawer of an officer at Picatinny. Shortly after the
explosion, the officer had moved to Tel Aviv and had been unavailable to testify
at the trial.

The Justice Department lawyers asked for a rehearing before the full appeals
court, 25 judges, a request the three-judge panel approved in 1980. The appeals
court also asked the Georgia Supreme Court for guidance in interpreting state
law in the case. The Georgia court answered in late 1981. A year later, the
appeals court reheard the case and upheld the three-judge panel, returning the
case to the district court for trial on the damages in the 63 other cases.

Months went by while the Government considered taking the case to the United
States Supreme Court. The Aretzes and the other plaintiffs continued to get by
on what was left of the settlements they had received from other insurance
policies in force the day of the accident and what jobs they could hold.

Policies Thiokol had carried had paid the families of those who were killed
$15,700 each, and Social Security and workers' compensation checks had added a
few hundred dollars a month for many of them. The injured had received
substantially less, depending on their injuries.

In 1982, the Government decided not to press its appeal. Mr. and Mrs. Aretz
would receive the awards determined by Judge Lawrence, and hearings would be
held to determine compensation for the other victims.

In late 1982, Judge B. Avant Edenfield (Judge Lawrence had died in 1979)
deputized a Savannah lawyer, Michael K. Gannam, to hear the arguments and
recommend awards. Those hearings began in 1984. Other cases went to the United
States Magistrate in Augusta, Ga.

The recommendations began to arrive in Judge Edenfield's court in January 1985.
The first was the case of Harriett Perry, who, at the age of 21, had lost a leg
in the explosion. Mr. Gannam recommended an award of just over $1 million, but
Judge Edenfield reduced it to $588,000.

In the months that followed, the recommendations rolled in. Some were revised
up, others down. Judge Edenfield, still impatient with the pace of settlement,
called lawyers for both sides to a conference in Brunswick. In three days in
early December, they settled 41 of the suits.

The recommendations are expected to be completed this summer. Judge Edenfield
has promised to make his decision in each case as soon as possible. Then it will
be up to each plaintiff to decide whether to appeal the award.

The explosion did not end Thiokol's work in Camden County. The company closed
the plant for repairs, cleaning up the area around building M-132. It reopened
six months later, with many of the survivors returning to work. It continued to
make munitions, but no more trip flares were produced there. Employment peaked
in 1973, then declined as the war in Vietnam wound down. By late 1976, only 150
people worked there. Thiokol decided to sell the plant.

In 1977, Thiokol left and a new industrial neighbor moved in, the Union Carbide
Corporation. Carbide processed a variety of agricultural chemicals there,
including methyl isocyanate, the compound that leaked in Bhopal, India, in
December 1984 and killed 2,000 people. After Bhopal, Carbide shut down its
methyl isocyanate operations in Camden County.

Some of the people who had worked in the Thiokol plant hired on with Carbide
when the plant was sold. Among them was Marion Lambert, a Kingsland resident who
is a long-time member and former president of Local 832 of the International
Chemical Workers Union, which represents workers at the Carbide plant, just as
it did for Thiokol.

''I'm very confident that this is a safe operation today,'' said Mr. Lambert.
''If we can't make our products safe, we don't make our products.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of rescue workers and victims in 1971 (Associated Press; United
Press International); Diagram of the building and the course of the fire
(Source: 1977 Federal Court decision, Aretz v. United States) (Pg. 8); Photos of
Lillian Dawson and Mary Chance (NYT/Richard Sommers); Photo of the plantation
that became the Thiokol factory (Beau Cabell) (pg.8); Map of Georgia
highlighting the site of

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION;
Governor's Races Steeped in Rancor

BYLINE: By Michael Wright and Caroline Rand Herron

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 325 words


''It does bother me as a Republican,'' said Joyce Hampers, the party's candidate
for treasurer of Massachusetts, who until last year was a Democrat. ''When we
cowboys draw the wagons in a circle, we are supposed to shoot out, not in.''

Massachusetts Republicans lost the second of the two candidates on their
gubernatorial primary ballot last week when Gregory S. Hyatt withdrew after
charges that he had accepted money from a reputed organized crime figure. Mr.
Hyatt lost party support this spring, when reports circulated that he had been
seen naked in his office and talked on the phone to himself.

State Representative Royall H. Switzler was then drafted at the party
convention. He withdrew last month after admitting that he had falsified his
military record, saying that he had been a captain in the Special Forces in
Vietnam when in fact he had been a sergeant in the peacetime Army in Korea.
Under state law, whomever the Republicans pick now will have to be a write-in
candidate.

In Alabama, it was the Democrats who were preoccupied as a special panel opened
hearings into the disputed results of their gubernatorial primary last month.
After a mean-spirited campaign, the conservative state Attorney General, Charles
Graddick, claimed victory by 8,756 votes over Lieut. Gov. Bill Baxley, a
populist who had been the favorite to succeed the retiring Governor, George
Wallace.

Mr. Graddick, who had accused Mr. Baxley of not telling the truth about reports
that he had used state cars and troopers to ferry a woman to and from his
apartment and of seeking the endorsement of ''black politicians,'' has said he
will go to court if the panel gives the nomination to Mr. Baxley. Mr. Baxley,
who had called his opponent a coward for pulling out of a debate, charged last
week that Mr. Graddick, a former Republican, had entered into a ''conspiracy''
as early as 1985 to encourage illegal crossover voting. The hearings could last
weeks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE HOUSE REPUBLICANS JUST WANT TO STAY EVEN

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 759 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


REPRESENTATIVE Tony Coelho of California, the chairman of the Democratic
Congressional Campaign Committee, predicts that the results of the 1986
elections will write an end to one chapter of the Reagan Revolution. ''The
battle of the 80's is over in the House,'' he says. ''After we gain 10 to 15
seats this fall, we will have virtually erased Ronald Reagan's impact on the
House.''

Joseph Gaylord, executive director of the Republican Congressional Campaign
Committee, disputes that assessment. To the contention that the Republicans have
failed to capitalize on the momentum of Mr. Reagan's two landslide victories,
Mr. Gaylord counters that his party has made solid gains in the 435-member
House. Repulican numbers have increased from 158 in 1980 to 182, despite a
26-seat loss in 1982, during a recession.

In 1984, he said, ''if 216,000 people in 36 Congressional districts had switched
their votes and voted for Republicans, we'd have 218 seats and the Democrats
217. We think that is significant movement.''

Still, Mr. Gaylord concedes that he is ''very nervous'' about Republican
prospects this year. Some party analysts say even the loss of a handful of seats
could weaken President Reagan's base in the House. ''We can't afford to see that
base much smaller than it is,'' said Mitch Daniels, assistant to the President
for political and intergovernmental affairs. ''It's getting harder and harder
for us to win Democratic votes.''

In an effort to protect his House base, Mr. Reagan starred last Tuesday at an
unusual $5,000-a-head reception that raised $394,000 for 24 Republican
incumbents, most of whom are facing tough Democratic challenges. And to shore up
Republican defenses on an issue that Democrats keep raising, Mr. Reagan
announced support for an effort to eliminate a law that bars Social Security
recipients from receiving cost-of-living raises if the inflation rate falls
below 3 percent.

Republicans say that long-term political trends are in their favor, pointing to
gains in party identification, especially among young voters. But they
acknowledged that the party has virtually no hope of winning the House as long
as Democrats control Congressional redistricting. Both parties are investing
heavily in state legislative races in preparation for the next round of
redistricting after the 1990 Census.

This year, House Republicans are playing defensive politics, setting as their
1986 goal holding their House losses to a dozen seats or fewer. But beyond such
gestures as last week's fund-raising reception, White House officials
acknowledge that Mr. Reagan is limited in what he can do. Approval of his
performance remains high in the public opinion polls, but analysts in both
parties doubt that his popularity will be much of a factor in the House
elections.

Containment Is Victory

Since World War II, Democrats have held an average of 253 House seats; in the
last six Congresses the average has been 270. Because his party is ''at about
full strength,'' said Mr. Coelho, it can reasonably expect to gain only 10 or 15
seats in November.

Republicans say that if they can hold their losses to that range, it would be a
major victory, given the pattern of House elections held midway in a President's
second term. The average effect of that phenomenon, known as ''the six-year
itch,'' has been a loss of 48 seats for the party holding the White House. But
that figure includes some extraordinary election cycles marked by the trauma of
economic recessions, the Vietnam war and the Watergate scandal.

This year, there are no dominant national issues, and most House races are
expected to turn on candidate strengths, financial backing and local concerns.
The re-election rate for House incumbents since 1950 has been about 92 percent.
As in the past, the real battleground this year will be for open seats.

There are 42 of them at stake in November - 21 held by Republicans and 21 by
Democrats - and many of them are in the South and the Midwest, regions where the
local economies have been battered by the farm crisis and imports. Democrats
also expect to pick up seats where candidates of the religious right beat out
regular Republicans in primary battles.

Mr. Coelho says he cannot think of a single issue that will put Democrats at a
disadvantage. ''I want the battle to be our central America over their Central
America,'' he adds. ''In our central America, farmers are going bankrupt and
workers are losing their jobs, while Reagan wants to put another $100 million
into the Nicaraguan contras.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph comparing number of Decomrat and Republican U.S. representatives
retiring, seeking other offices or seeking re-election (Source: Congressional
Quarterly); drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE HARVARD FACTOR

BYLINE: By Colin Campbell; Colin Campbell is a New York Times reporter.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4949 words


WADE INTO THE NAMES OF Harvard's former students and you soon feel not just the
tickling undertow of 350 years but also the force, the actual weight and sound,
of Harvard's influence on the world outside the Yard.

Remember George Starkey, class of 1646? He was an alchemist, a living link with
the medieval world.

Consider Ralph Waldo Emerson, class of 1821. The great transcendentalist and
distiller of ideas, which now seem deeply American, revisited his old college,
years after graduating, and reported feeling the presence of ''ghosts'' there.
The college was already two centuries old, its founding spirits as remote from
Emerson as George Washington is from us.

Consider the liberal professorial brain trusts of President Franklin D.
Roosevelt, class of 1904, and President John F. Kennedy, class of 1940. The
Washington of President Ronald Reagan may include fewer Harvard professors, but
look at the alumni of Harvard College, the undergraduate school, and of
Harvard's professional schools: Caspar W. Weinberger, Secretary of Defense;
Donald T. Regan, White House chief of staff; Education Secretary William J.
Bennett; Interior Secretary Donald P. Hodel; Transportation Secretary Elizabeth
Dole; Federal Reserve Chairman Paul A. Volcker, and Assistant Secretary of State
Elliott Abrams, among others.

Harvard has left a deep impress on American culture and society ever since it
was founded in 1636, in the reign of Charles I, and named after John Harvard, a
young minister who, when he died, left the college 400 books and a valuable
interest in a London tavern. And as the university prepares to celebrate its
350th birthday with a tremendous convocation next September (the present
Charles, Prince of Wales, will be among the guests), American education,
scholarship, government, law, medicine, business and literature still find
themselves somewhat under Harvard's spell. Harvard has set standards in
scholarship over the years, and underlying its scholarship there remains a
seriousness about truth-seeking, along with a moral ambition, that other schools
have strained to emulate. These deeper traits are probably traceable to
Harvard's Puritan origins.

One other type of influence is harder to grasp. It is Harvard's social power,
its link to cliques, networks and elites both real and imaginary. Defense
Secretary Weinberger, for instance, admits cheerfully that he is benevolently
disposed toward Harvard people. He adds that he tries not to indulge in blind
favoritism, but being Harvard ''certainly doesn't hurt them.''(Being Radcliffe,
by the same token, hasn't hurt, either. The women's college that grew out of
Harvard has produced the novelist Ursula Le Guin, the poet Maxine Kumin, the
historian Barbara Tuchman, the concert pianist Ursula Oppens and hundreds of
other distinguished women.) A degree from Harvard still has a certain talismanic
prestige, and a few years there supplies a person with valuable tickets and
acquaintances. The fact drives other good schools - which may well provide
undergraduates with as good or even better education - nearly crazy.

Yet, by most accounts, Harvard is less influential than it was on its 250th
anniversary in 1886, during the administration of president Charles W. Eliot,
who was one of the great reformers of American higher education. Harvard is
probably also less influential than it was on its 300th anniversary in 1936,
during the heyday of the New Deal. The decline, however, is relative. Harvard is
simply no longer alone in its eminence. Other great American universities have
cropped up. Part of the credit for them belongs to Harvard.HENRY ROSOVSKY, AN
ECONOMIST AND former dean of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences, is one of many
knowledgeable folk who say that Harvard is less unique than it used to be. He
loves the place all the same.

One day not long ago, he sat back in a big armchair in his office in Littauer
Hall and recalled that when he was dean he had often thought some Harvard
departments attracted better students than they deserved. They were flawed
departments, he said, but they got brilliant students because of Harvard's magic
name.

Speaking of Harvard's complex influence, Rosovsky proposed: ''Part of it is
composed of myth, part of it is a state of mind, part of it is realistic.'' The
realistic part is palpable, a matter of actual scholarly and scientific
discoveries. The myth, Rosovsky feels, is overrated, but there is a definite
Harvard ''state of mind,'' he says, which influences students and teachers to
get into the swing of old traditions, to become very serious about their work,
because it is expected of them.

Rosovsky was an undergraduate at the College of William and Mary in Virginia
(which is the nation's second oldest college, founded in 1693), and he has
taught at Berkeley. He earned such a name as dean of Harvard's faculty that in
1977 he was offered the presidency of Yale. He turned it down (there's a pearl
for Harvard's legendary string). He had work to do at Harvard, and he went on to
help institute Harvard's ''core curriculum'' - a range of basic courses that
make up 25 percent of an undergraduate's four-year plan.

Rosovsky retired as dean two years ago and is now a University Professor, which
means he can teach whatever he chooses. He has also been named a member of
Harvard's seven-member Corporation (formally, The President and Fellows of
Harvard College). The Corporation - like some independent inner circle of a
conventional board of trustees - runs the whole university. Apart from Harvard's
president and treasurer, its members have rarely been Harvard employees.
Rosovsky, in fact, is the first Harvard professor to be named to the Corporation
in a century.

One thing he wanted to say right away was that Harvard continues to be almost
uniquely ambitious. It wants to be best in everything, from its library to
physics to medicine. Most other great universities tend to specialize, and some
hardly bother to compete in some fields.

''Berkeley and Harvard are really the only two institutions in the country that
have the ambition to be good across the board,'' Rosovsky said. (Staying good
across the board can be tough. Another officer of Harvard, when asked his
private opinion of various departments and divisions, replied that economics,
the classics, Romance languages, chemistry, biophysics, mathematics and some
others are mighty departments that radiate influence throughout the world.
History, physics and philosophy, though extremely distinguished, will need new
blood soon. Astronomy, geology, English, sociology and the fine arts are
relatively weak.) ''When I think of Harvard's influence,'' Rosovsky said,
squinting into the mental distance, ''I think of its changed admissions
policies.'' He was referring to the ''opening'' of the university's admissions
in recent decades, and to a democratization of Harvard's influence.

The old policy, as at other elite schools, favored money and family. Glance at
the names of Harvard's graduates during the 18th and 19th centuries and they
remind you how many illustrious families Boston spawned. Even apart from all the
Adamses (Presidents John Adams and John Quincy Adams were both Harvard men), the
records toss up names like Leverett, Saltonstall, Phillips, Hancock, Pickering,
Sumner, Lowell, Prescott, Bancroft, Story, Coolidge, Peabody, Houghton, Oliver,
Wendell and Holmes.

A century ago, 80 percent of Harvard's freshmen came from prep schools, and even
in the early 1950's private schools prepared half the freshmen. Black students a
century ago were very rare. Jewish students were less so and eventally entered
Harvard in sizable numbers; they did so well that an informal (and deeply
resented) quota on Jewish students was instituted in the 1920's during the
presidency of A. Lawrence Lowell.

After World War II, the admissions policy opened wide. During the 1950's, when
Nathan Marsh Pusey was president, Harvard introduced a ''need-blind'' admissions
policy that, in theory, made family wealth completely irrelevant. William R.
Fitzsimmons, Harvard's admissions director, who himself went to Harvard in the
1960's on a large scholarship, reports that three out of four entering Harvard
freshmen now come from public high schools, and that two out of three students
get some financial aid.

When Harvard merged with Radcliffe in 1977, it became coeducational as well -
although it causes great displeasure in some quarters that only 45 of the
university's 898 tenured faculty members last year were women.

Today, Harvard recruits students from across the country and the world, and more
than 20 percent of Harvard's students come from minorities: 9 percent
Asian-American, 7 percent black, 5 percent Hispanic, 1 percent Native American.
Such minorities added up to only 5 percent of Harvard's student body in the
early 1960's.

''Harvard admissions,'' Rosovsky said, ''is an exercise in social engineering.''

Democratic admissions would be impossible without plenty of money, and, in fact,
one reason Harvard has prospered intellectually is that it has grown so rich.
Harvard today is by far the wealthiest private university in the country, with
an endowment of $3.6 billion (the second-richest private university, Princeton,
has a $1.9 billion endowment). Rosovsky agreed: wealth spells quality in an age
when libraries and laboratories cost unbelievable sums.

HARVARD HAS BEEN THINKING ABOUT its 350th birthday, and new volumes of history
have appeared in the bookshops of Cambridge: a history of Harvard's motley
architecture; a collection of essays, ''Glimpses of the Harvard Past,'' by the
Harvard historians Bernard Bailyn, Donald Fleming, Oscar Handlin and Stephan
Thernstrom; a reprint of the one-volume edition of Samuel Eliot Morison's great
four-volume ''Tercentennial History of Harvard University,'' which was published
half a century ago.

Morison argued in 1936 that Harvard's founders, scores of whom had graduated
from Oxford or Cambridge, were dedicated to a recognizably secular liberal
education. Bailyn and others, though, are shifting the emphasis. The founders,
they argue, wanted specifically to build a Puritan college that would differ
radically from the religiously corrupt old schools of Europe. They were
animated, too, by the ''dread,'' as they called it, that the new colony might
slip backward, that ministers might grow ignorant. Veritas, or truth, which
became Harvard's motto, signified God's truth. And, in the end, Bailyn has
written, ''it was an intensely religious, ascetic Puritan culture that created
this institution and that carried it through precarious years into the stability
of the 18th century.''

The founders' focus on hard work, self-discipline and doing the right thing is
still sharp, and it affects the university's seriousness about good works as
well as about scholarship. Richard Darman - who got degrees from both Harvard
College and from the business school, and who is now Under Secretary of the
Treasury -said the other day that the College still instilled ''this sense that
one must be of service.''

Many of the Puritans (Cotton Mather for instance) were powerfully drawn to the
natural sciences. Nature was God's nature, and to understand nature was to see
God's handiwork. Harvard followed suit. By the middle of the 19th century, as
the natural sciences became a key to education itself, Harvard's overseers had
grown sufficiently committed to modern science to appoint a young chemist -
Eliot - to the presidency. ''When the Jefferson physics lab was built,'' Gerald
Holton, a physicist and historian of science, said recently in the same
century-old building, ''there weren't enough physicists in the United States to
fill it. It was built on speculation. It was part of a grand statement about the
future of science.''

Most of the 29 Nobel Prizes Harvard's faculty members have won have been in the
sciences, or in medicine and physiology, from the 1914 prize in chemistry, which
went to T. W. Richards for his work on the atomic weights of elements, to the
1984 prize in physics, which went to Carlo Rubbia for his discovery of new
subatomic particles.

What sorts of professors does Harvard look for in the sciences? Jeremy Knowles,
an English chemist who has taught at Harvard for years, stared for a moment over
his lunch before answering: ''Deep ones.'' He apologized for sounding arrogant,
but, he said, there was no getting around it.

Harvard began turning into the sprawling, immensely ambitious university it is
today under Eliot, its president from 1869 to 1909. What did Eliot do? Herculean
things.  He gave his sleepy little law faculty a dean - Christopher Columbus
Langdell - who transformed the study of law in the United States. Under
Langdell, professors ceased to expound the law (a task that had become
increasingly difficult as the law kept growing and contradicting itself from
state to state) and began to study cases, through which modern students and
lawyers ''discover'' the law.

What bothers former Attorney General William French Smith, who got his law
degree at Harvard, is that the school has been poisonously divided in recent
years between a small group of conservative professors (Smith hired two such at
the Justice Department, though he said he hated depriving the school of their
talents) and another small group of more or less radical professors who have
been arguing that the law should be viewed as a function of social and political
power. Over the past year, the school's conflict has grown a bit calmer - but it
is still there, and students and professors say the school is not a happy place.

During the decades of Eliot's presidency, the Graduate School of Business
Administration was launched. Like the law school, the business school has felt
increasing competition from such places as Stanford, but it is still a
powerhouse.

Eliot also reformed the medical school, and today, a century later, it has
embarked on another great reform. Such huge amounts of money have lately been
channeled into medical research that teaching has suffered. So Harvard has
shaken up the way it teaches medicine. Traditionally, medical students take two
years of lab sciences and two years of clinical studies. But last year, 24 of
the school's 165 entering students were put on a ''New Pathway'' that introduces
them immediately to realistic medical problems. Clinical and scientific
instruction are merged from the start.

The new system also employs senior faculty members as tutors, and other new
labor-intensive methods. Gradually, the medical school's entire student body may
take the Pathway. ''Problem-based'' medical instruction isn't new (five other
schools did it before Harvard), but Harvard is certainly the most famous school
to take the new route, and its reforms are the most sweeping. Its performance
will be watched all over the world.

Harvard's Graduate School of Arts and Sciences also got off the ground a century
ago - and it helped transform a quiet, regional undergraduate college into a
cosmopolitan center of research. It helped bring German standards of
scholarship, then the best in the world, to the United States and it made
Harvard a haven for world-class humanists, scientists and - most famously for a
while - philosophers, such as C. S. Peirce, William James, Josiah Royce, George
Herbert Palmer and George Santayana. The fine arts flourished, too - beginning
with Charles Eliot Norton's great lectures and leading to Harvard's famous
Graduate School of Design. Yet it has been in literature more than in
philosophy, the arts or architecture that Harvard's humanistic influence has
seemed most extraordinary.

Harvard long produced poets, critics and other writers, including Emerson and
Thoreau, Richard Henry Dana and Henry Adams. But, starting in the late 19th
century, literary people began tumbling out: Edwin Arlington Robinson, Gertrude
Stein, Robert Frost, Wallace Stevens, T. S. Eliot, the journalists Walter
Lippmann and John Reed (both class of 1910), E. E. Cummings, Eugene O'Neill, S.
N. Behrman, John Dos Passos, Archibald MacLeish and other literary figures such
as Vernon L. Parrington, Maxwell Perkins, Van Wyck Brooks and Brooks Atkinson.

Literary names thinned out after World War I, but, even then, Harvard produced
James Gould Cozzens, F. O. Matthiessen, James Agee, William S. Burroughs, Norman
Mailer, John Ashbery, John Updike and columns of famous journalists who got
their start on The Crimson.

One other epochal step taken by president Eliot was to abolish the ancient
system of prescribed studies for undergraduates and introduce the elective
system. On Harvard's 250th birthday, upperclassmen were henceforth permitted to
cut classes; some sailed right to Bermuda. Compulsory chapel was also abolished.
So were Harvard's old requirements in Latin and Greek. Eliot dragged Harvard and
much of American higher education into an era of liberty that is still in
progress, and still being questioned. Harvard is, as it began to be under Eliot,
one of the hardest schools to get into (only 16 percent of those who apply are
admitted) and one of the hardest to flunk out of.

Trying to turn out more competent, cultured graduates in the face of all the
modern world's multiplicities, specialisms, distractions and rebellions, Harvard
in the 20th century has created one ambitious undergraduate program after
another. In the words of Harvard presidents, these programs have been designed
to make students ''intellectually well rounded'' (Lowell), to provide them with
a ''general education'' (James Bryant Conant), to reaffirm ''the liberal arts''
(Pusey) and to expound a ''core curriculum'' (Derek Curtis Bok, Harvard's
current president).

Each new affirmation, moreover, catches the ears of pundits and educators. When
the president of Harvard speaks, people listen.

I T WAS A BRIGHT BLUE AFTER-noon in May. Derek Bok - an athletic man who seems
comfortable in motion, a man from California who likes to garden - agreed it was
a good day for a walk.

Through the Yard and past the law school, greeting acquaintances and waving at
sunbathing students, Harvard's president paced his domain. He commented on the
flowering trees. He took a quick peek into Harvard's new Sackler Museum and
identified himself to the suspicious receptionist.

Unlike most previous Harvard presidents, Bok spent his undergraduate years
elsewhere. He went to Stanford, later taught at Harvard Law School, specialized
in labor law, was named dean, and - after Harvard erupted in the late 1960's
over the Vietnam War and other issues - became president in 1971. There's
something of the outsider about him. Some old Harvard people think he's
insufficiently Harvard.

He sometimes seems shy. But he has sent sparks flying by criticizing law schools
for cornering too many of the nation's best brains; he has irritated some
political activists by defending Harvard's decision not to divest itself of
stocks in companies that do business with South Africa; he has tweaked the
business school for not doing enough basic research.

He rejected the idea that Harvard exerted any ''monolithic'' political influence
either on Washington or on students, and he said Harvard's influence on
education was much more obvious. As proof, he swung an arm toward the law school
and mentioned the case-study system. He spoke of the core curriculum program
(''We'll have to see how history treats these things,'' he said with
characteristic reserve), and he spoke of the radical changes in the medical
school.

As for his personal influence, he said his powers inside Harvard were limited by
the financial independence of the university's separate schools, but that he
personally picked each school's dean. ''That creates a certain kind of
relationship between you,'' he pointed out. He also has veto power, in effect,
over tenure decisions. And because each tenure decision is made with the
confidential advice of an ad hoc committee of experts from outside the
department and even outside Harvard, he knows a great deal about each
department. There is, of course, power in such knowledge.

This system of appointments, by the way, which is meant to secure the best
professors in the world, also downgrades the powers of departments and their
proteges - including a lot of junior faculty - and in fact Harvard's junior
teachers usually fail to get tenure.

This causes much anguish among the people who do 40 percent of the teaching of
Harvard's undergraduates, and, for this and other reasons, Harvard's system of
appointments remains largely uncopied.

Bok called teaching ''the weak part of the equation.'' The strong part was
research. And he said he was concerned about undergraduates -though he had some
nice things to say about today's students. They aren't as obsessed with their
studies as some previous generations. They seem more mature, less silly.

But it bothers him that they are more interested in making money and achieving
power than they were 15 years ago (according to one study he cited), and that
they're less interested in improving their environments and the relations among
races.

He is troubled about attracting the best young professors to the Boston area and
finding them housing (''You wouldn't believe what you get for $250,000 in
Cambridge -slums!'') and about being more helpful to the junior faculty. He said
Harvard has never ceased to interest him. ''The only really bad time was the
Vietnam War,'' Bok said. ''The whole community lost its sense of humor.''

V IETNAM HURT, NOT just because a lot of Harvard's students and teachers opposed
the war, but because some of Harvard's most eminent minds, from McGeorge Bundy
to Henry Kissinger, got deeply involved over the course of 15 years in creating
Washington's Vietnam policy. The community became so deeply divided it nearly
fell apart.

A kind of internationalist interventionism long ago came to be a leading idea in
Harvard's conception of foreign affairs. Samuel Eliot Morison once wrote that so
many powerful Harvard men had helped start the Spanish-American War - including
William Randolph Hearst, Henry Cabot Lodge and Theodore Roosevelt - that Harvard
might say (as the Empress Eugenie reportedly said of the Franco-Prussian War),
''C'est ma guerre, c'est ma petite guerre a moi!''

David Halberstam, class of '55, related in ''The Best and the Brightest'' how
many notable Harvard alumni advanced the idea of intervention in Vietnam. The
spirit of interventionism has surfaced during the Reagan years, too.

Secretary of Defense Weinberger spent seven years at Harvard, at the college and
then the law school, and he loved the place and the rigor and skepticism of his
teachers. ''They quite literally taught you how to think,'' he recalled from
Washington the other day. He became a lover of reading at Harvard, and says he
still thinks often of Thomas Wolfe's description, in ''Of Time and the River,''
of a book-crazed romantic in the stacks of Widener trying to read every book in
the library.

Although Weinberger remembers being stimulated to hear that the Boston Tea Party
was ''nothing but a bunch of ruffians hired by local merchants,'' he doesn't
believe Harvard influenced his basic thoughts on military matters. ''I entered a
strong basic conservative,'' he said, an opponent of the New Deal, and he
recalls having ''ample opportunity'' to express his views. He left Harvard a
conservative and is one today - although compared to some in the Administration,
he has been an occasional moderate on the introduction of combat troops.

Harvard has exerted enormous influence not just over war and peace but over
Government policy generally. There were the economics of the New Deal, for
example. ''The Keynesian revolution did not come directly to Washington,'' John
Kenneth Galbraith recalled one day in the library of his house in Cambridge.
''It came by Harvard. The original Keynesians in Washington were all Harvard
people.''

Going to Washington became a tradition, especially for younger Harvard people
-graduate students and junior faculty. ''A hundred years ago, or 80 years ago,
young people would have spent a year on the Continent, in Europe,'' said John
Dunlop, a Harvard economist who was President Ford's Secretary of Labor. But the
Continental tour became the Washington tour, and ''almost regardless of the
political party in power.'' According to Dunlop, it is still considered
respectable to go to Washington for a while, but ''it is not respectable to stay
there.''

H ARVARD PEOPLE have often been accused of snobbery and priggishness. Benjamin
Franklin, for example - a Boston-born genius who did not go to Harvard - wrote
in 1722 that Harvardians ''learn little more than how to carry themselves
handsomely, and enter a Room genteely (which might as well be acquired at a
Dancing-school),'' and that they graduate, after causing their parents much
trouble and expense, ''as great Blockheads as ever, only more proud and
self-conceited.''

It is at least arguable that Harvard has made major pedagogical missteps.
Morison, one of countless admirers of Eliot's imperial presidency, nonetheless
joined the conservative critics in lamenting the way Harvard dropped its Latin
and Greek requirements for entering freshmen. Eliot's and Harvard's prestige
(combined with the scientific spirit of the age) soon caused high schools across
the country to drop the classics. Morison called the loss ''the greatest
educational crime of the century.''

Donald Fleming, the historian, has written that the underlying cultural and
political message of many of Harvard's famous humanists during Harvard's
''golden age'' under Eliot was nostalgic - pro-English, pro-aristocratic,
hostile to immigration. Fleming also thinks Harvard's democratic admissions
policies have been exaggerated and says Harvard's students still come
disproportionately from the upper managerial classes of New England and the
mid-Atlantic states. (Whatever their class, 55 percent of the class of '89 comes
from these areas.) Galbraith thinks Harvard's policy-minded professors tend to
assume that the hypothetical ''middle position'' between extremes is usually the
best or true position. They have, moreover, viewed public administration as
potentially neutral - beyond the reach of values and ideologies. Galbraith
thinks both such notions are pernicious.

Even Harvard's best friends note that its unsupervised, unstructured atmosphere
causes some undergraduates to flounder. David Riesman, the sociologist, said one
afternoon that the heady myth of Harvard's greatness ''almost seizes some
undergraduates and makes them less vibrant.'' He said, too: ''I wish the
students had more interesting ambitions. I keep telling them that the Peace
Corps wouldn't really hurt their resumes.''

Yet even given the drawbacks, Harvard has powerful charms. It may be vain at
times, but its humor and seriousness are unsurpassed. So are the pith and energy
of its public arguments, whether over human nature or South Africa or taking
grants from the C.I.A. ''It's one of the criticisms of Harvard that its stars do
not have the coherence of constellations,'' the chemist Jeremy Knowles observed.
In fact, Harvard is as disputatious as it was in Cotton Mather's day. But it
does dispute splendidly. ''We don't exist to solve problems,'' Henry Rosovsky
said. ''We exist just as much to raise problems.''

It's amazing, when all is said, to consider a dinner for Harvard's Society of
Fellows, one of the world's most exclusive scholarly associations, which also
supports promising young scholars. The last such dinner gathered together Walter
Gilbert, the Nobel Prize-winning biologist, Willard Quine, whom some consider
the most eminent living philosopher, a young biochemist-cum-artist named Dan
Jay, and dozens of other extraordinary minds.

It's almost moving to hear pink-jowled Walter Cabot, president of the Harvard
Management Company, which handles Harvard's gigantic endowment, talk of the
general drift of price-earnings ratios since 1870. (Time is money.) As for the
future, Cabot is cautious: ''I think the financial markets have a chaunce of
being good to us.''

It's gratifying to hear Riesman describe a meeting during the 1960's at which a
Harvard alumnus asked president Pusey if admissions policies couldn't be changed
to rid the school of protesters. ''He was shamed by his fellow alumni,'' Riesman
said proudly.  It was a pleasure, too, last spring, to join the annual dinner of
the Signet Society, a 116-year-old literary club for undergraduates and
professors. The guests sat back at their tables in the Faculty Club -pale faces,
red faces, elegant shocks of white hair, the half-childlike faces of
adolescents, a colorful punk hairdo or two, and everyone in evening clothes -
and listened silently to a string trio of superb undergraduate musicians.

Later, the Irish poet Seamus Heaney, Harvard's Boylston Professor of Rhetoric,
recited some of his verses, which sounded as if Yeats had come back to life; and
then, Helen Vendler, a professor of English, told everyone what Heaney meant. At
one point, a great silver bowl of champagne went around the room, and hundreds
of people sipped from it, as if nobody had heard of communicable diseases. And
still later, at the Signet's clubhouse, the undergraduates got intelligently
rowdy. They obviously felt, as such undergraduates do, that they were special,
as they were.

And Heaney spoke the first lines of his poem for Harvard's 350th birthday party:

A spirit moved. John Harvard walked the yard.

The atom lay unsplit, the west unwon, The books stood open and the gates
unbarred.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of president Derek Bok at Harvard commencement (Ira Wyman/Sygma);
Harvard historical photos (Courtesy of Harvard University Archives) (pages
16-21); Photo of Memorial Hall (David Burnett/Contact) (page 18); Photo of
Faculty Club (David Burnett/Contact) (page 20)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 721 words


Lawrence Block's WHEN THE SACRED GINMILL CLOSES (Arbor House, $15.95) is an
exercise in nostalgia. It also is a sad book about lonely people with few inner
resources. It takes Matthew Scudder, Mr. Block's private eye, back to 1975, a
time when Scudder was slowly drinking himself to death in various midtown New
York gin mills.

Scudder himself tells the story and describes the cases with which he was
involved in a slow, often meandering, reminiscent manner. But this is a novel
written by a very experienced practitioner who knows exactly what he is doing.
At the end everything comes together, and one ends up with great respect for
Scudder and the way he does things, even if his methods are a little irregular
(not to say illegal).

He is present when two masked men rob one of his favorite joints at gunpoint,
and he is asked by the proprietors to try to find the criminals. He is hired by
the owners of another bar, whose books have been stolen and held for ransom. If
the Internal Revenue Service gets its hands on those crooked books, it could
mean a long jail sentence for all concerned. There also is a murder case in
which the chief suspect has an impregnable alibi.

The writing is realistic in the best sense of the word. There are no artificial
heroics, forced lines of dialogue or false moves. Mr. Block knows his New York
and the way people speak. Once in a while, perhaps to show his virtuosity, he
inserts a few set pieces that slow the action up a bit. Yet these are so well
done that nobody can object too much. Throughout the book the author sustains a
mood - a dark, brooding mood in which nocturnal characters desperately cling to
one another because they have nothing much else to do. And because they are
afraid of themselves and of life.

International terrorism in Los Angeles is the subject of THE FROG AND THE
SCORPION by A. E. Maxwell (Doubleday, $16.95), and the book brings back Fiddler,
the rich (inheritance plus wise investments) private eye. Fiddler, who does not
seem to have a first name, is so called because in his youth, he claims, he was
a promising violinist. He also says that he quit because he knew he never could
make it to the top. Judging from the few comments he lets drop about music, he
was doubtless right in abandoning his musical career.

He is a man's man, two inches over six feet tall, who drives only the best and
fastest cars, beds only the most beautiful women, takes on only the most lethal
villains. In ''The Frog and the Scorpion,'' one of his friends, an Iranian Jew
illegally in the United States, is being blackmailed by the head of an Arab
terrorist group - a fanatic in the Palestine Liberation Organization who was a
key figure in the Munich slaughter of Israeli athletes. He is very good at his
trade. So is Fiddler, who links up with an Israeli father-and-daughter team to
conquer the forces of darkness in an ending full of violent but conventional
heroics.

Naturally, the daughter is radiantly beautiful. There is a romance, and she and
Fiddler engage in some vapid talk and philosophizing. Some of their dialogue
descends to the lowest cliches of romantic pulp fiction: ''Sharai wrapped her
arms around me and hung on. 'I know,' she whispered. 'Thank you for caring,
Fiddler. Thank you for last night.' '' The other parts of the book read better,
though not much.

James Patterson's BLACK MARKET (Simon & Schuster, $17.95) is an ambitious,
hysterical and really awful piece of work. It starts with a group named the
Green Band firebombing Wall Street. Local and Federal agencies mobilize to stop
the group.

We learn early in the story that all the members of the Green Band are Vietnam
veterans. Other terrorists, trained by Arabs and Russians, enter the picture.
Security forces get nowhere; the enemy is always a step ahead. Possible
informants are murdered, sometimes even while talking to the authorities. The
United States is on the brink of economic collapse. The Kremlin watches and
plots. Perhaps this is the time to take over the world?

Yes, an ambitious book indeed. But it is written in superheated prose very heavy
on the italics. Its characters are about as lifelike as Arnold Schwarzenegger or
- what's the other guy's name? - Stallone something. The entire scenario is
artificial and unbelievable. Don't waste your time here.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of pop musician John Taylor (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 22, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A Big Push for Pentagon Reform

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 441 words


''The defense acquisition system has basic problems that must be corrected.'' So
concludes the President's Commission on Defense Management headed by David
Packard, a former Deputy Secretary of Defense. Its verdict is no great surprise.
But its authoritative voice should propel Congress to alter the way the Pentagon
buys weapons and structures its military command.

The Packard commission picked up its broom a year ago in the wake of scandals
about weapons that didn't work, spare parts that cost too much and accounting
crimes by defense contractors. The commission rightly concludes that
misbillings, of the sort to which Litton Industries has just pleaded guilty, are
superficial symptoms. So too is a more serious disability, the ''gold-plating''
of weapons. But its report neglects to connect these maladies to the
institutional arrangements by which the underlying disease is spread.

The Army, Navy and Air Force each support overstaffed procurement agencies. Each
insists on adding special features, and complexity, to designs. Contractors
protected from competition by the Pentagon bureaucracy then charge prodigious
prices for unreliable weapons. And since the Pentagon's developers of any new
weapon are also charged with testing it, unmanageable complexity is usually no
bar to the weapon's procurement.

The commission favors more competition among contractors, but ignores the
''revolving door'' through which contractors dangle future jobs before their
Pentagon employers. The commission remarks on inadequate testing but fails to
insist on independent testing.

The Packard commission more effectively addresses the creaky structure of
military command. Both the House and Senate have passed bills to streamline the
Joint Chiefs of Staff and to strengthen field commanders' authority over Army,
Navy and Air Force units assigned to them. This reorganization, long in
gestation, was prompted by concern about military performance in arenas from
Vietnam to Grenada.

The commission generally endorses the proposed changes. But it warns Congress to
ease the ''stifling burdens of regulation, reporting and oversight'' it has
placed on the Pentagon and recommends a broader approach in reviewing the
Pentagon's budget.

The Defense Department under Caspar Weinberger has been determined to spend more
bucks rather than to get more bang out of the bucks it has. Congress, alert to
widespread perceptions of Pentagon profligacy, has tried to press Mr. Weinberger
to reform. Now the Packard commission, composed of former officials of high
military and civilian rank, insists, politely but unmistakably, that reform is
overdue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 22, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DRAMA: 'STATE OF BOOGEDY BOOGEDY'

BYLINE: By D.J.R. BRUCKNER

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 631 words


NEBUCHADNEZZAR is on trial in ''The Sovereign State of Boogedy Boogedy'' at the
New Federal Theater; his judges are Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-Nego and his
lawyer is Danielle. But, while Lonnie Carter has cool revelations about justice
to unveil, this courtroom is no place of order and decorum. The judges have all
dabbled in petty crime; the angel who rescues the three men from the fiery
furnace is a fireman of dubious morals; the king, possibly on the principle that
the sins of sons will be visited on their fathers, is shackled with a charge he
threw Danielle into the lions' den and doomed by the handwriting on the wall
that spelled the downfall of Belshazzar in the Bible, and Danielle is reduced to
stunned horror by the fate of the false accusers who persuaded the king to fling
her to the big cats.

The judges test Danielle with dozens of ridiculous riddles (''Pretend you are
green and wearing a mask; what are you?'' ''The lone lime.''), crack dreadful
jokes and bound off the bench to play basketball, tell tall tales or dance and
mime the words of recorded songs - leading Danielle to point at them commanding,
''Get behind me, Temptations.''

In a more serious vein, the judges assume other characters whose stories explore
more familiar moral problems - the war in Vietnam, the guilt of slum landlords
and industrial polluters, the sins of child molesters, the tyranny of machine
politicians and many more. There is so much going on in this play that it seems
at times not the big top, let alone this little theater, could contain it. The
director, Dennis Zacek, keeps all the wild action zipping along like an old
musical (indeed, the play has the feel of a musical that somehow lost its pit
band), but in the end he cannot prevent one from feeling bamboozled and a little
annoyed by the emotional and intellectual confusion of this farce.

But the actors have so much fun with Mr. Carter's outrageous manipulations of
language and logic that one cannot stay annoyed for long. Helmar Augustus Cooper
as Shadrach takes one's breath away with some of his verbal stunts, which often
sound like a black version of the language of James Joyce in ''Ulysses.'' As a
legless veteran zooming around on wheels, then as a Perry Mason in a wheelchair
he dismantles power structures, and in a pair of sunglasses he tells an
uproarious story about one Sapphire Divine and her son Ray Wonder.

Andre De Shields and Angela Sargeant have tougher assignments as the king in the
dock and Danielle the attorney, since they have to bear the load of their own
and everyone else's anger without looking like mere victims of these lunatic
judges. By the end Mr. De Shields, every inch a king, has so entirely captured
the audience's sympathy that his acquittal is a kind of catharsis. Miss
Sargeant's expressions, when she considers the fate of Danielle's false
accusers, are so eloquent of suffering that one hopes to see her again, in roles
that will give her more scope.

The handwriting on the wall deserves a mention, too. Bob Edmonds puts it over
the judges' bench. A little wooden hand moves across the wall and ''mene, mene,
tekel, upharsin'' lights up the room; that may be the most clever play with
words in this entire circus of language.

LANGUAGE LUNACY - THE SOVEREIGN STATE OF BOOGEDY

BOOGEDY, by Lonnie Carter; directed by Dennis Zacek; set by Bob Edmonds;
lighting by William H. Grant, 3d; costumes by Judy Dearing; sound by Galen G.
Ramsey; production stage manager, Jesse Wooden Jr. Presented by Henry Street
Settlement's New Federal Theater, Woodie King Jr., producer. At 466 Grand
Street: Abed-Nego...Reggie MontgomeryShadrach...Helmar Augustus
CooperMeshach...Robert JasonDanielle...Angela SargeantNebuchadnezzar...Andre De
ShieldsFourth Man...Brian Thomas

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Angela Sargeant and Andrew De Shields (Bert Andrews)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 23, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Think of Immigrants as Mostly Women

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 300 words


To the Editor:

Your otherwise informative news article contrasting mass immigration at the turn
of the century and now (front page, June 30), neglects to mention one of the
most striking differences: immigrants then were mostly men, while immigrants now
are mostly women.

Indeed, women have outnumbered men as immigrants to the United States in every
year since 1930. By failing to recognize this, you help perpetuate the myth that
most international migrants are men seeking employment opportunities in
countries other than those of their birth. Women predominate as immigrants from
many regions of the world. Only a few Asian countries, such as Vietnam and
India, send mostly male immigrants, while Korea, the Philippines and Thailand
predominantly send females. Women dominate most immigration from Europe, while
men dominate the relatively smaller flow from Africa. Women also outnumber men
from most countries in the Western Hemisphere, except Mexico.

There is no obvious explanation why some countries send predominantly female
immigrants while others send mostly men. As you discussed, changes in the
national origins of immigrants are attributed to the 1965 and 1978 amendments to
the Immigration and Nationality Act, which finally eliminated all
national-origin quotas.

However, these changes go only so far to explain the peculiarly female
immigration from some countries and not others. For example, an emphasis on
family reunification in the 1965 and 1978 amendments is a partial explanation
for the predominance of women immigrants as a whole, since parents and spouses
of U.S. citizens and alien residents are mostly female and exempt from the
admission preference system employed by the Immigration and Naturalization
Service. KATHARINE M. DONATO Stony Brook, L.I., July 4, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 23, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

IN PRAISE OF THE LOBSTER: FROM POT TO PLATE

BYLINE: By NANCY HARMON JENKINS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 6; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1311 words


AT 9 o'clock on a July morning, the fog hangs thickly over the Fox Island
Thoroughfare, a narrow body of water separating the islands of North Haven and
Vinalhaven in Penobscot Bay in Maine. Peter MacDonald, a North Haven lobster
fisherman, is pulling his first traps of the day. He is off to a late start
because of heavy rain.

''My God, son, we just made another dollar and a half,'' he says with mock
sarcasm, as 11-year-old Jason MacDonald, his son and sternman on the 36-foot
lobster boat ''Lucky Lady II'' oversees the emptying of the large wire-mesh
trap. Its contents: half a dozen starfish and sea urchins, a length of kelp, a
few fat crabs, a small skate and one lobster, its body, or carapace, slightly
longer than the 3 3/16-inch minimum legal length. The lobster weighs just about
a pound. It has probably taken seven years to reach this size, during which time
it has molted, changing its shell, at least 15 times.

The lobster in Mr. MacDonald's trap may be served to a happy tourist at a Maine
lobster shack. Or it may go into the steaming kettles of fancy restaurants
anywhere from Paris to New York to Tokyo. Maine lobster - as it is often called
whether it comes from Maine, Massachusetts or the Canadian Maritime Provinces -
currently sells for around $8 or $9 a pound retail in New York City and is one
of those rare and expensive gastronomic treats that seem to symbolize the very
word ''gourmet.''

We are speaking here of the true lobster, Homarus americanus, denizen of the
coastal shelves of the western edge of the North Atlantic Ocean. True lobsters
have two claws, a heavy crusher claw and a skinnier ripper claw, unlike rock
lobster or crayfish or spiny lobster or any of the other names by which its less
desirable clawless cousin, Palinurus vulgaris, is known. Their dense, rich,
tender, sweet flesh makes them the prized crustacean.

Most lobsters are caught by fishermen like Mr. MacDonald, who returned to his
native North Haven after serving with the Marines in Vietnam. Young Jason
MacDonald is the fourth generation of his family to ply this trade. ''He has his
grandfather's license,'' Mr. MacDonald says with pride, ''and my brother has our
grandfather's license.''

On most July mornings Mr. Mac=

Donald hauls 150 traps. By late August, at the height of the season, when warmer
waters make lobsters more active, he will have 500 traps set and work will begin
at 4 A.M.

Working swiftly, he empties the lobster pot, binding the creature's
vicious-looking claws with thick yellow bands. Jason empties the bait bag,
gingerly, to the waiting horde of screaming seagulls, and replaces it with
another, packed with salted, rotten herring - a lobster's delight.

The ''Lucky Lady II'' - a typical version of the classic Beals Island boat -
costs about $60,000, complete with the two-way radio, radar, depth sounder and
other gear that allows fishermen to operate with some security in fogs,
hurricanes and winter storms.

Few lobstermen have grown rich hauling traps. They do it for tradition, mostly,
and for the independent life they say it affords. The islands and harbors of
Maine are still places where men honor their fathers and grandfathers by
continuing a way of life that is venerable and dignified. ''Independent as a hog
on ice'' is a Maine expression for the typical lobster fisherman, cantankerous,
taciturn and adept at self-mockery.

One man, one boat and the sea: The romantic vision is often belied by
unrelenting work, aching backs, arthritis and little in the bank to see the
family through the winter. But the romance returns in the hush of a summer
morning when the sea rolls over barnacle-encrusted rocks and a majestic bald
eagle waits on a dead tree limb for its prey.

Maine is the only place with both a minimum and maximum size limit.

Lobsters smaller than 3 3/16 inches, longer than 5 inches or ''berried'' females
- with egg clusters attached - must be thrown back. Penalties for infractions
are severe, including loss of the fisherman's license, and Mr. MacDonald
discards about two of every three lobsters caught. While the efficacy of such
conservation measures is frequently debated, the Maine lobster catch has
remained fairly constant during the last five or six years, according to Robert
D. Lewis, a research scientist of the state's Department of Marine Resources. In
1982, one of the best years in recent memory, 10,384 metric tons of lobster were
caught, Mr. Lewis said. That catch was taken from 2 million traps set by 8,900
licensed lobster fishermen, many of whom worked only part time. But if more
recent years have shown small declines from that record high - 9,127 metric tons
in 1985, for instance -their consistency is considered significant by department
specialists.

For what is often thought of as an elitist food with a small market, lobsters
are the most important segment of fishing in Maine and Massachusetts. In the
last five years, the landed value of the Maine lobster catch has been around $50
million. The income derived from the fishery - from banks to boat builders to
knitters of bait bags - brings in another $100 million. In Massachusetts, where
the annual catch has hovered around 12 million pounds worth $30 million to the
fishermen, 1985 saw an unexpected increase of 2 million pounds, according to
officials of the state's Division of Marine Fisheries.

''The group in trouble is not the lobsters but the fishermen,'' said Mr. Lewis
of the Maine Department of Marine Resources. He blamed the weather, pesticide
contamination, increasing water temperatures, overfishing and bad management
practices. But the key factor, Mr. Lewis said, is Canada.

Three-quarters of all Canadian lobster exports go to the United States, where
nearly 25 percent of all lobsters consumed - fresh, frozen and canned - come
from Canadian waters. In 1985, according to the Fisheries Council of Canada,
12,230 metric tons of live lobsters, valued at $116 million Canadian, were
shipped to this country from Canada. That was an increase of 16 percent in
volume and 7 percent in value compared with the previous year. While United
States fishermen complain that their Canadian colleagues are Government
subsidized, Ron Bulmer, the president of the Fisheries Council, says subsidies
are minimal and none are specifically aimed at protecting the lobster industry.

''Less than one-tenth of 1 percent of all lobster eggs hatched in the wild
survive to maturity,'' said Michael Syslo, the director of the Massachusetts
State Lobster Hatchery and Research Station on Martha's Vineyard.

''But at the hatchery we can get as much as an 80 percent survival rate.''

The hatchery uses special rearing tanks, warm water to promote year-round growth
and regular feeding to reduce the lobster's natural cannibalism - a major threat
to its survival.

The hatchery releases a half million one-month-old lobsters into local waters
each season.

Aquaculture, long thought impossible with lobsters, is becoming a brighter
prospect for the future. ''You can do it biologically,'' Mr. Syslo said, ''but
can you do it and make money?'' It takes five pounds of fresh fish and
shellfish, the finicky lobster's favorite diet, to produce one pound of lobster
meat, he said.

For the immediate future, the lobster on diners' plates will come from icy North
Atlantic waters, caught by fishermen like Mr. MacDonald in a tradition that is
older than this century. As his afternoon wears on, mist clouds the windscreen
of ''Lucky Lady II'' and the fog outside deepens.

The radio crackles with news as fishermen and yachtsmen converse:

''We're in Camden,'' comes a report from that coastal resort, ''doing some
shopping and waiting for the weather to break.'' Chewing on one of the yellow
rubber lobster bands, Mr. MacDonald smiles wryly at the yachtsman's life and
pulls his boat around for another haul.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings; Photos of lobsterman Peter MacDonald, his lobster boat
''Lucky Lady II'' and a lobster-eating couple (NYT/Fred R. Conrad); Photo of
Jason MacDonald emptying lobster pots (NYT/Fred R. Conrad) (pg. 8)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 24, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

RUSSIANS STRIKE BACK WITH A RAMBO OF THEIR OWN

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 697 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 23


The newest hero in the Soviet Union is a tough but compassionate commando
officer who leads his men into combat against evil Americans in the summer's hit
movie.

The film's protagonist cuts down Americans with bullets, grenades and knives
before he is felled at the end by a rifle shot in the back that brings gasps
from the audience.

Muscovites have nicknamed him ''Rambo,'' for the American movie character played
by Sylvester Stallone who, in one film, kills dozens of Russians while rescuing
Americans held prisoner in Southeast Asia.

The Soviet authorities have complained about the anti-Soviet tone of Mr.
Stallone's movies and other Hollywood films. One official said American films
were creating heroes who kill ''Reds and Russians not for money, but with a kind
of perverse relish.'' Russians Foil U.S. Agents In the Soviet film, which is
called ''Odinochnoye Plavaniye'' or ''Solo Voyage,'' a commando unit foils an
attempt by agents of the American military-industrial complex to cause a war
between the United States and the Soviet Union that would produce profits for
American arms manufacturers.

Although the movie is careful to differentiate between responsible Americans and
crazed anti-Soviet plotters, the depiction of the United States conforms to the
Soviet vision of a corrupt society dominated by business and military interests.

The movie is the latest effort by the Soviet film industry to produce more
contemporary, compelling dramas that blend ideologically acceptable themes with
fast-paced action.

Many Soviet moviegoers, apparently bored by the hackneyed style of most films,
have been staying home in recent years, producing an economic and creative
depression in the movie industry.

A recent convention of movie makers threw out their old leadership and elected
as their new head Elem Klimov, a 52-year-old director who had been in conflict
with the censors. Unusual Display of Violence ''Solo Voyage,'' while not testing
ideological limits or setting standards for artistic excellence, offers more
action and violence than most Soviet movies.

The plot revolves around the activities of a group of Americans, led by a
psychologically troubled Vietnam veteran who once directed a massacre of
Vietnamese civilians. The Americans work for an agency described as ''more
secret than the Central Intelligence Agency.''

Their mission, designed by military and intelligence officials and businessmen
who are shown hatching the plan as they play a round of golf and later sip
cocktails, is to blow up an American cruise ship in the South Pacific and make
the Soviet Union look responsible.

This, in turn, is supposed to bring United States Navy ships into combat with
Soviet naval forces on maneuvers in the area.

When a cruise missile aimed at the passenger liner goes off course and blows up
a small sailboat, the Vietnam veteran goes berserk and orders his men to fire
another missile, this one armed with a nuclear warhead, at the Soviet warships.

Enter the Soviet commando team, led by Mikhail Nozhkin, a stage and film actor.
Their job is to infiltrate the island stronghold where the Americans are based
and stop the launching of the nuclear missile.

In the movie, filmed in Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Moscow and the Crimea, Russians
outwit and outfight Americans. The movie includes violent scenes that are
unusually explicit, including close-up shots of bullets smashing into heads and
knives piercing necks and abdomens.

In the end, Mr. Nozhkin, who muses during the movie about the unfortunate need
to kill Americans to defend the ''moral and nonmaterialistic'' Soviet Union, is
killed by a dying American who fires one last shot before collapsing.

The movie was directed by Mikhail Tumanishvili and was made by Mosfilm, a major
studio.

At a recent showing in a packed Moscow theater, many in the audience seemed to
get caught up in the action, gasping when Mr. Nozhkin was killed.

Several Muscovites said they found the movie entertaining but lacking in
subtlety.

The ''Rambo'' movies and other films starring Mr. Stallone are popular among
Russians with video recorders who have access to films smuggled into the Soviet
Union.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of scenes from 'Solo Voyage' (Tass)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 24, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'REFUGEE ROAD' ON 13, ON ASIANS

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 459 words


''REFUGEE ROAD'' is a muddle, and something of an anachronism, too. It is a 1981
documentary, made with a 1960's sensibility, and shown, in all the
unpredictability of summertime-doldrums programming, on Channel 13 at 10 o'clock
tonight. At the same time, it does have points of interest.

The principal point of interest is what it says about Southeast Asian refugees:
Their adjustment to American life can be painful; they're not sure they even
want to be here. This is not a new thought, but at least credit the documentary
with saying it imaginatively and well.

The secondary point of interest is the ease, indeed the zeal, with which
''Refugee Road'' misrepresents recent history. Who or what uprooted masses of
people in Southeast Asia and forced them to become refugees? Clearly, the
documentary says, it was the United States. ''Refugee Road'' is explicit.

Thus the opening sequence, which is made up of old television footage from the
Vietnam War. Napalm explodes; people flee; American helicopters hover. The
sequence ends with pictures of a man with a bandaged head coughing up gouts of
blood.

Go then to a refugee camp in Thailand, where families huddle behind fences. A
Cambodian farmer says that he has waited there five years and that two of his
children died in Cambodia. Then, in an interview, an American academic speaks
about the injustice of United States immigration policy. Moments after that, we
are at a rally of the Ku Klux Klan.

''We are totally opposed,'' a Klansman says, ''to any Southeast Asian or any
Mongolian or any colored immigration into this country from anywhere. This is
our religious belief.''

''Refugee Road,'' financed by the National Endowment for the Humanities, is
casual about this; it is simply the way it sees the world. The Cambodian
farmer's children could not have been murdered by the Khmer Rouge. The Laotians
in the documentary could not have fled the Pathet Lao. Vietnamese boat people,
their exodus already five years under way by 1981, are never mentioned. The
United States is the oppressor, and Southeast Asians are the oppressed.

The film maker, Tom Hayes, is steadfast on this. When we see a Laotian family
renting an apartment somewhere in Ohio, the camera comes in close on a framed
photograph on the landlord's table. It is a picture of a soldier in fatigues,
holding an M-16. We are reminded, of course, of the opening sequence.

Meanwhile, when Mr. Hayes's camera is not pressing its world view, it is
provocative, even touching, about the Laotian family. The parents are bereft;
the children are bewildered. Almost in spite of itself, the documentary succeeds
then in telling us something of value. ''Refugee Road'' sees no difference
between what is spurious and what is real.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of scene from 'Refugee Road'

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Former Saigon Envoy And Wife Found Dead

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 144 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 24


Tran Van Chuong, a former Ambassador from South Vietnam, and his wife were found
dead today in their northwest Washington home.

The police would not release details about the deaths, but said that no cause
had been determined and that homicide detectives were investigating.

Mr. Chuong, 88 years old, father of Madam Ngo Dinh Nhu, was Vietnamese
Ambassador to the United States from 1954 to 1963. He resigned in a dispute over
the treatment of Buddhists in his country.

His wife, Nam Tran Chuong, 75, was South Vietnam's observer at the United
Nations in the early 1960's.

Sgt. Joseph Gentile, a Washington police spokesman, said the medical examiner
was classifying the deaths as of undetermined cause pending an autopsy.

Mr. Chuong was Saigon's top representative in Washington during a period that
saw growing American involvement in Southeast Asia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 26, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Police Arrest Son in Deaths Of Former Saigon Diplomats

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 120 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 25


The son of two former South Vietnamese diplomats whose bodies were found in
their home was arrested this evening in their deaths, the police said.

The couple, Tran Van Chuong, 88 years old, South Vietnam's Ambassador to
Washington from 1954 to 1963, and his wife, Nam-Tran Chuong, 75, permanent
observer to the United Nations at the time, were found dead Thursday morning in
their Northwest Washington home.

The suspect, Khiem Tran Van, 60, was arrested at his parents' home and booked on
two counts of murder, said Tom Randolph, a District of Columbia police officer.

The Chuongs resigned their diplomatic posts in 1963 in protest of the treatment
of Buddhists in their country under President Ngo Dinh Diem.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 26, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW CANDIDATE RAISES QUESTIONS FOR G.O.P. IN MASSACHUSETTS

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1031 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, July 25


After enduring growing embarrassment as both their candidates for Governor were
forced to drop out of the race by disclosures about their background,
Massachusetts Republicans this week finally picked a new contender: a wealthy
businessman who is a former Democrat.

But the new candidate, George S. Kariotis, 63 years old, was immediately
confronted with questions about his background, and it remained unclear how he
would surmount an unusual legal obstacle to his candidacy. Because the deadline
has passed, his name cannot appear on the Sept. 16 Republican gubernatorial
primary ballot; however, the names of the two Republican candidates who withdrew
will appear.

Only a formal renunciation of candidacy by the primary winner will open the way
for Mr. Kariotis to run on the Republican general election ballot, officials
say.

The questions about Mr. Kariotis center on the high-technology company he
founded and heads, Alpha Industries, a maker of microwave components, largely
for the military. Last year Alpha Industries pleaded guilty to a Federal charge
of paying kickbacks to get a contract and paid a $100,000 fine. It was also
reported Friday that Alpha Industries was fined $60,000 last year in a separate
state case for illegally dumping chemicals with its waste water.

Not Involved, He Says

In a news conference today, Mr. Kariotis contended he was not personally
involved in either incident since at the time the offenses occurred he was only
chairman of the board of Alpha Industries while his brother, Andrew Kariotis,
was president. ''The chairman of the board is not the same thing as chief
executive officer,'' Mr. Kariotis said. ''I didn't know about these things.''

John A. Volpe, a former Governor who was chairman of a special Republican
commission to find a new candidate, insisted that while some people ''will make
a big deal'' out of the charges against Alpha Industries, he was confident Mr.
Kariotis had nothing to do with the kickbacks or the pollution. Mr. Kariotis's
selection must still be formally approved by the Republican State Committee,
which is scheduled to meet on Aug. 4.

The two previous Republican gubenatorial candidates were Royall H. Switzler, a
State Representative, who admitted he had falsely claimed to have been a captain
in the Special Forces in Vietnam, and Gregory S. Hyatt, a lawyer. Mr. Hyatt
dropped out of the race last week after charges that he had sought campaign
funds from a reputed leader of organized crime in Massachusetts were made. He
was earlier accused by a former employer of appearing naked in his office and
admitted that many of the signatures on his nomination papers were forged.

The series of disclosures about the Republican candidates come at a time when
the state party is struggling to revive itself after a long period of decline.
No Republican has won a statewide race here since 1972, and this year the
Republicans are fielding candidates for only a third of the 200 seats in the two
houses of the Legislature, the lowest total in years. Republican enrollment has
sagged to 15 percent of registered voters, as against 47 percent for the
Democrats.

A Party in Transition

The Republican decline in Massachusetts coincides with a transition in the party
as its leadership has shifted from old-line moderate Yankees like Henry Cabot
Lodge to a new group of right-wing, wealthy businessmen and disgruntled former
Democrats from ethnic and working-class communities.

Mr. Kariotis in some ways personifies this trend. The son of poor immigrants
from Greece, he became a Democrat in the New Deal era of Franklin D. Roosevelt
while his father earned $11 a week from the Works Progress Administration. After
a stint in the Navy in World War II, Mr. Kariotis realized what he described in
his news conference as the American dream, founding his own company, Alpha
Industries. From 1979 to 1983, while Edward J. King, at the time a Democrat, was
Governor, Mr. Kariotis served as his Secretary of Economic Affairs and won
widespread respect from the business community for his interest in reducing
taxes and attracting new investment in Massachusetts.

But former Governor King has since become a Republican, and Mr. Kariotis
followed his lead, saying in his news conference that he preferred the economic
policies of President Reagan to what he charged were the ''tax and spend''
policies of Gov. Michael S. Dukakis.

Mr. Kariotis becomes one of three Republican statewide candidates in
Massachusetts of Greek descent. The others are Nicholas Nikitas, the candidate
for Lieutenant Governor, and Andrew S. Natsios, the Republican state party
chairman who is a candidate for State Auditor. Mr. Kariotis's Democratic
opponent, Governor Dukakis, is also of Greek descent.

The Popularity of Dukakis

One of the major reasons for chosing Mr. Kariotis, several Republican officials
said, is that he is a wealthy man who will be able to provide money for his
campaign from his own pocket at a time when Republican fund-raising in
Massachusetts has been made difficult by the party's series of embarrassments.
Mr. Kariotis also has a reputation for being personable and candid, although he
is not an experienced campaigner. Mr. Dukakis, who is completing his second
term, is considered very popular, even with Republicans, according to recent
public opinion polls, and few political specialists here give Mr. Kariotis much
chance of winning.

Indeed, for Mr. Kariotis's name to appear on the November election ballot the
man who wins the most votes in the Republican primary, either Mr. Switzler or
Mr. Hyatt, must sign a pledge that he is not running. Both men say they have
withdrawn, but Mr. Kariotis cannot be a legal candidate until after the
Republican primary and then the official renunciation of candidacy by the
winner, according to both Republican and Democratic officials.

In the meantime, a spokesman for the Republican state party said it had not been
decided whether Mr. Kariotis would try to run as a write-in candidate in the
primary. His vote total would be largely symbolic, the spokesman said, since he
cannot be a legal candidate until the other obstacles are overcome.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of George S. Kariotis (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 26, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

15-YEAR-OLD IS ARRESTED IN SHOOTING OF AN OFFICER

BYLINE: By ROBERT O. BOORSTIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 642 words


A 15-year-old youth, believed by police to be a member of a Chinatown gang, was
arrested yesterday and charged with shooting a police officer during an exchange
of gunfire in a lower Manhattan park early Tuesday, the police said.

The suspect, Trini Sham, whose address is unknown, will be charged as an adult
with attempted murder of the police officer, James Dora. Officer Dora, who
underwent surgery for cheek and hand wounds, was reported yesterday to be
recovering well at the Bellevue Hospital Center, according to a hospital
spokesman.

The suspect and another youth, Lee Lang Chiu, 18, of 27 Rutgers Street in
Manhattan, were arrested early yesterday morning in a Queens house used by Asian
immigrant youths. Both youths were also expected to be arraigned late last night
or today on charges of possessing deadly weapons, according to a spokesman for
the Manhattan District Attorney.

The arrest of Trini Sham marked the second time in two weeks that a 15-year-old
has been arrested in connection with the shooting of a police officer. Shavod
Jones of Manhattan has been charged with attempted murder in the July 12
shooting of Officer Steven McDonald, who is paralyzed from the neck down at
Bellevue Hospital.

A Recent Arrival

If convicted, Trini Sham could face a prison sentence of 8 to 10 years.

Like the Jones youth, who has a history of encounters with city criminal-justice
and social-service authorities, Trini Sham had been in trouble with Family
Court, the police said. He had an outstanding warrant at the time of his arrest,
investigators said. They did not specify the charges in the warrant.

Two police officials said investigations have linked Trini Sham to the Fook
Ching gang, a Chinatown group that draws its members from the Chinese coastal
province of Fujian. The police believe the Sham youth was born in China and
raised in Vietnam and then lived in Hong Kong before coming to New York two
years ago.

Detectives said they believed the Sham youth does not live with his family. His
mother, who lives at 215 Bay 35th Street in the Brighton Beach section of
Brooklyn, has been identified, the police said, but they declined to give her
name. ''His father is either in jail or in Hong Kong, depending on which story
you believe,'' one detective said.

Gunfire in Chinatown

According to a police account, the Sham youth apparently fired two shots at
Officer Dora when the officer, not in uniform, encountered him in Columbus Park,
behind the Manhattan Criminal Court building, at 4:30 A.M. Tuesday.

After leaving the court building, Officer Dora had heard gunfire - what police
yesterday described as shooting between the Sham youth and Mr. Lee and members
of a Chinatown gang, known as the Flying Dragons, at the intersection of Pell
and Mott Streets. Officer Dora ran into the park, where the youths had come
apparently to dump two guns, the police said.

Officer Dora, according to the police, identified himself and ordered Trini Sham
to drop his gun. When the youth refused and began to fire, Officer Dora emptied
his five-shot off-duty revolver at his assailant, the police said.

Getaway Car Used

Investigators later recovered a .38-caliber revolver and a .357 Magnum in the
park. Ballistic tests later determined that the two bullets that hit Officer
Dora had been fired from the .38-caliber, which had two live rounds still in its
five-round chamber.

Three superficial bullet wounds on the Sham youth's left leg, back and buttocks
apparently matched bullets fired from Officer Dora's gun.

The police said they believe Mr. Lee was in the getaway car that Trini Sham
used.

Detectives said that a series of anonymous telephone tips from Chinatown
residents led to the identification of the two youths and yesterday morning's
raid at the house at 104-17 128th Street in Richmond Hill, Queens.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EX-GOV. AVERELL HARRIMAN, ADVISER TO 4 PRESIDENTS, DIES

BYLINE: By ALAN S. OSER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 4960 words


W. Averell Harriman, the durable Democrat who was Governor of New York from 1955
to 1959 and served four Presidents in key diplomatic roles, died early yesterday
at Birchgrove, his home in Yorktown Heights, N.Y. He was 94 years old.  Mr.
Harriman, who had been in failing health for about a month, died of kidney
failure complicated by pneumonia, according to a family spokesman, Robert M.
Shrum, Mr. Harriman, a patrician heir to a railroad fortune, first went to the
Soviet Union as a businessman in 1926, and in subsequent decades he played a
major part in the development of Soviet-American relations. As Ambassador in
Moscow during World War II, he had a rough-and-tumble relationship with Stalin,
going on to carry out crucial negotiations with Communist governments in later
years.

He served also as Secretary of Commerce in the Truman Administration and held a
variety of important positions in business and finance.

Persistent on Way to Success

Patience, persistence, resourcefulness, a grasp of detail and a shrewd sense of
how to get things done were among the qualities that helped Mr. Harriman win his
high government appointments in the administrations of four Democratic
Presidents - Roosevelt, Truman, Johnson and Kennedy -and to get his work done,
decade after decade, with a striking degree of success.

He also benefited from much hard work and, notably as Ambassador in Moscow, from
an independent-mindedness that was nourished by the awareness that he did not
need his salary.

As he put it: ''Fortunately, I'm not dependent on my job to eat and, therefore,
have a certain independence. That is a great advantage.'' And there was his
sheer gusto: Neither age nor shifting political winds could wither the
enthusiasm of William Averell Harriman for affairs of state. His lanky, somewhat
stooped figure was present in the highest councils of the nation and the world
for four decades, so long that to many Americans he was the country's
superdiplomat.

American Plenipotentiary

It was in the later years of his life, when he had already distinguished himself
in business, diplomacy and politics, that he blossomed as the American
plenipotentiary supreme. By the time most of his contemporaries of World War II
diplomacy had died or retired, he was just beginning to amaze his countrymen
with his durability and seemingly inexhaustible vitality.

Mr. Harriman was 70 years old when he negotiated Geneva accords on a civil war
in Laos; 72 when he led the American team that negotiated the 1963 Moscow treaty
banning above-ground nuclear tests, and 76 when he went to Paris to start the
negotiations to end the Vietnam War. To his chagrin, the election in 1968 of a
Republican, Richard M. Nixon, compelled him to turn that task over to other
hands.

All this came in the 1960's, with Presidents Kennedy and Johnson. But he had
already had a long period of diplomatic work under Presidents Roosevelt and
Truman.

''In the last 10 years,'' Mr. Harriman said in 1952, ''I guess I've seen most of
the important political characters -Benes, de Gaulle, Chiang, Adenauer, de
Gasperi and the rest. I've seen Stalin more than any other foreigner has, you
know. Some name did come up the other day - someone I'd never met. I've
forgotten who it was, for the instant. Oh, yes. Nehru.'' Later he also met
Jawaharlal Nehru, the Indian leader.

Among other things, he had been in those years Roosevelt's lend-lease chief in
Britain as well as the United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union, from 1943
to 1946, and to Britain, later in 1946, and Truman's adviser on postwar foreign
policy and coordinator of the Marshall Plan recovery effort in Europe.

In the Democratic Presidential hiatus of the Eisenhower years, Mr. Harriman
tried his hand at politics. His Presidential aspirations were snuffed out at two
Democratic Party conventions, but he managed to win election, by a thin margin,
to his term as Governor of New York.

While he was Governor, and known to some as ''Honest Ave,'' he followed
faithfully in the liberal footsteps of his great predecessors in that office but
left an impression of plodding colorlessness.

And yet, much earlier, in the years after World War I, he had won a reputation
as a shrewd, driving shipping magnate and a vigorous Wall Street financier. He
had gone on to be the chairman of the board of the Union Pacific Railroad, from
1932 to 1942, before serving as an innovative, though unimposing, Secretary of
Commerce from 1946 to 1948. The Look Of a Leader There was no lack of the
physical attributes for political popularity or boardroom leadership. He was a
slim and handsome 6 feet 1, with deeply intent brown eyes, a square jaw and a
demeanor of seriousness that made his sudden broad smile all the more disarming.

His style was not of the outgoing warmth generally associated with the
successful politician, but it fitted the successful negotiator perfectly. First
there were his almost legendary patience and tenacious perseverance.
''Persistence is the key,'' he once said. One official described how that
applied during the test-ban negotiations in 1963: ''He just keeps on talking in
that low monotone.''

Then there was a crafty instinct for dealing with those at the source of power.
An associate described the talent harshly: ''Averell's a power snob.'' Another
put it more generously: ''He wants to know the right people all the time, not
the 'right people' socially but the 'right people' to get things done. He thinks
if you sit down and talk things over sensibly you can work out almost
anything.''

There was also a painstaking mastery of the issues. Mr. Harriman awed his
associates with his grasp of detail - a grasp as firm on the other side's point
of view as on the American.

There were a no-nonsense, businesslike attitude, candor, even bluntness when
called for, and an uncanny ability to maintain the personal respect even of
those with whom he differed. A member of Congress once said of him: ''Averell's
nonprovocative. You just never get mad at him.'' Stalin, who argued vigorously
with Mr. Harriman as Soviet-American relations deteriorated at the close of the
war, expressed his respect with the gift of a white stallion that the Ambassador
had admired in a Soviet military film.

Finally, Mr. Harriman had a resolute grasp of the principles of policy and an
unswerving and rather grand notion of America's role in the international
firmament. ''We must have our hand out in friendship but our guard up,'' he
would say, meaning that in practice the national interest lay in reaching
accommodation, wherever possible, with a Soviet Union whose postwar
international motives he distrusted.

On the personal level, Mr. Harriman had few of the conventional attributes of
the diplomat. He was indifferent to clothes, bored by purely social gatherings
to the point of occasional rudeness and sometimes absent-minded on personal
matters. He was fluent in no foreign language, not even French, the language of
diplomacy. ''My French is excellent, except for the verbs,'' he once remarked,
and it was said that this was about as close to making a joke as he ever came.

This ''last tall timber of the New Deal,'' as Theodore H. White called him, was
born in New York on Nov. 15, 1891, into one of America's wealthiest families. He
was one of six children of the railroad baron E. H. Harriman, who began as a
$5-a-week office boy, rose to head the Union Pacific Railroad and left a fortune
estimated at $70 million to $100 million. His mother was Mary Williamson
Averell, a banker's daughter. The family lived in Arden House, a 40-bedroom
Renaissance-style chateau on 20,000 acres overlooking the Hudson River between
Tuxedo Park and West Point.

His strong-minded father impressed on him the virtues of a healthy body, strong
nerves, an ability to mix with others and public service. ''Great wealth is an
obligation,'' his father declared. ''Whatever you have to do with, you should
try to improve it.''

This view emerged later from the mouth of the son: ''It is as indefensible for a
man who has capital not to apply himself to using it in a way that will be of
most benefit for the country as it is for a laborer to refuse to work. It is the
duty of everyone, rich or poor, to work. I love work - I cannot see how anyone
can prefer to remain idle.''

At Groton and Yale, young Harriman received C's but distinguished himself
athletically. As a rower at Yale, he was made coach of the freshman crew and
then of the varsity. Polo, bowling, handball, badminton, pool, skiing and
croquet were passions at various times. At one time he was the fourth-ranked
polo player in the country.

He taught himself skiing in middle age and became so proficient that when Soviet
security agents were shadowing him while he was Ambassador in the 1940's, a
champion skier had to be assigned to him when he went out on the slopes. And the
croquet games at the Harriman home in Sands Point, L.I., became widely
celebrated.

While he was a senior at Yale, Mr. Harriman was elected to the board of
directors of Union Pacific. He went to work for the railroad as a trackwalker
after graduation from Yale in 1913 and became a vice president a year later. But
he was restless under the shadow of his father's reputation, so he bought a
rundown shipyard in Chester, Pa., in 1917 and quit the railroad to run it.

After World War I his company took over the facilities and prewar trade routes
of the Hamburg-American Line in a deal that was called the biggest in the
history of American shipping. By the age of 29, Mr. Harriman was one of the most
powerful figures in American shipping - shy, astute and hard-working, shipping
writers called him - and he had dreams of establishing an international maritime
empire.

He was also active on Wall Street, forming the investment house of W. A.
Harriman & Company in 1919 and, with his brother, E. Roland Harriman, the
private bank of Harriman Brothers & Company a year later. Later these merged
with Brown Brothers to become Brown Brothers Harriman & Company, in which he was
a general partner before becoming a limited partner when he went into government
service full time.

His investment ventures of the 1920's had a strong international tone. One that
arrested the attention of Wall Street was a deal with the young Bolshevik
Government in the Soviet Union giving the Harriman interests a 20-year
concession to exploit a manganese mine in the Caucasus.

Two years later, in 1926, he visited the Soviet Union and had a four-hour
audience with Trotsky, whom he found brisk, businesslike and penetrating. But he
also found the Soviet Union to be no place for foreign investment. Convinced
that the xenophobic Stalin would win out in the power struggle to come, he
recommended withdrawal from the Soviet venture, and a settlement was negotiated.
''We got our money out with a small profit,'' he said.

His grandiose shipping aspirations gradually expired, and in 1926 he sold his
ships. Six years later he was a railroad man again with his election as chairman
of the board of Union Pacific.

Until 1928 Mr. Harriman was a faithful Republican, but that year brought a
change. There have been various explanations of his turn to the Democrats. Some
said he greatly admired Alfred E. Smith, the New York Governor who ran for
President that year.

Others have pointed to Mr. Harriman's sister Mary, an intellectual who was the
wife of the sculptor Charles Cary Rumsey and a close friend of Frances Perkins,
Secretary of Labor in the Roosevelt Administration. The theory was that Mrs.
Rumsey had something to do with arousing her brother's social conscience and
redirecting his political allegiance.

Years later he himself gave several reasons for his shift. He objected to
Republican isolationism, he said, and favored support for the League of Nations.
He also favored a change in protectionist tariff policies and restraints on
speculative expansion in stock investments.

''I have frequently said, and it has usually gotten a laugh, that I've had a lot
more fun out of life since I've been a Democrat,'' he said. Job Negotiations At
Croquet Game The New Deal found work for a man of great wealth, broad experience
and wide connections in business and finance. It is said that Harry Hopkins, the
New Deal official, recruited him during a game of croquet. The first important
job, in 1934, was as state chairman of the National Recovery Administration,
which prepared and enforced codes of fair competition for business to encourage
economic recovery. He later was named the agency's administrative officer.

In these years he was also a member of the Business Advisory Council of the
Department of Commerce, and in 1937 he was named chairman. His public comments
at the time expressed his strong belief that business must show a sense of
public responsibility.

''People in this country, I believe, are ready to listen to businessmen with
more confidence than they are to the politician,'' he said. ''But when business
people don't offer any hope, don't offer any solution, why, they turn to the
politician for the political cure.''

In early 1941, when the United States was only months away from entering World
War II, Mr. Harriman became chief of the materials branch of the production
division in the Office of Production Management. From there Mr. Hopkins sent him
to Britain just before the passage of the lend-lease bill.

In a matter of months he was flying everywhere from Moscow to the Middle East to
expedite shipments of war aid to the British. ''By my direction he was shown
everything,'' Winston Churchill, then the British Prime Minister, wrote in his
memoirs. So began a vigorously peripatetic international career.

With Lord Beaverbrook of Britain he went to Moscow in 1941 to arrange lend-lease
shipments to the Soviet Union, the new ally of the West. In August 1942 he
returned there, this time with Churchill, to talk about opening a second front
in Europe. A year later he was named Ambassador to Moscow.

During the war Mr. Harriman twice flew in planes that mistakenly came under
Allied fire. ''I once mentioned to Stalin that I had been shot at by the British
and the Russians,'' he recalled. ''Stalin rather liked that.'' The Soviet leader
learned to stand for some unaccustomed backtalk from Ambassador Harriman to his
own blunt criticism of American policy. On one occasion, the American Ambassador
to China, Maj. Gen. Patrick J. Hurley, was witness to an argument that waxed so
hot that he interposed, ''Come, come, gentlemen, things can't be as bad as all
that.''

The combatants stopped only long enough to turn to General Hurley with a
disdainful, who-let-him-in expression and then returned to the fray. Later Mr.
Harriman told General Hurley, ''That was nothing compared to what usually goes
on.''

As Ambassador, Mr. Harriman showed a willingness to make independent decisions
without instructions from Washington.

When the Russians wanted him to forward to Washington a proposed draft for an
Allied reply to a Japanese surrender statement, he declined, telling Stalin that
its language seemed to give the Soviet Union a veto over the selection of
personnel for the Allied High Command that would rule Japan. Stalin changed the
language. In the aftermath of the war, the Ambassador became convinced that the
Soviet Union intended to extend its control over neighboring countries in
violation of the Yalta agreement, as the United States understood it.

As James V. Forrestal, who was to become the first Secretary of Defense,
recalled it, Mr. Harriman said ''that the outward thrust of Communism was not
dead and that we may have to face an ideological warfare just as vigorous and
dangerous as Fascism or Nazism.''

Mr. Harriman therefore advocated a policy of strength and firmness and,
according to Truman, an abandonment of any illusion that the Soviet Union was
likely to act in accordance with the principles of international relations to
which the rest of the world held.

Some later critics said Mr. Harriman's viewpoint helped set the cold war in
motion. In any event, it proved persuasive to Truman and guided his position,
for example, in the wrangling over Poland's postwar government. The West strove
for a broadly representative interim government pending free elections, while
Stalin insisted that the pro-Soviet Lublin regime hold power. Mr. Harriman told
Truman, ''I am afraid Stalin does not and never will understand our interest in
a free Poland as a matter of principle.''

Mr. Harriman placed great emphasis on the importance of the United Nations, then
being formed, in keeping world peace. ''It is a fact that the Russian ideology
is completely different from ours,'' he said, ''but if we both adopt the
attitude of live and let live as to internal affairs and we both respect the
right of all people to choose their own way of life, this barrier needn't be
insurmountable.''

In 1946 Truman acceded to Mr. Harriman's request to be relieved of the Moscow
post but only a month later asked him to go to London as Ambassador. He was
welcomed warmly by the British, but scarcely seven months later he was back in
Washington as Secretary of Commerce.

At Commerce, Mr. Harriman headed a committee that produced a study that helped
bring about the passage of the Economic Cooperation Act, the basis of assistance
to postwar Europe.

But in the public aspects of the post, he was less than a success. He acquired a
reputation as a dreadful public speaker, talking in a slow monotone and sounding
unsure of himself.

In the spring of 1948 Truman had a new assignment for his loyal lieutenant. He
was given the title Special Representative in Europe for the Economic
Cooperation Administration, in effect making him the White House watchdog over
the Marshall Plan in Europe. During the next several years Mr. Harriman traveled
widely and supervised the disbursement of billions of dollars in American goods
and money to American allies, past, present and potential.

Later Truman made Mr. Harriman a special assistant on foreign policy and head of
the Mutual Security Administration. But hardly anyone, until the 1950's, thought
of him as a likely political candidate.

When Truman withdrew from consideration for renomination to the Presidency in
1952, Mr. Harriman came forward as an uncompromising New Deal-Fair Deal liberal.
At the Democratic convention in that year he allied himself with Senator Estes
Kefauver of Tennessee in an attempt to stop the nomination of Adlai E.
Stevenson. They failed.

So Mr. Harriman, still ambitious, still dogged, turned two years later to New
York State, where uncompromising New Deal liberalism had a strong appeal. With
the support of state Democratic chieftains, and especially the Tammany Hall
leader, Carmine G. DeSapio, he won the 1954 gubernatorial nomination over the
antiboss candidate, Franklin D. Roosevelt Jr. For that he paid a price:
Independent voices as well as the Republican opposition charged that he was the
captive of the bosses.

The charge did not die even after the election, in which Mr. Harriman squeaked
through against his Republican opponent, Senator Irving M. Ives, by 11,791 votes
out of five million cast. 'Honest Ave'

Drops the 'W.'

According to one colleague, Adrian S. Fisher, the election changed Mr. Harriman.
''I think in Harriman's life being elected rather than appointed was the
equivalent of meeting a payroll,'' he said. ''Where he was jumpy before, he's
now self-confident. His diffidence in speaking is completely gone.''

Nevertheless, as the Governor -who had adopted the sobriquet ''Honest Ave'' and
dropped the ''W.'' in front of Averell - he never succeeded in inflaming the
imagination or stirring the affection of the New York public.

Once he was said to have telephoned his close assistant, Milton Stewart, during
dinner and reprimanded him in exceptionally strong language for something. Those
at the table kept an embarrassed silence, and soon the Governor placed a second
call to Mr. Stewart. Everyone expected an apology, but instead Mr. Harriman
grumbled into the phone, ''Milt, I just wanted you to know I meant everything I
said.''

Mr. Harriman himself always felt that he compiled a good record as Governor, and
four years later, running for re-election, he set it out before the voters in
rigorous if tedious statistical prose: programs to help the aged; an increase of
77 percent in state aid to education; a quadrupling of the number of authorized
Regents' scholarships; a change in emphasis in mental health from custodial care
to research and treatment aimed at reducing the mental-hospital population,
which fell by 4,000; pioneering advances in privately financed middle-income
housing; legislation providing increased benefits to workers, and steps to
strengthen small business.

Despite all that, Nelson A. Rockefeller won a smashing half-million-vote victory
over Mr. Harriman in 1958. Commentators were not inclined to attribute the
defeat to Mr. Harriman's performance as Governor. There were Mr. Rockefeller's
electric qualities as a campaigner to consider, as well as the public's sour
reaction to a Democratic convention in Buffalo that seemed to fall under Tammany
Hall's domination.

The defeat came on top of Mr. Harriman's second failure, in 1956, to capture the
Presidential nomination. Truman, whose relations with Mr. Stevenson had cooled,
announced support for Mr. Harriman a few days before the Democratic convention.
But Governor Harriman could not get the support of the South, and Mr. Stevenson
was nominated on the first ballot.

With the gubernatorial defeat in 1958, Mr. Harriman declared his political
ambitions ended and the ''W.'' returned to his stationery. He set out on a tour
to India and then to the Soviet Union, where his reception was the most
enthusiastic received by an American in some time.

''Within 48 hours of my arrival no less than three members of the Cabinet
offered me everything from a bear hunt to a nonaggression pact,'' he said. But
that did not prevent what he described as a blunt and brutal talk with Prime
Minister Nikita S. Khrushchev about Soviet-American problems.

As the Presidential campaign of 1960 neared, Mr. Harriman announced for Senator
Kennedy, who, after his nomination, named the former Ambassador one of his
foreign policy advisers. In that capacity Mr. Harriman toured Africa.

After the election Kennedy hesitated to give Mr. Harriman a Government post,
fearing, as Arthur M. Schlesinger wrote in ''A Thousand Days,'' that ''at 69 and
slightly deaf he was too old for active service.'' But there was widespread
enthusiasm for him on the New Frontier, and Kennedy relented with the proviso
that Mr. Harriman be persuaded to wear a hearing aid. He was persuaded.

For his part, Mr. Harriman suffered from no self-doubts. ''I am confident that
before things end up, I will be in the inner circle,'' he told a friend. ''I
started as a private with Roosevelt and worked to the top. And then I had to
start as a private all over again with Truman and work to the top. That is what
I intend to do again.''

Thus Mr. Harriman took on the relatively vague job of Ambassador at Large among
the vigorous young folk in the Kennedy camp. His first task, in 1961, concerned
Laos, where a conflict with cold war overtones was going on among rightists,
neutralists and a pro-Communist faction. Mr. Harriman went to see the neutralist
leader, Prince Souvanna Phouma, in New Delhi and reported favorably on the
Prince's desire for a coalition government with international guarantees of
Laotian neutrality.

The White House was impressed, and in time the United States moved away from its
support of the rightist anti-Communist leader, Phoumi Nosavan, which had been
fostered in the Eisenhower period, toward support of a neutral regime. 'Balanced
Ticket'

At Geneva

The tortuous 14-nation negotiations at Geneva on Laos involved putting together
a government of national union that the Russians, the Chinese and the Americans,
as well as the Laotians themselves, could agree to. Mr. Harriman was effective
at that.''He's putting together a New York State balanced ticket; he's doing a
good job,'' Kennedy remarked. The pleased President made Mr. Harriman Assistant
Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs. In that post he acquired the
nickname ''the Crocodile'' because he tended to bite off abruptly proposals that
seemed to him foolish or irrelevant. And he sought persistently to bring along
youthful and audacious people. ''Do you know what this department needs?'' he
was said to have declared at the age of 71. ''Young blood!''

In 1963 another promotion came - to Under Secretary for Political Affairs, the
No. 3 post in the State Department. In that year he was also named to head the
American team that negotiated with the Soviet Union the treaty banning all
nuclear tests except those conducted underground.

Mr. Harriman never claimed credit for the success of the negotiations. He said
that he knew after speaking to Mr. Khrushchev on the first day that the Russians
had decided that a test-ban treaty would be advantageous, and that the problem
then was merely to agree on the wording. But it was widely agreed that his deft
touch moved the negotiations smartly along and made basic agreement among the
Soviet Union, Britain and the United States possible within five days.

After Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963, Mr. Harriman stayed on with
President Johnson, supporting his controversial determination to press on with
the Vietnam War and undertaking numerous Presidential missions. Meanwhile, at
his own request, Mr. Harriman reverted to the title of Ambassador at Large.

As the 1960's wore on, he played a larger role in the Vietnam problem. He
traveled to Moscow for two meetings with Prime Minister Aleksei N. Kosygin
during one American ''peace offensive,'' trying to persuade the Soviet Union to
coax Hanoi toward the negotiating table. But that effort failed. From there he
went to Belgrade, Bonn, Brussels, Rome and London, explaining Johnson's decision
to escalate the war in the absence of peace talks.

When he returned, Johnson placed him in charge of coordinating the American
effort to get talks started, and in 1966 he traveled throughout the world to
emphasize this American aim. But he remained faithful to the Johnson view that
Vietnam was a critical test of the non-Communist world's ability to stop
so-called wars of national liberation.

He was far from a hawk in the end, however, and as chief of the United States
delegation at the Paris peace talks in 1968 he strove for accommodation. The
South Vietnamese no less than the North Vietnamese frustrated the efforts, and
finally Mr. Harriman was among those who felt that the Nixon Administration dog
had been wagged by the Saigon tail for too long.

After the new Administration had replaced him in Paris, those views made him
popular within the peace movement that kept up pressure on the Republicans for
military withdrawal.

Mr. Harriman remained active in foreign affairs late in his life. In June 1983,
he went to Moscow to confer with Yuri V. Andropov, then the Soviet leader. At
their meeting, in Mr. Andropov's office at the headquarters of the Central
Committee of the Soviet Communist party, Mr. Andropov said his country had a
''sincere and fervent desire'' to restore normal relations with the United
States. He contended that the Reagan Administration was to blame for a situation
that ''cannot but give rise to alarm,'' and he called for a return to peaceful
coexistence.

Reporting on the talks afterward, Mr. Harriman said he had been frank in voicing
his view ''that it was possible for the Soviet Government to take steps which
can improve relations.''

Mr. Harriman married three times. His first wife was Kitty Lanier Lawrence, the
daughter of a New York banker. The couple were divorced in 1929, and a year
later Mr. Harriman married the former Marie Norton, who had been the wife of
Cornelius Vanderbilt Whitney. Mrs. Harriman operated an art gallery in New York,
and she and her husband acquired a notable collection of paintings. She died in
1970.

The following year Mr. Harriman married Pamela Digby Hayward. She was the widow
of Leland Hayward, the theatrical producer, and was the mother, by a previous
marriage to Churchill's son, Randolph, of Sir Winston's grandson, who bears his
grandfather's name.

The home in which Mr. Harriman grew up, Arden House - named after the forest in
''As You Like It'' - was donated to Columbia University. Years earlier, the
family had donated 10,000 acres in its 20,000-acre estate to New York State as a
park, leading the town nearby to change its name from Turner to Harriman.

In 1982 Mr. Harriman donated $10 million, to which his family's Gladys and
Roland Harriman Foundation added $1.5 million, to the Russian Institute at
Columbia University, to promote American studies of the Soviet Union.

Mr. Harriman did so, he said, because the popularity of Soviet studies had
declined in recent years and American ignorance of the Soviet Union was ''very
dangerous.''

The university renamed the institute the W. Averell Harriman Institute for the
Advanced Study of the Soviet Union.

Mr. Harriman is survived by his wife; two daughters by his first marriage, Mary
Harriman Fisk and Kathleen Harriman Mortimer, both of Manhattan; six
grandchildren and six great-grandchildren.

A funeral service is to be held at noon Tuesday at St. Thomas Episcopal Church,
53rd Street and Fifth Avenue. Burial will be later in the day at the Harriman
family estate in Harriman, N.Y.A memorial service is to be held on Sept. 16 at
noon at the National Cathedral in Washington.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of W. Averell Harriman (NYT/George Tames, 1969); Photos of
Harriman with Presidents Roosevelt, 1939; Truman, 1956; and Kennedy, 1963 (AP)
(Pg.23); Photos of Harriman with Churchill and Stalin in 1942; with his wife in
1981 and on skis in 1936 (AP; NYT) (Pg.23)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

$100,000 BOND SET FOR VIETNAMESE HELD IN SLAYING OF PARENTS

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 329 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 26


The 60-year-old son of an exiled South Vietnamese Ambassador to the United
States was held on $100,000 bond today in the slaying of his mother and father,
the parents of Mrs. Ngo Dinh Nhu, who was known as the ''Dragon Lady.''

The police said Khiem Tran Van, who is a lawyer, is accused of beating and
strangling his father, Tran Van Chuong, 88, and mother, Nam Tran Chuong, 76.
Their deaths were reported Thursday by Mr. Khiem, who was arrested Friday night.

Mr. Khiem is the brother of Mrs. Ngo Dinh Nhu, whose brother-in-law was
President Ngo Dinh Diem of South Vietnam. Mrs. Ngo Dinh Nhu, who was known as
the ''Dragon Lady,'' was widely believed to be the real power behind the
family-dominated regime. She was noted for remarks such as a pledge to ''clap
hands'' each time a Buddhist monk set himself afire.

Mr. Khiem, a former paramilitary leader in South Vietnam, was arraigned in
Superior Court today on first-degree murder charges. He is a French citizen.

Bond was set at $100,000, according to a court official, Trudy van Voorhis.

Tests by a coroner determined that the couple died of asphyxiation.

Mr. Chuong resigned as South Vietnam's Ambassador to Washington in 1963 to
protest the Diem Government's treatment of Buddhists. His wife resigned as the
country's United Nations observer. Their split with the Government was
accompanied by an estrangement from their daughter, who now lives in Europe.

In an interview with The Washington Post on Friday, Mr. Khiem said he left his
legal practice in Paris in 1985 to take care of his parents here and had ''no
reason'' to kill them.

The police said Mr. Khiem had been staying at his parents' home since March.

Mr. Khiem said that he ''was not astonished'' at his parents' deaths because
they ''were very old'' and that he had expected them to die soon.

Family members said Mr. Khiem apparently had political differences with his
parents, but the police refused to discuss a motive for the slayings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MUSIC VIEW;
PERIOD PIECES SHOULD BE TAKEN AS THEY ARE

BYLINE: By Donal Henahan

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1173 words


In opera, just as in that other dramatically improbable sphere that we call the
real world, it is sometimes wiser to accept small gifts gladly than to hold out
for the multimillion lottery payoff. It occurred to me, for instance, during a
recent performance of ''Les Pecheurs de Perles'' at the New York City Opera that
Bizet's work is one of a fairly small family of fatally flawed operas that even
the most inspired stage direction cannot much improve. With its impossibly
muddled libretto and intermittently captivating music, this is the sort of faded
period piece that must be taken as is or not at all. Once the listener accepts
the intellectually blasphemous idea that any change will only be for the worse,
a mood of tolerant resignation may overtake him. Given a moderately well-sung
performance, secret flushes of affection may then be felt. Guilty pleasures, as
musical intellectuals and other puritans know, are the best kind, after all.

Even grave dramatic flaws, if the word dramatic can be used in this context,
take on their own lunatic charm in such works, provided the production does not
try to sweep them under the rug. It would take a hard heart not to be enchanted,
for instance, by the plot's basic notion that the priestess-heroine of ''Les
Pecheurs de Perles'' is a kind of rent-a-virgin engaged by a tribe of Ceylonese
pearl fishers to appease the god Brahma - chiefly by wearing a veil, praying in
a highly ornamental coloratura style and practicing utter celibacy - while they
are off diving for treasure. I simply do not want one of your new-wave directors
trying to make this situation plausible by the usual diversionary devices, such
as putting the pearl fishers in dinner jackets or bringing in Leila by
helicopter, dressed as a Vietnamese guerrilla. ''Les Pecheurs de Perles'' is
already an inadvertently surrealistic work and that point need not be belabored.

Attending the City Opera performance of Bizet's opera with that determinedly
innocent mind-set, I was unsettled at the rise of the first-act curtain. As
chorus members pretending to be Ceylonese pearl fishers cavorted and reveled in
standard operatic fashion, I looked up to see a supertitle announcing: ''On
these peaceful shores we will make our camp.'' Oh, my, I thought, what are we in
for tonight? If there is anything a production of ''Les Pecheurs de Perles''
does not need it is intentional humor. It soon became clear, however, that the
projected words were simply an inexplicably hazy translation of the libretto's
opening lines: ''Sur la greve en feu/ Ou dort le flot bleu/ Nous dessons nos
tentes.'' That is to say, according to a more literal translation that I have at
hand: ''On the burning sand/ Where the blue sea sleeps/ We set up our tents.''

The point, of course, is not that appallingly inept operas or perilously fragile
operas should be prized because of their failures, but merely that they are best
taken straight, if at all. What ''Les Pecheurs de Perles'' really has to offer
an audience in 1986 are occasional pages of alluring melody, tunes that stick in
the head, such as the tenor's ''Je crois encore entendre.'' That, and the
opportunity to ponder how and why such fragile charms have managed to survive
almost a century and a quarter of social violence and artistic brutality, all
too accurately reflected in the recent history of musical theater.

Unfortunately, many stage directors of late have been inclined to dismiss such a
laissez-faire approach to opera. Having belatedly discovered the idea of music
drama, often without musical background to give them an understanding of the
fundamental appeal of the art form, they look at every opera as a chance to make
a large, personal statement, perhaps even a cultural or political manifesto of
the sort that brings them to the nonmusical world's notice in the back pages of
news magazines.

The best operas generally receive the most drastic treatment, of course, perhaps
on the theory that they can take it best. And so we get the ''Madama Butterfly''
set in a modern Tokyo brothel, the ''Cosi Fan Tutte'' bent into a comment on the
Vietnam experience, the ''Rigoletto'' transplanted to New York's underworld. All
right, the best of Puccini, Mozart and Verdi will survive. But it is the
irreparably modest, exceedingly minor opera that I fear for, the work that has
little or nothing to offer us but a taste of outmoded musical pleasures, of
opera's pink lemonade and cotton candy.

Preserve me, then, from a ''Rondine'' set in Tribeca, a ''Prince Igor'' set in
the Gulag, a ''Merry Wives'' set in Windsor, Ontario. Let restless stage
directors, fresh from their Shakespeare in the park or Beckett in the round,
work out against the operatic heavyweights - the indestructible old ''Carmen,''
the often-down-but-not-out ''Figaro,'' the knockout-proof ''Tosca.'' Let them,
if they like, climb into the ring with Wagner.

But please, gentlemen and ladies of the stage director community, do not crush
my favorite butterflies on your wheels. Spare the French, especially. Let
''Thais'' alone, and ''Mignon,'' and ''Lakme.'' I am not at all sure I could
continue to enjoy the quaintly exotic music of ''Les Pecheurs de Perles'' if
Bizet's pearl fishers became Maine lobster men, or if their priestess were to be
sent over to them from the Temporary Virgins Employment Agency in Bangor. There
is room for untouched innocence, even in opera.

Lest you think there are no stage directors capable of making sense, offstage,
at least, let me quote some sobering words uttered by Nikolaus Lehnhoff at a
Central Opera Service symposium last November in New York City. Mr. Lehnhoff,
who staged a dramaturgically restrained and generally admirable ''Ring'' last
year in San Francisco, points out that opera direction ''as a style, as an art
form,'' is quite new. ''Actually it has not existed much longer than, let's say,
50 years.'' Until fairly recently, ''the movers of staging were musicians -
conductors - and the Wagner case is a very telling one in this respect.''

Famous designers certainly had been heavily involved in opera - Adolphe Appia
and Alfred Roller, for instance - but with few exceptions they seem to have been
under the thumb of autocratic conductors such as Mahler. For argument's sake,
Mr. Lehnhoff stretches his 50-year limit somewhat, drawing the dividing line at
the world premiere of ''Der Rosenkavalier'' in Dresden in 1911. When the
director assigned to that production could not cope with Strauss's theatrical
style, with its episodes of quasi-realistic conversation, Max Reinhardt was
rushed in at the last hour from Berlin to save the show.

So, along with Stanislavski, who had been working in opera in Russia, the great
Max was perhaps responsible for giving unmusical theater directors the opera
itch. Seventy-five years later, his modestly talented heirs are still at it,
ingeniously recasting the idiom in their own prosaic images, but most often
succeeding only in scratching the surface of opera as a primarily musical art.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Lives of Averell Harriman

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 375 words


Averell Harriman could have devoted his life to his beloved polo and in other
ways squandered the millions he inherited from his railroad-baron father. But if
some Americans were born richer, none have been less idle.

As a leading diplomat, entrepreneur, politician and philanthropist, he was in
the thick of things for an astonishing eight decades. Having dealt with Stalin,
he became above all a voice for sanity in coping with that dictator's
successors. And still he became America's fourth-ranking player at polo.

Mr. Harriman's wealth gave him independence and patrician self-assurance,
qualities that contributed to his success as a gray eminence under four
Democratic Presidents. He was also aloof and a dull public speaker, and failed,
despite election to one term as Governor of New York, in two bids for the
Presidency. So at 69 he undertook a fresh career as an Assistant Secretary in
President Kennedy's State Department, running younger New Frontiersmen ragged.

He became something of a legend in what others would call the advanced years, as
negotiator of the Laos accords, of the landmark treaty banning atmospheric
nuclear tests and in the first probes for peace with North Vietnam. His great
influence had been established in World War II by his clear-headed prescience
about the aggressive expansion of Stalin's empire. Precisely because he had no
illusions about Moscow and carried that armor in American politics, he could
take the lead in efforts to curb the arms race and to negotiate with other
adversaries.

In an age that overrates charisma, Mr. Harriman's dogged virtues stood out. He
had respect for intelligence and a shrewd eye for talent. If scarcely a great
Governor, he nevertheless assembled an impressive team, including talented
rookies like Daniel Patrick Moynihan and the late Jonathan Bingham.

He generously donated Arden House, his boyhood home north of New York City, to
Columbia University, and most recently gave the university new resources to
finance the rebuilding of its Russian Institute.

To the end, this well-born capitalist waged a compassionate politics and feared
ignorant passion in the global competition with Communism. He served when he
could have played and he served abundantly.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GORBACHEV'S DILEMMA

BYLINE: By Harrison Salisbury; Harrison Salisbury is a former New York Times
correspondent, associate editor and editor of the Op-Ed page who has specialized
in Soviet affairs. His latest book is ''The Long March: The Untold Story.''

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3290 words


THERE IS AN OLD RUSSIAN SKAZKA (FAIRY TALE) IN which a wife must wash her hands
into eternity, trying to remove the blood of the husband she murdered. All
summer long the yellow water trucks have been flushing radioactive dust from the
streets of Kiev and a cluster of towns surrounding the crippled Chernobyl
nuclear reactor. By autumn, it is hoped, most of the dust will be gone. Not so
the political fallout. That is a far different matter.

Ten days of talks in the Soviet Union and close monitoring of Soviet diplomatic
and propaganda moves leave little doubt in this reporter's mind that the
Chernobyl nuclear disaster has placed the ''new politics'' of the Soviet leader
Mikhail S. Gorbachev at risk. He has counterattacked with spirit, but it may
take all of his considerable political skill to protect and maintain his
position as first among his Politburo equals.

Chernobyl, many high-ranking

Soviet officials contend, has pushed Gorbachev into a hard-line stance to fend
off moves by old-style Kremlin stalwarts to undercut him.

The problems of retaining power in the Kremlin, the toughest political arena in
the world, are expected by these officials to dominate Gorbachev's thinking on
both domestic and international issues - regardless of summitry, nonsummitry,
White House maneuvers, propaganda offensives, arms negotations, Western unity or
disunity.

Secrecy traditionally shrouds Soviet politics, but the trauma of Chernobyl has
afforded an unusual occasion for some new assessments, the revision of cliches
and the clearing away of wishful thinking on many issues. No one in Moscow is
suggesting Gorbachev has been irrevocably damaged nor that a viable opposition
coalition has yet emerged. What they are saying is that events have played into
the hands of such figures as Andrei A. Gromyko, the last of the old guard in the
Politburo, and military men, including the volatile Marshal Nikolai V. Ogarkov.

The following account is based almost in its entirety upon conversations
conducted in Moscow in recent weeks. The talks, all held on a confidential
basis, included four with high-ranking officials of the Communist Party Central
Committee and Party Secretariat, each of whom has a direct relationship with
Gorbachev. There were also talks with a half-dozen junior advisers, the kind who
draft position papers and recommendations that may or may not be submitted by
their superiors for Politburo consideration. There were talks with several
people who understand the political and personal relationships within the
Politburo.

Most of those canvassed expressed strong support for Gorbachev. Several,
however, offered sharp (if strictly private) criticism. Under Gorbachev, one man
said: ''Nothing has changed. It's all boilerplate, propaganda, pretty words. It
never will change.'' No other individual spoke with such pessimism.

All those interviewed, regardless of their politics or point of view, agreed on
one point: the tragedy of Chernobyl has produced a season of internal crisis in
Moscow. Most of those who expressed an opinion believed Gorbachev would retain
his power - but at what cost? One recalled the U-2 incident of May 1, 1960, in
which the shooting down of an American spy plane over Sverdlovsk derailed
President Eisenhower's plans to visit the Soviet Union. The late Nikita S.
Khrushchev held on for four years as Soviet leader but confessed to an American
friend: ''I never regained my political power. From that time on I was involved
in an uphill struggle.'' Khrushchev was forced to scale down his plans for
change in order to retain office; eventually, he was sacked. BEFORE MAY OF THIS
YEAR, CHERNOBYL MEANT little to most Russians. Named for a dusty gray shrub that
grows on the chalky soil at the nearby conflux of the Dnieper and Pripyat
Rivers, Chernobyl was a sleepy town, set in a land of Russian sagas - of
bogatyri, knights, of the Varangian from the north, of conflict between Goth and
Slav. Near here Vladimir in 988 hurled down the heathen idols from the bluffs of
Kiev and brought his people into Christianity with a mass baptism in the muddy
Dnieper.

It was this dreamy, drowsy corner (Continued on Page 25) of Russia, now
blistered with a formidable assemblage of atomic power plants, that riveted
Moscow's attention during the ''Six Days in May,'' a period from April 28 to May
4, during which, according to a Gorbachev associate, neither the Soviet leader
nor anyone in the Politburo knew when, how - or whether - the nuclear disaster
could be brought under control. In that time, a Gorbachev associate said,
''Frankly, we felt we were on the edge.'' There was fear that the United States
might seize the opportunity for an anti-Soviet maneuver and there was concern
that Gorbachev's opponents might exploit the crisis.

These fears, some Gorbachev associates implied, underlaid the
rally-round-the-flag tone of Gorbachev's television speech on May 14, with its
strong patriotic appeal and its attack on the United States and the West. The
speech was intended to push Soviet public opinion into the familiar defensive
crouch of resistance against ''capitalist encirclement,'' a cry first raised in
the days of Lenin nearly 70 years ago and often reiterated since in times of
crisis.

That President Reagan did not send Gorbachev a formal message of sympathy - as
did British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and other heads of state - was
cited by Gorbachev's associates as proof that Reagan is implacably hostile
toward Russia, even in a time of a national tragedy.

According to one intimate, Gorbachev felt ''personal outrage'' over what he
perceived as an American effort to repeat, in the Soviet adviser's words, ''the
propaganda triumph of the Korean 007 disaster.'' Another intimate said: ''What
do the Americans want from us? Gorbachev told me personally: 'I was ready to
agree to everything at Geneva. How could Reagan let it all go? How do you deal
with that? He just reads from cue cards that one of his aides has written out
for him.' '' If, in fact, Gorbachev was prepared ''to agree to everything'' at
the Geneva summit, American negotiators got no such signal.

It must be noted that this negative image of Reagan contrasts with that offered
in Moscow last November, immediately after the Geneva summit, by one of these
same Grobachev advisers . The adviser then said that the Soviet side now
understood and respected Reagan's ''Star Wars'' proposal - that is, they
realized that the President truly believed ''Star Wars'' was a defensive plan.
The same adviser said he felt both men now understood each other on a personal
basis and got on well, particularly as a result of a long private chat during
the summit.

No such coziness was reflected in Moscow in the grim post-Chernobyl atmosphere.
Gorbachev's aides uniformly presented a mood of despondency and frustration.
They seemed to feel that events had taken command. One of Gorbachev's younger
advisers, a sandy-complexioned man in his late 30's who sports a blue
windbreaker, tan chinos and loafers (looking more like the coach of a Glasgow
soccer team than a dour Kremlin ideologue), made no secret of his feeling that
neither of the superpowers any longer could control events.

He drew an analogy - one many sophisticated Soviet observers are coming to draw
- between Soviet policy in Afghanistan and United States policy in Vietnam.
''Neither power knew what it was getting into,'' he said. ''And in the end,
neither one knew how to get out.''

Again and again, these highly placed specialists suggested that ''we can no
longer control technology'' -defensively citing the Challenger disaster and
Three Mile Island, along with Chernobyl. ''What will be next?'' one asked.

Gorbachev's advisers were bitter that the official American attitude on
Chernobyl had inadvertently played into the hands of Gorbachev's domestic
opponents. ''We told you so,'' critics of Gorbachev's policies were saying of
the General Secretary's effort to revive detente. Referring to the Americans, he
said they ''have just set a trap for you.''

A cool-headed member of the Soviet elite, not a Gorbachev adviser, explained the
Communist Party leader's problem in these terms:

''He was blind-sided by Chernobyl. It was not just that the local officials were
stupid or tried to cover up. They literally did not know what had happened. They
reported the accident but did not say it was a nuclear accident because they did
not think it was an accident of that type. They thought it was a fire in the
superstructure. Not for 48 hours, from the early hours of Saturday, April 26,
until Monday morning the 28th, when Gorbachev sent Politburo members to Kiev did
he know what he had on his hands. By that time, it was a nuclear reactor raging
out of control.''

Chernobyl, this Soviet official said, struck as Gorbachev was rapidly increasing
his control of the party and state apparatus, but he was not yet firmly in the
saddle. He came into office as a protege of the late Yuri V. Andropov, backed by
a coalition that included the K.G.B., young party apparatchiks and military
technocrats. Hard-liners, Brezhnev hacks and major industrial bosses opposed
him.

Today only one of Gorbachev's major opponents, Gromyko, is in the Politburo. But
there is still a three-way split in the Communist Party -the rapidly growing and
more youthful group appointed by Gorbachev; the almost equally large group of
loyalists to old ways and old leaders (''Stalin was right. You have to use the
knout''), and sideliners waiting to (Continued on Page 30) see who comes out on
top before joining the winner. ''Gorbachev's job of taking control was still
only half done at the close of the 27th Party Congress in February,'' one
Russian told me. ''Half the members of the Central Committee were not his men.''

Gorbachev, this man said, moved swiftly and effectively at the start to put his
own men into the Politburo and the Secretariat. He had taken control of the
Leningrad Party apparatus by ousting his hard-line rival there, Grigory V.
Romanov. He replaced the stodgy Moscow Party leadership after the November
summit (when Gorbachev's prestige was high). But the Ukraine Party apparatus was
still in place, and is still solidly in traditional hands.

The military also has been little changed during Gorbachev's brief tenure,
remaining disdainfully aloof as it has watched the evolution of Gorbachev's
''new politics.'' Soviet military leaders have seen campaigns for change before
- under Nikita Khrushchev (they threw their weight against him and he was
dumped) and Andropov. But Andropov was gone in little more than a year, his
efforts to drag the Soviet Union out of the swamp of stale dialectic and dogma
cut short by the onset of a fatal illness. Gorbachev has not yet mustered the
strength to stand up to the military, and in the aftermath of Chernobyl, he must
rely on them more than ever. There is not much sympathy for change among the
beefy, medal-heavy marshals and generals. Their inclinations run toward a
neo-Stalinist approach - bigger and bigger military budgets, no nonsense about
''liberalism,'' guns not butter, tough talk to the United States.

One issue on which Gorbachev and the military do see eye to eye is Afghanistan.
Many military men were reluctant to get involved in Afghanistan (although some
welcomed the opportunity to test new weapons and tactics, feeling the United
States had gotten ahead of them by extensive combat experience in Korea and
Vietnam). And some Soviet military leaders share the concern of some young
Gorbachev advisers about the cost-effectiveness of small-scale foreign
involvements.

A N ISSUE THAT ENRAGES the Gorbachev camp is the charge, made in the West, that
the Kremlin deliberately withheld news of the Chernobyl disaster.

''It's true,'' one of Gorbachev's older advisers said. ''The news was not
well-handled at the beginning. Part of that was bungling, but mostly it was due
to the difficulty at the top in finding out what had happened and what was going
to happen.''

There was fear of creating panic and there was panic in some quarters. One
highly respected scientist reportedly threw up his arms and said: ''This is the
worst catastrophe of our times. I don't know what we can do.'' Some Chernobyl
personnel just ran away. Two months later, they were still missing. In Kiev, the
Ukrainian Minister of Health went on television during the accident to tell the
population there was no need for alarm, and he outlined a series of precautions
-take frequent baths, wash down sidewalks several times a day, don't let
children play outdoors. Instead of calming the city, this set off an exodus. The
problem, one Russian said, was that the population was not accustomed to hearing
about disasters. When the health minister said there was no reason for concern,
many people leapt to the conclusion that if the minister admitted this much, the
situation must be far worse. They decided to get themselves and their children
out of town.

In Russian terms, the reaction of the citizens made sense. Ashkabad, the capital
of Turkmania, was leveled by an earthquake in 1948, taking the lives of half the
city's population of more than 200,000. Only a paragraph or two about the
disaster was published in the Soviet press days after the event. The first real
details were contained in a poem in a literary magazine published years later.
Tashkent, the largest city of Soviet Central Asia, was devastated by an
earthquake in 1966. Little about that was ever published.

Nor has anything ever appeared in the Soviet press or on Soviet television about
the great Kyshtym accident in 1957 near Chelyabinsk, the big industrial center
in the Urals. A dump for radioactive materials exploded, devastating the area,
causing hundreds of casualties and leaving behind vast pollution that still
poisons the region. Some scientists, including the dissident Zhores A. Medvedev,
who has done extensive research on the event, believe it was the worst nuclear
accident in history. At the mention of the word Kyshtym, knowledgeable Russians
pale and put a finger to their lips. More than a quarter century has passed, but
Kyshtym is still too hot to discuss - much less mention in print.

It was in this atmosphere of secrecy that Mikhail Gorbachev took office in March
1985. One of the basic elements of his plan for reform was what the Russians
call glasnost, openness. Glasnost was advocated not on a basis of principle but
of pragmatism. In his effort to move the Soviet Union out of the economic,
technological and creative slough in which it had been mired for nearly 70 years
by the Russian version of Marxism-Leninism, Gorbachev was determined to shine
the floodlight of publicity into the dark corners of the country, focusing on
anachronisms, corruption, obsolescence, red tape, featherbedding and cronyism.

To do this he enlisted a new team of advisers. It is not accidental that high
among them are specialists on America. Chief among them is Anatoly F. Dobrynin,
whom Gorbachev summoned back from his lengthy term as Ambassador to Washington
and installed in quarters close to his own in a relationship not unlike that of
Henry Kissinger and President Nixon. To all intents, Dobrynin is Gorbachev's
Secretary of State. Andrei A. Gromyko, sullen and skeptical, has been kicked
upstairs to the ceremonial post of Soviet President. But he retains his
membership on the Politburo, as much a pillar of political rigidity as his
famous mentor, Vyacheslav (Old Stonebottom) Molotov.

The whole Soviet diplomatic corps has been shaken up as it has never been
before. Orders went out that a new diplomatic style, more flexible, more
realistic, less ideological, more innovative was to be the handmaiden of
glasnost. New responsibilities went to Georgi A. Arbatov and his specialists at
the Institute for the U.S.A. and Canada.

Gorbachev brought in Aleksandr N. Yakovlev, the unorthodox former ambassador to
Canada, a one-time graduate student at Columbia University, an Americanist, an
out-spoken opponent of Russian nationalist theories and neo-Stalinism. He was
placed in charge of the drive for glasnost. Yakovlev is a strong believer in
television. ''The TV image is everything,'' he has been quoted as saying.
Overnight, Yakovlev was installed as Party Secretary in charge of propaganda and
information.

There are other far-reaching aspects of glasnost as conceived by Gorbachev: an
end to writing history as propaganda; a cessation of publication of laudatory
potboilers in the form of military memoirs and quasi fictional war novels.

Recently, a remarkable Congress of Writers was held in the Kremlin, marked by
open and sometimes rowdy debate and the replacement of a stodgy, reactionary
union leadership by younger, more free-thinking writers. This, it was said, had
the personal encouragement of Gorbachev.

But glasnost and the ambitious ideas associated with it have been put on hold.
How much will survive Chernobyl is unclear. Leaders under stress tend to
jettison the controversial and the radical. When, after Chernobyl, Gorbachev
raised the cry of ''capitalist encirclement,'' it was a signal that he was
moving to safer, more conventional ground. Experiments could wait.

A similar signal came from a senior foreign policy adviser who hauled out
another longtime Soviet cliche -''equality.'' The United States, he said,
echoing past generations of Soviet foreign ministers, was refusing to deal with
Moscow on a basis of equality; it was trying to dictate to her as an inferior
power.

For years, this argument had been thrown up by the Soviet Union as a barrier to
productive diplomatic talks. In part, it stemmed from the days when the Soviet
was an ''outsider,'' begging for crumbs from the diplomatic table. In part, it
was just a diplomatic bargaining chip. President Nixon and Kissinger went to
great pains to emphasize that in their view the Soviet was an equal partner at
the diplomatic table and, in their memoirs, both stressed that this attitude had
played a major part in making effective great-power diplomacy.

The resurfacing of the ''equality'' argument suggested that Gorbachev did not
want serious talks with Washington when his defenses were in disarray because of
Chernobyl. The summit? Forget it for the near future. First things first, and
the first priority for Gorbachev is damage control in the Kremlin.

A man in the second rank of Gorbachev's circle said he did not see how serious
talks could be conducted ''at the present time.'' He even scoffed at an
unofficial exploration of presummit conditions.

It sounded very much like Gorbachev had drawn the wagons around the campfire.
Yet, a day or two later, Pravda gave a clear hint that glasnost was not entirely
dead. The newspaper published a blistering criticism of Soviet television,
centering on the poor techniques and failures of Vremya, the Soviet equivalent
of American network evening news. Pravda seemed to be saying that Vremya had not
handled Chernobyl with an aggressive, forthright approach.

Certainly, whatever concessions he may have to make, Gorbachev is still in
control. But neither he nor his associates seem to realize that perhaps their
strongest move in buttressing their position at home and abroad would be to take
the lid off Chernobyl itself, to make public a blow-by-blow, hour-by-hour,
no-holds-barred account. And no harm would be done if, 29 years after it
happened, the terrible secrets of the Kystym catastrophe were given to the
Russian people -and the world. Therein may lie Gorbachev's way to securing
Soviet credibility and the rout of the assemblage of bureaucrats,
neo-Stalinists, and party and military elements with whom he must contend.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing of Gorbachev

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE ANCHORS;
WHO THEY ARE, WHAT THEY DO, THE TESTS THEY FACE

BYLINE: By Alex S. Jones; Alex S. Jones, a reporter for the Times, covers the
press)

SECTION: Section 6; Page 12, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5509 words


EACH WEEKNIGHT, 38 MILLION AMERicans watch one of the network evening news
programs - 22 minutes of news and eight minutes of commercials. In this brief
envelope of time, three men - Dan Rather, Tom Brokaw and Peter Jennings -
present the world to a vast audience in a communication so intimate that it
leads strangers to greet them automatically as Dan, Tom and Peter. In their role
as anchors of the network evening news, the three have become not only
celebrities equal to any in Hollywood, but also the nation's best-known
journalists, who have come to symbolize continuity and order in the face of
sometimes shattering news events. Like town criers, the anchors offer proof each
night that ''the world's still here and there's going to be another day,'' said
Richard S. Salant, president of CBS News for 16 years, until 1979. While the
world the anchors present is often graphically violent, the anchors themselves
are reasoned and calm, and the three shows usually lighten the report with
something upbeat or heartwarming. ''They want it to be a reassuring view of the
world,'' said Les Brown, editor in chief of Channels magazine, which covers the
electronic media.

But as they go about their job of crafting the nightly news, they are doing so
in a television world that is in unprecedented tumult. This summer's extremely
close viewership ratings for ''CBS Evening News With Dan Rather,'' ''NBC Nightly
News With Tom Brokaw'' and ''ABC's World News Tonight With Peter Jennings'' -
the ratings are so close that the differences are statistically negligible -
have transformed the normally spirited competition among the shows into
something fiercer. ''It's trench warfare,'' said Van Gordon Sauter, president of
CBS News. ''There's everything out there but mustard gas.''

The anchors and their programs are caught up in an environment of change that
goes far beyond their struggle with each other for ratings. Interviews with the
anchors, corporate and news executives, journalists, academics, television
researchspecialists and financial analysts specializing in televi-sion paint a
picture of the three anchors and their shows in a ferment of transition. New
corporate ownership, new competition from cable and independent television as
well as the networks' own affiliates and new technologies are exerting enormous
pressures, including economic ones such as those that resulted in the dismissal
10 days ago of 70 CBS employees. In this supercharged atmosphere, the anchor is
the key weapon in the war for journalistic respect and ratings supremacy.

WHILE THE ANCHOR'S JOB HAS always included a bit of showmanship, the role today
encompasses conflicts that previous anchors were largely spared. The networks
demand that an anchor be the network's premier journalist and principal showman,
top editor and star, symbol of news excellence and the network's single most
important living logo. Despite his overwhelming ratings, Bill Cosby is not NBC.
Tom Brokaw is NBC.

But who, in a corporate sense, are NBC, CBS and ABC? After decades of consistent
ownership and management, all three networks have experienced upheavals in the
last year that have raised new questions about how the networks will be operated
in the years to come. NBC and its parent, RCA, were officially acquired in June
by General Electric; ABC this year became part of Capital Cities, a
communications conglomerate, and, in an effort to ward off unwelcome takeover
attempts such as that by Ted Turner, CBS has allied itself with Laurence Tisch,
chairman of the Loews Corporation, who now owns 19.7 percent of the company's
stock.

Historically, the networks' news coverage has been driven by a desire for
prestige as well as concern for profit. But the cost-consciousness among the
corporations that now own the networks has prompted cuts in news staffs and,
some say, threatens quality. Among news organizations at all three networks
there is anxiety about the ultimate impact of the recent takeovers, or the fear
of takeovers, and apprehension that the new corporate leadership may eventually
intrude upon the independence of the news.

Change wrought by technology - particularly readily available satellite
transmission - is another of the principal pressures the anchors and their
programs face. Local stations now have the ability to cover national and
international news, and this has placed them in competition for the first time
with the network news shows. There is also new pressure from competing
organizations such as Ted Turner's Cable News Network and potential competition
from the fourth commercial broadcast network Rupert Murdoch is attempting to
assemble. As a result, all three networks are struggling to redefine their shows
to make them somehow unique.

Though ratings pressure has always been present, the close competition among the
news shows has created what Dan Rather describes as a ''ratings madness'' that
some fear could eventually make news judgment second to ratings success. With
outside competition growing, the average viewership of the three network shows
combined dropped nearly 18 percent from 1979 to 1984, according to the A.C.
Nielsen Company. A rebound in 1985 brought the decline to about 13 percent, but
this June's ratings were lower than last year's. Consequently, the
agenda-setting role of the nightly news is being questioned and its impact is
being challenged by studies that argue that, contrary to what the television
industry has long claimed, television is not the main source of most Americans'
news. In fact, new research suggests that television news adds little if
anything to the body of information people draw from many sources.

Amid all these pressures, the evolution of the nightly news is taking place on
two fronts - journalistic and commercial - so thoroughly intertwined that those
involved have difficulty separating one from the other. Though all news
organizations, including newspapers, must wrestle with maintaining an
independent journalistic voice within the context of a business, nowhere are
news reporting and news marketing merged as thoroughly as they are in
television.

''People in television news are in a tear,'' said David W. Burke, executive vice
president of ABC News. ''Good, sound, professional journalism is on one side of
the tear. On the other is the method by which we package and deliver material.
Some people consider this show business. I don't.''

The conflict between journalism and entertainment has never been greater than
now for hegemony of the dinner-hour news, the flagship newscast where both
millions of dollars in advertising revenue and the networks' pride as news
organizations are at stake. PETER JENNINGS AND WILLIAM E. LORD, EXECU-tive
producer of ABC's ''World News Tonight,'' along with others, were planning
future segments for the broadcast in Mr. Jennings's office in the ABC News
headquarters on West 66th Street, near Central Park. ''Give away the piece,''
Mr. Jennings said, meaning that a videotaped news feature that had languished on
the shelf for several weeks would be offered to an-other ABC show, ''Good
Morning America,'' or be used on a weekend news program, but would not be aired
on ''World News Tonight.''

Mr. Jennings and Mr. Lord spend most of every day following the news and
discussing what should be on ''World News Tonight,'' where a segment should come
in the broadcast, how long it should be, and what points it should make. A long
segment is over two minutes. An extraordinarily long segment approaches four
minutes. Each minute represents about 160 spoken words, which means that the
total number of words on a newscast would fill a bit more than half of a typical
newspaper page.

Later in the day, the conversation turned to what should be dropped, as ''World
News Tonight'' cannot be expanded to accommodate a heavy news day. If they
disagree, Mr. Lord has the final say, but Mr. Jennings's views carry a great
deal of weight and, in network television news, an executive producer who does
not generally see things the same way as the anchorman is likely to find himself
with a new job.

At the Rockefeller Center offices of NBC News and at the CBS News headquarters
on West 57th Street, Tom Brokaw and Dan Rather are engaged in the same kind of
exchange with their executive producers and staffs. At all three organizations,
the competition is never far from anyone's mind.

In their anchors, the three networks have sought a combination of journalistic
expertise and mass appeal. Each anchor takes a leading role in crafting his
program. Mr. Rather and Mr. Brokaw are managing editors of their broadcasts, Mr.
Jennings is senior editor of his, and all three take their titles extremely
seriously. Both Mr. Rather and Mr. Brokaw seem to have a veto power over their
broadcasts that goes beyond Mr. Jennings's control, but the difference is a
subtle one and all three wield enormous power. The anchors are strikingly
similar - perhaps too similar if diversity is a virtue. All three are
middle-aged Anglo-Saxon male Protestants. Mr. Rather is 54 years old, Mr.
Jennings will be 48 tomorrow and Mr. Brokaw is 46. All have close ties to wives
and children and live in uptown Manhattan apartments. All are attractive and
have the polished look of men who are extra attentive to their appearance. They
appear to share basic middle-class values such as sympathy for the average
citizen, a taste for hard work and concern about the world their children will
inherit. Their journalistic skills would make them a welcome addition to any
news organization. Each says he has considerable respect for his rivals. All are
fiercely competitive, both as reporters and as anchormen.

They bristle at the notion that their job is, as Mr. Brokaw says, ''to put on
makeup and read out loud.'' But the comparison to show-business celebrities is
inevitable. All three have been at the center of advertising and promotional
campaigns attempting to boost the image and popularity of the dinner-hour news
by promoting the anchors as, in essence, stars of the shows. This promotional
effort did not include posing together for a photograph for this article; Mr.
Rather declined, though Mr. Brokaw and Mr. Jennings were willing.

All three command star salaries. None of the networks will disclose figures, but
officials who asked not to be identified said that Mr. Rather earns about $2.5
million a year; Mr. Brokaw, about $1.8 million, and Mr. Jennings, about
$900,000. The greater salaries for Mr. Rather and Mr. Brokaw reflect
inter-network bidding wars for their services in the early 1980's.

Despite their similarities, they are also quite different men with different
styles in many respects, and though some elements of their personalities are
reflected in their broadcasts, some others are carefully kept out.

Peter Jennings is a self-described ''weeper,'' whose eyes can well up as he
describes the memorial service for the astronauts killed months earlier in the
shuttle explosion. He makes an enormous effort not to cry on the air. He is the
only smoker of the three, and sometimes takes a drag on a cigarette while
off-camera. Mr. Jennings is a Canadian who says he plans to become an American
citizen when eligible in two years. Canada occasionally comes through when he
says certain words, such as house, which in his mouth rhymes with loose.

Admirers of Mr. Jennings frequently say that he seems urbane and sophisticated,
the most thoughtful of the anchors, although those who do not like his style say
it is a bit facile and glib. ''World News Tonight'' is considered at its best
with fast-breaking foreign stories, such as the TWA hostage crisis, when Mr.
Jennings's experience as a foreign correspondent seems to give him an edge.

Mr. Jennings seems both pleased and somewhat awed by his ratings success - for
decades, ABC's nightly news lagged behind the other networks' - since he became
sole anchor three years ago. ''When they hired me for this job, I don't think
they had any idea whether I would succeed,'' he says. ''I tend to feel the
weight of social consciousness a good deal more than three years ago. When
you've done the Challenger broadcast and seen what power this electronic beast
has, it affects you. Hopefully, it makes you more modest.'' He says that his
attitude toward reporting has been colored by his limited education - he
finished the 10th grade in Canada - and his years as a reporter in the Middle
East, where he concluded that most issues were inevitably many-sided. He also
says his father, who was a journalist, pounded away at fairness. He says that
these influences make him cautious about assuming a strong point of view in his
newscast, though he doesn't shrink from injecting his perspective when he feels
he has special knowledge, such as with subjects like the Middle East and South
Africa, where he also worked as a reporter for ABC.

Mr. Jennings describes himself as an internationalist who views the world as a
global village. This orientation is reflected in ''World News Tonight,'' which
devotes more time than its competitors to international news - 67 percent of its
average broadcast, according to a recent study of the content of the shows by
Leslie K. Davis of the University of Massachusetts and James Smith of the State
University of New York at New Paltz. Though all three broadcasts devote over
half of their time to international news, CBS gives it the least attention. Mr.
Rather's show reflects his greater preoccupation with regional issues, and Mr.
Brokaw steers a course between the two.

In each case, the content also reflects the audience of the shows. Mr. Jennings
tends to be more popular in large cities while Mr. Rather has strength in small
towns, and Mr. Brokaw's audience touches both. The ratings race is so tight that
during the second week in July, all three shows were tied, each drawing a 22
percent share of the television audience for the time period, according to the
A.C. Nielsen Company. The rest of the audience was claimed by the
''MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour'' on the Public Broadcasting Service or, in most
cases, syndicated reruns of entertainment shows such as ''MASH.''

RATHER IS A TEXAN WHO CAME UP through the ranks at CBS and worked for many years
as a top correspondent in Vietnam and at the White House and as an investigative
reporter for ''60 Minutes.'' He offers a sense of passion in his broadcasts, and
his admirers often say his program is the most sincere and human. His detractors
say Mr. Rather's passion is overdone, the emotion sometimes seeming calculated.

According to the people he works with, his charged delivery is an accurate
reflection of the man, and he is encouraged to be as passionate as feels
natural. Mr. Rather is a student of oratory, and says that the television
evangelist Jimmy Swaggart, who frequently attacks the three anchors, may be the
most effective speaker in the country. Tom Bettag, who recently became executive
producer of ''CBS Evening News,'' says that the show seemed to be drifting
earlier this year and was somewhat unfocused, in large part because too much
time was spent anxiously watching what the other anchors were doing as they cut
into Mr. Rather's ratings lead. The broadcast, he says, now has a sharper focus
on significant news, is shifting away from frothier subjects, and is giving full
rein to Mr. Rather's intensity, which Mr. Bettag says looked somewhat strained
earlier this year. News executives at CBS note that Mr. Rather has been found to
be the most trusted anchorman in various surveys.

When Mr. Rather contemplates the meaning of his job, he talks with a zealot's
fervor about stewardship of a CBS news tradition. Prominently displayed outside
the door of Mr. Rather's office is a picture of Edward R. Murrow, the pioneer
CBS journalist. He is also fascinated by the intimate bond that anchors form -
sometimes to the point of delusion - with their audience. He tells how, when he
was an anchorman in Houston years ago, an elderly woman who watched him
regularly asked him about a new picture she had just acquired through a Sears,
Roebuck catalogue. ''She asked did I like it better over the mantle in the
dining room, or did I like it better where it was in the living room,'' Mr.
Rather recalls.

One day this summer, as he paced the cramped space that serves as both the
newsroom and studio for the ''CBS Evening News,'' Mr. Rather was clearly the
dominant presence. It is a tense period for Mr. Rather, who has seen his
commanding ratings lead dwindle, and there is palpable anxiety among the staff
that the slippage could get worse. Wearing both suspenders and a vest, Mr.
Rather seemed to reflect the girded-for-battle atmosphere that permeates the
newsroom.

''If I err, I probably err with too much zeal,'' Mr. Rather said. ''I don't have
anything else to prove to myself. I don't need money. I have more money than I
need. But I really care about this place. Right or wrong, I think CBS News is
important to U.S. journalism. Insofar as I'm able to influence its staying that
way, I want to do so. In my own mind, this place was a lighthouse of standards
of what could be. I think it's tougher to do that now.'' MR. BROKAW'S CREDITS AS
A REPORTER INCLUDE coverage for NBC of the civil-rights movement and the White
House, but his many years as host of the ''Today'' show have forced him to
contend with the impression that his journalism background is not as rigorous as
that of Mr. Rather and Mr. Jennings. He takes pains to make his delivery calm
and unemotional, with occasional wry, sardonic humor. Mr. Brokaw's fans find his
presentation authoritative, smooth and intelligent, while to his critics his
resolute steadiness and deadpan delivery tend to make the broadcast flat. Mr.
Brokaw says he is uncomfortable when asked to discuss the meaning of what he
does. ''I don't get up in the morning and bury my head in my hands,'' he says,
add-ing: ''My instincts are as a reporter. I have a story to tell.'' In part,
the reticence seems to come from an aversion to the flurry of self-promotion
that has streamed from NBC in recent months and has centered on Mr. Brokaw. A
South Dakotan whose office is spotted with relics of and books on the West, Mr.
Brokaw comes from a world often suspicious of celebrity. He is quick to lash out
at television critics who, he says, make too much of the show-biz side of his
job. ''I get a little weary of this,'' he says. ''The personality part of
television is inescapable. There's one critic who talks about my button nose.''

According to William O. Wheatley Jr., his executive producer, Mr. Brokaw's
carefully modulated on-air delivery stems in part from his experience with an
interview that appeared in Mother Jones, a leftwing magazine, in 1983, in which
he described his personal politics, which - like the other anchors' - are
basically centrist, but seem somewhat more liberal. Mr. Brokaw has said that the
interview was a mistake and that he takes care to keep his personal opinions out
of the broadcast. But, as with the other anchors, his views sometimes become
apparent. For instance, he does little to hide his distaste for the
near-adoration many Americans display for English royalty, which he considers to
be contrary to America's democratic traditions.

At times, Mr. Brokaw and Mr. Wheatley disagree on some aspect of the show. ''We
close the door and work it out,'' Mr. Brokaw says. ''I'm not given to hysterics,
but I have very strong feelings. When we honestly don't see eye to eye, we work
it out among ourselves. Sometimes I prevail, sometimes Bill prevails. But it is
not by sheer muscle that I prevail. Nor does he prevail because of my lack of
interest. Anchormen have lots of weight, and you have to be sure you don't throw
it around.''

The pace becomes frenetic in the cramped NBC newsroom as air-time nears. On one
relatively calm news day, 10 minutes before the show began, Mr. Brokaw was
pounding out revised copy on his electric typewriter in the midst of a debate
about whether a short item about a Supreme Court decision should be rewritten to
make it clearer. It wasn't, and this was later judged a mistake. At 6:22 P.M.,
Mr. Brokaw pushed back his chair, put on his jacket, which covered a big
turquoise belt buckle he favors, and left the newsroom for the studio from which
the show is televised.

THOUGH THE PUBLIC PERCEPTION OF the network newscasts is that the anchors are
giving their personal synthesis of the day's events, how much they actually
write of what they say can vary greatly from day to day, depending on their
interest in various news events and whether they are diverted by addressing
conventions of affiliates and other such duties. Mr. Brokaw almost always writes
at least the first part of each night's broadcast, and Mr. Jennings writes much
of what he says. While Mr. Rather also writes part of his broadcast, he says he
does not feel it is particularly important to write the copy himself. All three
work with a team of writers who prepare a script that not only conveys
information but also is tailored to the style and taste of the anchor. At the
very least, the anchors review the script before they go on the air, adding
shadings and altering emphasis here and there. In the final moments before the
shows begin, the altered scripts are reviewed by a copy editor to make sure the
construction and grammar are proper, then passed to the executive producer for a
final look. After a little makeup is applied, the anchors go on the air at 6:30
P.M. and, if there are glitches or late-breaking news, all or part of the show
is done a second time at 7 P.M. Usually, however, viewers who see the news at 7
P.M. are mainly watching a videotape of the 6:30 broadcast.

Since the evening network news shows were born in the early 1950's, viewers have
watched them change from a 15-minute broadcast focused almost entirely on
recapping that day's events to a much more technically sophisticated 30-minute
show whose focus is more difficult to define. While the most important of the
day's events are still covered, those assembling today's broadcasts say they are
seeking a combination of breaking news, background news, coverage of trends,
commentary, interviews and light features, all taking maximum advantage of
satellite technology and electronic gadgetry to provide the freshest material so
that the program will be entertaining as well as informative.

Despite a popular impression that the shows are very much alike, the Smith-Davis
survey found that only about a quarter of the news items they presented were
covered by all three programs. About 15 percent of each network's news content
was not covered by the others at all.

In the face of new competitive pressure from local stations for national and
state coverage, the network shows are increasingly turning to longer, in-depth
coverage of fewer news events, and interviews with prominent people. A station
in Nebraska now has the ability to cover news in Borneo, transmit it to a
satellite using equipment that fits into half a dozen suitcases, and get the
signal instantaneously on its own satellite receiver. Goaded by pressure from
affiliates who want to include major national and international news in their
local broadcasts each afternoon, the networks routinely transmit via satellite
portions of the network's own videotape gathered ostensibly for the network news
show - though the networks reserve the best material for themselves. Timothy J.
Russert, a vice president of NBC News, says that about 70 percent of those
viewing the network evening news have already watched a local news show, which
has made the networks acutely aware that many of their viewers have already been
exposed to many of the subjects the network news will cover.

Though there is no clear solution to what many network executives call ''the
redundancy problem,'' many say that the nightly news of the future will likely
be more of a one-man show, with the anchors presenting most of the broadcast
while the on-air role for field correspondents will be greatly diminished. In an
extremely imitative business, the success of ABC's late-night ''Nightline'' has
been watched with great interest. Ted Koppel, the anchor, dominates the show,
which examines one or more timely issues in depth. But there is concern that
adapting that format to the nightly news would cause morale to plummet among
correspondents, who covet air time, and thus damage the quality of a news
organization.

The anchors and other news executives generally agree that the expansion of the
network evening news to a one-hour show is extremely unlikely because the local
affiliates have been unwilling to give up control of such valuable advertising
time. This spring, there were reports that Lawrence K. Grossman, president of
NBC News, was interested in creating a so-called ''news wheel'' in which local
stations and network stations would share a longer broadcast, with a period of
network news followed by a period of local news. According to many network and
local news executives, the idea found little support among the affiliates.

P RESSURES CREATED BY cutbacks of news personnel and intense cost-consciousness
have been felt at all three networks, but NBC and ABC seem to have coped with
the cuts better than CBS. At CBS, which dropped 120 news positions last year, 70
more employees were dismissed July 17, including the correspondent George
Herman, who had been with the organization 42 years, and Don Webster, the CBS
Middle East bureau chief, who had been with the network for 25 years. The impact
on morale has been devastating, and although the ''CBS Evening News'' was not
affected by the latest cutbacks, Mr. Rather had said before the dismissals were
officially announced, ''It's hard for me to figure a way our coverage isn't
going to suffer some.''

Compounding this economic pressure is a concern among many in the news divisions
that the new corporate owners will not preserve the traditional hands-off
attitude. Top network and corporate executives say they have no intention of
impinging on the independence of the news. But the anxiety remains.

And there is a parallel anxiety that the corporate parents will come to view the
network nightly news as an advertising vehicle that should put ratings ahead of
anything else. Mr. Jennings argues that the ratings battle has sharpened all
three news shows, and many news executives say the best strategy for earning
higher ratings is a more serious, deeper news show rather than a more frivolous
one. But there is wide agreement that if a more sensational news show were
successfully launched, it would likely push network news in the same direction.
The prime candidate for launching such a show is believed to be Mr. Murdoch's
Fox Broadcasting Company, a fourth network of independent stations, and a
spokesman at Fox did not rule out such a show in years to come.

The debate about the role of the nightly network news is clouded further by
disagreement among news executives - even within the same network - about
whether the format is still the agenda-setting vehicle it was when it had a
near-monopoly on television coverage of national and international news and when
there was not so much competition from other news outlets, such as cable
channels, early morning and late night network news and newsbreaks throughout
the day, as well as national newspapers and magazines.

According to the recently published ''The Main Source: Learning From Television
News,'' by Mark R. Levy and John P. Robinson, both professors at the University
of Maryland, people generally have a basic knowledge of current events that is
drawn from a variety of sources, including television, newspapers, magazines,
radio and other people, and this level of knowledge is present whether or not
people watch television news. It is considerably enhanced, however, by reading
newspapers or news magazines, which carry much more information. According to
the book, much of which is based on research sponsored by the John and Mary
Markle Foundation, viewers of the nightly news comprehend the main points of
only about a third of what they see. Though broadcast executives express
skepticism about the book's findings, many agree that clarity and context are
sometimes lost as the news is compressed to meet time demands, and that concerns
about this are coloring the way the nightly news is evolving.

F ROM THE PUBLIC'S perspective, the basic question raised by this environment of
transition and pressure is whether the nightly news is becoming better or worse.

The anchors - indeed, virtually everyone in television news - insist that the
shows are better than ever, and even their most severe critics acknowledge that
in some ways they are right. Technological advances, especially worldwide
satellite links, have extended the reach and timeliness of the nightly news
dramatically. Other electronic innovations, in graphics and special effects, now
make the programs more likely to cover abstract subjects such as economics. The
shows are more likely to devote more time to fewer subjects, adding depth to the
coverage. And the competence of the anchors and their news organizations are not
seriously questioned.

But there have been losses as well. Intense competition and technological
innovation have meant that the shows sometimes lose the ability to ponder.
Burton Benjamin, who was executive producer of ''CBS Evening News With Walter
Cronkite'' and who says he is an admirer of the present broadcasts, notes that
his broadcast ended four nights a week with a commentary by Eric Sevareid.
Though the current shows all have commentators, ABC and CBS devote much less
time to them. The shows almost inevitably end with a crowd-pleasing segment. The
use of lengthier segments has meant that breadth of coverage has been
sacrificed.

Ongoing criticism from the older generation of television broadcasters and
others charges that the nightly news shows have de-emphasized substantive news
in favor of ''softer'' items that are mainly crowd-pleasing and designed to
raise ratings. For instance, ABC recently installed ''person of the week,'' a
long segment at the end of each Friday's broadcast. Roone Arledge, president of
ABC News, says it was created in large part to attract younger viewers, who
frequently skip the Friday news in favor of other weekend pursuits. The people
profiled have ranged from Speaker of the House Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill to the
pianist Vladimir Horowitz. While Mr. Arledge defends the creation as newsworthy,
others have labeled it something else. ''You're talking People magazine more
than you're talking news,'' sniffs Thomas H. Wyman, chairman and chief executive
officer of CBS. Mr. Arledge responds that CBS and ABC do the same sort of thing
or worse.

Questions of journalistic judgment have also been raised as a result of the
overwhelming competitive climate. For instance, during the race to cover the TWA
hostage crisis in Lebanon, Dan Rather's pointed on-air questioning of Nabih
Berri, the Moslem leader ostensibly trying to negotiate the release of the
hostages, prompted criticism that he had crossed the line dividing journalism
from personal diplomacy. This spring, NBC aired an interview with Abul Abbas,
the fugitive Palestinian terrorist charged with masterminding the highjacking of
the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro. NBC agreed not to say where the interview
originated, which drew stinging criticism from Government officials and some
other news organizations. Both NBC News and CBS News defended what they did as
legitimate news coverage.

ABC News drew fire from the other networks and news organizations by limiting
access to the ceremony relighting the Statue of Liberty on July 3. ABC had paid
$10 million for broadcast rights to the weekend's activities and justified
limiting access by arguing that most of the events were entertainment rather
than news. But the network installed Peter Jennings to anchor coverage of the
entire weekend, blurring his role as a newsman. Mr. Jennings said that he ''felt
a slight bit of anxiety'' about his role.

Despite such incidents, even the most severe critics of the network nightly news
shows say that the shows remain within their original framework as serious
journalistic outlets. But there remains a concern that the combination of
pressures could eventually alter the nightly news into something much less
substantial, if more popular and profitable.

''I sometimes fear that I may be the last of my kind of anchorman at CBS,'' Mr.
Rather says. His nightmare, he says, is that the corporations owning the
networks will find it easier to deal with more docile anchors than the current
crop, with their long journalistic backgrounds and ''emotional commitment to the
responsibility of the broadcast.''

But Mr. Rather adds that he remains an optimist. ''If we're about half-smart and
a lot lucky, we can keep our standards. I'm not sure we can do so, but I like
our chances.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Dan Rather (David Burnett/Contact); Photo of Tom Brokaw (David
Burnett/Contact) (page 14); Photo of Peter Jennings (Steve Fenn/ABC News) (page
15)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GETTING STRONGER, GETTING WEAKER?

BYLINE: By Peter Reddaway; Peter Reddaway directs the Kennan Institute for
Advanced Russian Studies in Washington. He is the co-author of ''Soviet
Psychiatric Abuse.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2881 words


THE SOVIET PARADOX External Expansion, Internal Decline. By Seweryn Bialer. 391
pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $22.95. SEWERYN BIALER has done it again. He has
rewritten the penetrating, often brilliant analysis of the Soviet regime and its
policies that he has produced at intervals over the last decade. This time his
stimulating, updated synthesis of his own views and those of others is
wider-ranging than before. He gives more space to futurology, the international
context, the Soviet policy of the United States, and his own prescriptions for
policy. Unlike his book ''Stalin's Successors'' (1980), the new work is aimed
more at lay readers than at scholars.

Mr. Bialer, director of the Research Institute on International Change at
Columbia University, here argues persuasively that the 33 years since Stalin
died have witnessed ''a change in the form of [Soviet] rule, not in its basic
substance.'' Although this inflexibility is increasingly damaging to the
economy, it has been reinforced by the fear that any radical change at home
would destabilize the Soviet empire in Eastern Europe, with disastrous results.
This in turn would destabilize the Soviet Union itself and destroy its power and
influence around the world. At the same time, this fragility of the regime's
imperial and - ultimately - domestic legitimacy has been reinforcing its
inherent expansionism, even in the face of growing internal problems and the
threat of economic stagnation. Its hope is to boost its power and legitimacy
both by the traditional means of assisting the spread of Communism and by acting
in the world as an equal of the United States.

Such is Mr. Bialer's central argument - his explanation of the apparent paradox
of his subtitle ''External Expansion, Internal Decline.'' And he believes in his
thesis strongly enough to take the view that Mikhail S. Gorbachev's advent to
power is unlikely to affect the basic picture. Mr. Gorbachev and the political
elite face ''a crisis of the system'' which ''can be solved only by changing the
system.'' Yet they do not seem prepared to undertake reforms ''which go beyond
the boundaries of the existing system.'' Why? Because the requirements of growth
and technology clash with their ''determination to preserve their immense
power.''

Mr. Bialer develops a powerful argument that ''communist encirclement'' is a
growing threat that ''may become the nemesis of Soviet international aspirations
and of the Soviet system itself.'' He points out, for example, that Eastern
Europe is a ''powder keg,'' that the Chinese-Soviet border is the site of the
world's largest peacetime confrontation of mutually hostile forces, and that
Cuba, Vietnam and other allies rely on large Soviet subsidies. He then draws his
conclusions. The cost to the Russians of keeping their colonial empire and
noncolonial allies economically afloat is high and not diminishing. The same is
true on the cost of arming these countries, policing the empire and guarding the
Chinese border. Meanwhile, the Soviet economy is running into serious trouble.
The necessary reforms cannot be risked, however, because they would light a fuse
to the East European powder keg. Bottom line: a combination - potentially fatal
to empires - of political rigidity and economic overextension. STATUS quo
attitudes are, Mr. Bialer demonstrates, immensely strong in the Soviet Union,
and for a variety of reasons. The different sections of the elite - the party,
the military, the K.G.B. internal-security agency, the managers, the ideological
apparatus - have all accommodated to the system and are content with it. The
professions have been successfully co-opted or bought off, the workers and
peasants are mostly apathetic and demoralized, and the young generation is
materialistic and politically passive. As for the dissidents, ''their individual
heroism, strong faith, and commitment mask their weakness as a movement''; they
have no significant mass support and are far from united.

To explain the political passivity of the population, Mr. Bialer notes that
bribery and corruption have become a universal way of life, and that no
revolution of rising expectations has occurred, because popular expectations
have been modest. At the same time the worst poverty has been partly alleviated
by official welfare policies, and the decline of law and order under Leonid I.
Brezhnev, which was affecting the regime's legitimacy, has since been reversed.

Despite his general picture of social and political stability, Mr. Bialer
nonetheless sees the serried ranks of the status quo forces as being on the
defensive. The main reason for this is clear. In the first decade of Brezhnev's
rule there was a steady growth in both production and consumption. But then, in
the mid-1970's, ''growth slowed to its lowest level in Soviet history,'' and
because the slowdown was not cyclical but part of a long-range trend, it
''constitutes the central problem of the Soviet Union in the 1980s.'' The
centralized ''command economy'' has served the elite well in the past, but now
its effectiveness ''is visibly declining.'' This situation leads Mr. Bialer to
be more ambivalent than before about the regime's long-term stability.

In his review of political developments over the last decade Mr. Bialer
describes the flabbiness of the Brezhnev leadership in the face of growing
drift, corruption, pessimism and economic difficulty. Good money was poured
after bad into dubious agricultural investments, while the total length of
weatherproofed roads throughout the country remained less than the total in
Texas. During the 1970's the labor force grew at a much slower rate than in the
United States, and in the coming decade it will increase five times more slowly
than in the 1970's. Even with a quarter of all workers still on the farms, the
Soviet Union has come to import almost a quarter of its grain needs from the
West. Infant and male mortality figures rose alarmingly, and deaths from
alcoholic poisoning reached a level 88 times higher than in the United States.

What remained at the time of Brezhnev's death in 1982 were, in Mr. Bialer's
words: ''great-power ambitions, the inertia induced by a rigidly ideological
outlook on the world, private careerism and materialism, and spiritual
emptiness.'' Not surprisingly, then, the elite chose a stronger, sterner, less
complacent man, Yuri V. Andropov, to replace Brezhnev. However, Andropov's
incipient purge of Brezhnevites and his determined talk of the need for economic
reform were cut short by his fatal illness. This gave the signal for a
conservative, grass-roots, party revolt - presumably orchestrated from the top
by Konstantin U. Chernenko - which warned against both purge and reform, and
soon propelled this 72-year-old invalid into the top job. In March 1985 Mr.
Gorbachev duly stepped into the dead Chernenko's shoes amid a wave of
exhilaration that a decade of gerontocratic leadership was over, along with the
deeply unsettling wave of deaths and successions. At this point Mr. Bialer
catches some of the euphoria he is describing, and loses, on occasion, his
deftness of touch. We are told, for example, that Mr. Gorbachev was soon
''firmly in charge'' because half of the Politburo ''are strong Gorbachev
loyalists'' and ''his domination of the Central Committee Secretariat is
absolute.'' A few pages later, sobriety returns and we are reminded that he
''will have to operate for a long while within the context of the collective and
oligarchic decision-making process.''

As regards policy, Mr. Bialer's temporary euphoria produces, inter alia, his
uncritical quotation of the view that Mr. Gorbachev will probably be seen by
future historians ''as one of the major reformers in Russian and Soviet
history.'' Later, however, comes a lengthy and expertly argued section
demonstrating why radical reform will fail unless it is both decentralizing and
comprehensive, as in China, and why, for this and other reasons such as the
probably disastrous effect on Eastern Europe, the Gorbachev leadership is most
unlikely to take that path. On the contrary, as Mr. Bialer shows, the evidence
strongly suggests that the leadership favors a technocratic, managerial,
streamlining approach to the economy, based on tight control from the center, a
firm rejection of market mechanisms, quicker technological advance and strict
worker discipline. Mr. Bialer sums up his persuasive overall view by stressing
that ''the elite seems capable of mustering enough power and determination to
prevent the appearance of a strong leader committed to radical reforms, or at
least to nullify his attempts at reform in the very process of their
implementation.''

In his discussion of foreign policy, Mr. Bialer examines the fulcrum of Eastern
Europe from the Soviet perspective. Ideologically, it is a cautionary example to
the third world of the failure of socialism. Militarily, it could not be relied
on in a major war. Economically, it is burdensome enough that the Soviet subsidy
must be reduced, despite the serious risks involved. And politically, its
chronic crises inhibit detente with the United States, facilitate
American-Chinese rapprochement, keep NATO together, and hamper the development
of a cohesive pro-Soviet bloc within world Communism.

All these liabilities were highlighted by the rise and suppression of the
independent trade union Solidarity in Poland in 1980-81, an episode that Mr.
Bialer, in a masterly chapter, sees as ''a critical turning-point in the history
of the Soviet empire.'' The imposition of martial law avoided an immediate
political and economic disaster for the Soviet Union. But, he believes, in the
longer term it solved nothing: the ironic fact is that - to adapt Marx and
Engels's famous line - the specter of a workers' revolution is now haunting East
European Communism.

The response to this of the new Kremlin leaders has been to impose a harder
line. They are insisting on greater political orthodoxy in domestic and foreign
policy, more economic integration through Comecon, the Soviet bloc economic
grouping, and harder work all round to make up for reduced Soviet subsidies. As
for the West Europeans, Mr. Bialer takes them to task for being unduly soft on
Soviet colonialism. They should ease the plight of their Eastern neighbors by
exploiting the leverage they have, both in the economic field and in their
capacity to exert or withhold pressure on the United States.

Soviet relations with China will probably, Mr. Bialer thinks, continue to become
less tense. However, as the Chinese-Soviet conflict is one ''of national
purposes and interests, not one of personalities or ideologies,'' there are
definite limits to this process, and Chinese-American relations will remain
better than their Chinese-Soviet and Soviet-American equivalents. IN his general
interpretation of Soviet foreign policy, Mr. Bialer believes its basic impulse
is an imperialistic Soviet nationalism, even though its ultimate goal of a
pro-Soviet Communist world has been shaped in considerable part by the ideology
of Marxism-Leninism. In pursuing that goal it is opportunistic and pragmatic,
and adapts to the changing environment. It is determined to avoid nuclear war
and dangerous confrontations with the United States.

On how dynamic Soviet nationalism currently is, the book strikes two different
notes. The less insistent one predicts greater selectivity of effort in the
third world, and a certain ''retrenchment in Soviet foreign policy.'' The more
dominant one is reflected in the author's view that ''far from being a sated
power, the Soviet Union has only recently entered a truly global phase of
expansionist ambitions.'' Regarding the directions in which these ambitions will
be mainly expended, he seems most confident about Pakistan, where the Kremlin's
aim is to intimidate President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq through subversion and border
air raids, and thus force him to end his support of the Afghan rebels. Nicaragua
will go Moscow's way with relatively little effort on the Soviet part. Mr.
Bialer's mentions of Afghanistan are disappointingly cursory, but square with
the emphasis on Soviet self-assertion. Contrary to his view of two years ago, he
now sees no sign that the Russians might consider withdrawal. This debatable
position on an important issue needs elaboration.

Most basic, perhaps, to Mr. Bialer's stressing of assertive ambition is his
extremely useful chapter on the neglected subject of Soviet militarism. Apart
from the extensive militarization of today's Soviet society, it was military
strength that in large measure consolidated the Bolshevik regime, which gained
it legitimacy in the Second World War, which created the East European empire,
and which the Kremlin leaders steadily built up from the mid-1960's with the aim
of turning it to political account as the main instrument of their foreign
policy.

On whether the leadership might go beyond this to outright adventurism, Mr.
Bialer is, again, ambivalent. In one place he argues persuasively that ''this is
not at all likely.'' The strong factors against it include the risks of
confrontation with the United States, China, or both. But elsewhere he seems to
contradict himself by saying that the combination of Kremlin vulnerability and
the Reagan challenge reinforces Soviet caution ''only in the short run. In the
long run it may lead to high-risk behavior by fueling anger, obduracy, and
defiance.'' The Soviet leaders are in other words, frustrated by the difficulty
of translating military might into political gains.

The keynote for the United States should, in the author's view, be ''competitive
coexistence or managed rivalry.'' Soviet expansionism should be strongly
contained, but, Mr. Bialer believes (perhaps too insistently), it is
unrealistic, and therefore unwise, to hope to change very radically Soviet
domestic policy. Although the Gorbachev leadership has not yet worked out its
foreign policy strategy very clearly, and may be both seeking arms control and -
to mask Soviet weakness - projecting a combative image to the United States, the
Reagan Administration should, in Mr. Bialer's view, respond positively on arms
control. In particular, it should be ready to make major concessions on the
strategic defense initiative known as ''Star Wars,'' as this program will not
enhance American security. It should also pursue such trade-offs as granting
most-favored-nation status in return for improved Soviet human rights
performance, but should not expect too dramatic results. It should not regard
what semi-official Soviet scholars write as a reliable guide to Politburo
thinking, nor should it imagine it knows enough about the Kremlin power struggle
to try to exploit it. It should, in the main, defend clearly defined American
interests, cooperate with the Soviet Union in areas of mutual interest and
cultivate Western unity.

It is a pity that such a valuable book has not been better edited to eliminate
repetition and factual errors - of which I counted a dozen. But this does not
disqualify it as a major instrument for use by those American leaders on whom
the author lays a solemn duty regarding United States-Soviet relations. This is
''to present to the public the grim reality of a prolonged conflict and the need
for flexibility in the use of foreign policy resources in the decades to come.''
Mr. Bialer's wisdom will serve this purpose well. A REFUGEE, THEN A DEFECTOR
Educated in Poland, Seweryn Bialer had his first encounter with the Soviet Union
at the end of World War II, when the Nazi concentration camp in which he was
held prisoner was liberated by Russian troops. ''I was part of a generation of
young people for whom the struggle against Nazism was the formative experience,
and the Soviet Union was a central part of that fight,'' he said in a recent
telephone interview from his home in Massachusetts.

After the war, Mr. Bialer, who was born in Berlin in 1926, studied political
economy in Warsaw and became a professor at the prestigious institute of social
sciences attached to the Central Committee of the Polish Communist Party. He
made his first visit to the Soviet Union in 1954. ''I came to realize that the
system there involved all of the things I had fought against in Nazism. And I
made my decision on this basis to leave that system at the first opportunity.''

In 1956, Mr. Bialer defected to the United States, and later received a
doctorate in political science from Columbia University, where he has taught for
the last 20 years, with frequent trips to Russia. ''There is an idea that
Churchill made popular when he said that the Soviet Union is a riddle wrapped in
an enigma. But Churchill had no difficulties understanding the Soviet Union. I
think we know the Soviet Union very well.''

What is important, said Mr. Bialer, who was awarded a MacArthur Fellowship in
1983, is a willingness to view Soviet affairs in a broad context. ''In order to
write well about the Soviet Union, one has to be a journalist - to travel widely
and speak to people. It is essential to look at the Soviet Union in the
framework of its history, culture and relations with other nations. And this
takes an extraordinary amount of time.'' - Mark A. Uhlig

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Seweryn Bialer (Pg. 24); Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE

BYLINE: By Betsy Brown

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 12, Column 3; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1233 words


STRANGER IN TWO WORLDS by Jean Harris. Macmillan Publishing Company. 388 pages.
$18.95.

Jean Harris has now told her own story, her version of the events leading to the
fatal shooting of Dr. Herman Tarnower in 1980 and her conviction for his murder.
She writes from the Bedford Hills Correction Facility, where she has served five
years of a 15-years-to-life sentence.

The book is divided into Mrs. Harris's two worlds. The first encompasses her
upper-middle-class girlhood; her 19-year marriage that ended in divorce; her
career as a schoolteacher and administrator, ending with her role as
headmistress at the Madeira School in Virginia; and her romance with Dr.
Tarnower, the ''Scarsdale Diet Doctor.''

As she did at her trial, she insists that she intended to kill herself and that,
contrary to public opinion, she was not jealous of Dr. Tarnower's affair with
his nurse and did not kill him in a jealous rage.

Throughout the book, she refers consistently to ''when Hy died, before Hy died,
and after Hy died.'' She analyzes some of the evidence of her trial minutely,
blames the police for a sloppy investigation that she says destroyed evidence
that could have exonerated her, and criticizes the police for wasting minutes
that she says could have saved Dr. Tarnower's life.

The press turned her into a ''public freak'' and a ''cottage industry,'' she
writes; jurors slept through key testimony, witnesses perjured themselves, and,
she concludes, ''the law is a monster.''

Mrs. Harris's second world is the prison. She describes her arrival, when one of
her main worries was getting her hair done; her efforts to tutor inmates despite
regulations she calls stupid and sadistic; the childishness, hopelessness and
vulgarity of the prisoners; and, finally, her efforts in setting up a program
for prisoners' children - some of whose letters are here included. .

This second half involves considerable research on prison systems, and Mrs.
Harris delivers her opinions on child-rearing and society's mistaken priorities.
Selections from her own diary provide a vivid picture of her life in prison and
of a woman of assurance and determination.

GREEK GODS AND HEROES by Alice Low. Macmillan Publishing Company. 184 pages.
$15.95.

Some of the most entertaining stories ever told make up this book, theoretically
written for children but likely to appeal to any adult who is a bit vague about
the gods and goddesses but not quite willing to sit down and read Bullfinch.

The author puts the myths in perspective: why the Greeks believed what they
believed, how gods differed from men, and what parts of the stories were based
on fact.

There is an index with capsule descriptions such as ''Arachne: Boastful girl who
is changed into a spider by Athena,'' and ''Chimera: Fire-breathing monsters
slayed by Bellerophon.''

The book is big size with large type, easy for reading and compelling for
browsing. Illustrations, mostly in color, are by Arvis Stewart.

Alice Low, a resident of Briarcliff Manor for 34 years, is the author of 17
books. She has written for every age, from preschoolers to adults.

She began with ''Little Golden Books'' in verse as well as prose and later wrote
fold-out-flap books for 1- to 6-year-olds; ''Genie and the Witch's Spells'' and
''The Witch Who Was Afraid of Witches,'' for 8- to 11-year-olds; and others. She
has written short stories for Seventeen and Ingenue magazines; has edited
children's readers, reviewed children's books for The New York Times Book Review
and Publishers Weekly; served as editor for the Children's Choice Book Club, and
written and produced educational filmstrips.

COURAGE IS A THREE-LETTER WORD by Walter Anderson. Random House. 241 words.
$17.95.

The other half of the title appears on the back cover: ''And That Word Is Yes.''
The author went to Barbara Walters, John Ehrlichman, John Glenn, Jack Anderson,
Prince Michael of Greece and a half-dozen other successful people and asked this
question: ''When it's dark and you're alone, do you ever say to yourself, What
will I do when they find out I'm me?''

The result is a self-help book of advice from celebrities who describe their own
self-doubts and how they overcame them. The author weaves their stories into his
own life story.

Walter Anderson, a resident of White Plains, is the editor of Parade Magazine.
He grew up in a tenement in Mount Vernon and joined the Marines when he was 16
years old. His first work for publication was a letter from Vietnam that ran on
Page One of The Mount Vernon Daily Argus in 1965. When he returned home, he
tried selling insurance and working in a laboratory and then got a job in White
Plains as a reporter in 1967 on The Reporter Dispatch.

Without even a high-school diploma, he signed up for a class at Mercy College
and was given a full scholarship. He became editor of The New Rochelle Standard
Star in 1973 and of The Reporter Dispatch in 1975. He joined Parade in 1977 and
became its editor in 1980.

BUYING PRODUCE, a Greengrocer's Guide to Selecting and Storing Fresh Fruit and
Vegetables by Jack Murdich. Hearst Books. 256 pages. $13.95.

For anyone who has ever held back in uncertainty while other shoppers sniffed,
squeezed and shook fruits and vegetables, this book provides a wealth of useful
information, written in a straightforward and nontechnical style and covering
175 different items.

The author tells what to look for -what makes a good grapefruit or head of
lettuce, for example - explains when the produce is at its peak, and advises how
to store it. He discusses varieties of each fruit and vegetable, and includes a
chapter on the lesser-known tropical fruits.

Mr. Murdich, a resident of Scarsdale for 30 years and earlier of New Rochelle,
writes from 30 years' experience in the produce business. His family ran the
Broadview Market in New Rochelle, for retail and wholesale buyers, for 40 years,
and when Mr. Murdich sold the business 10 years ago, he missed it. He went to
work for a Hunts Point market and at the same time began writing a produce
column for The Scarsdale Inquirer. From that beginning of what he calls his
second career, he added a produce report every morning on radio station WMCA.

More recently he has been writing a column, ''Our Man at Hunts Point,'' every
Wednesday in the Gannett Westchester Newspapers, has spoken on several radio
programs, and has lectured to consumer groups and supermarket produce managers.

EXPLORING UNDERWATER PHOTOGRAPHY by John Christopher Fine. Plexus Publishing
Inc. 174 pages. $16.95.

This textbook is designed for readers who are experienced both in photography
and diving, but not in putting the two together. It concentrates heavily on
equipment, and also has two chapters on taking good pictures and getting
dramatic or educational shots. The author discusses night photography,
shipwrecks, and even photography in aquariums. He suggests ways of getting
photos published and of organizing slide shows with music and sound effects.

John Fine is a resident of Scarsdale, where he has lived most of his life. He
has a degree in marine biology and is a lawyer with a specialty in marine
salvage and oceanographic subjects.

He is a prolific writer of articles for specialized magazines on diving and the
sea, as well as airline and adventure publications. He is the author of
''Exploring the Sea.'' He lectures widely on marine subjects.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Jean Harris, John Christopher Fine, Jack Murdick and Walter
Anderson (NYT/Eddie Adams)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY TO PRESENT AIR DEFENSE PLAN COSTING $8 BILLION

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1702 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 27


A year after the Defense Department canceled the Sergeant York air defense gun
as a failure, the Army is seeking approval to spend $8 billion to $22 billion on
weapons to protect front-line divisions from air attack.

Army leaders will present the plan, pieced together over several months, at a
top-level Pentagon review on Tuesday. The plan calls for buying a variety of
weapons ranging from heat-seeking missiles to projectiles guided from afar
through glass filaments.

Critics say that the plan costs too much, that the Army could end up buying the
wrong weapons and that a crucial mistake of the Sergeant York failure - trying
to move too fast - is about to be repeated.

Demise of a Weapons System

The Sergeant York, also known as the Divad, or division air defense gun, was
canceled last August by Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger after the Army
had spent $1.8 billion on its development.

Belated tests proved that the weapon, consisting of two guns and a radar set
mounted on an armored vehicle, could not destroy helicopters hovering close to
the ground, behind hills and trees or at a distance.

If the demise of the Sergeant York illuminated the failings of the military
procurement system, the search for another way to provide battlefield air
defenses illustrates that purchasing weapons is never a simple matter.

A Scramble Among Contractors

The Army now plans to spend perhaps $8 billion in building five types of weapons
to fend off helicopters and jet fighters. Some Army estimates have put the cost
at $22 billion. Even Gen. John A. Wickham Jr., the Army Chief of Staff, told
Congress earlier this year at a closed hearing that the Army did not have enough
money in its long-term budget to pay for the entire plan.

The Pentagon has begun to seek information from prospective contractors about
weapons they might supply, setting of a scramble for potentially lucrative
contracts among more than two dozen arms makers.

The prodigious costs of replacing the Sergeant York result from the
proliferation of helicopters that are able to swarm over a battlefield. The
helicopters have complicated the task of air defense, which previously entailed
knocking down only airplanes. To counter today's threat, the Army has decided,
will require more than the 36 Divad guns, each costing $6 million, that were to
accompany every 17,000-man division.

The Question of Cost

With the bill skyrocketing, the question of cost will be uppermost as a Pentagon
review board meets Tuesday to consider the Army's plan.

''Given the current budgetary climate, it is critical that the Army present a
reasonable, affordable program,'' Donald A. Hicks, Under Secretary of Defense
for Research and Engineering, warned in a memorandum last week to John O. Marsh
Jr., Secretary of the Army. Mr. Hicks asked the Army to make its priorities
clear in case the program must be trimmed.

The Joint Requirements and Management Board, which Mr. Hicks heads, will also
have to deal with technical controversies on Tuesday as it assesses the plan. On
July 18, Army leaders concluded meetings at which the proposed package took
final form. Army officials declined last week to discuss the plans or answer
criticisms, saying they were in the midst of high-level meetings on the subject.

The Army's plan would include five main elements: a vehicle carrying both guns
and missiles, preferably chosen from arms already in service; a longer-range
guided weapon, probably an experimental missile guided by a television camera
and a six-mile-long strand of optical fiber; heat-seeking Stinger missiles
mounted on trucks; steps to arm existing helicopters, tanks and infantry
vehicles with weapons that can shoot down aircraft, and a sophisticated set of
radar sets, radios and computers that would provide information about enemy
targets.

A Dim View of the Plan

But some critics say some elements of the plan are not necessary. A report
published last month by the Congressional Budget Office took a dim view of
combining guns and missiles on vehicles, a centerpiece of the Army's plan. The
guns are often ineffective, the report said, the missiles tend to be too costly
and the advantages of a hybrid vehicle carrying both types of weapons ''appear
to be minimal.''

Charles W. Bernard, who was director of land warfare in the office of the
Defense Secretary in the demise of the Sergeant York, agreed in an interview
that the gun-missile hybrid, which, like the Sergeant York, can only hit targets
that are on a direct line of sight, has been overemphasized.

Mr. Bernard, who is on a one-year sabbatical from the Pentagon, has long been an
advocate of another part of the Army's plan: the fiber-optic guided missile, or
FOG-M, which was devised in the Army's own laboratories. Its great advantage, he
says, is that it allows a gunner to shoot at targets he cannot see. He watches
through a television camera in the missile's nose as it flies to its
destination, connected all the while by the optical fiber that lets the marksman
steer it.

Despite the critics, Tuesday's meeting of the Joint Requirements and Management
Board, which must approve all such weapon purchases, is expected to endorse the
solution accepted by Army leaders earlier this month.

Plan 'Approved in Principle'

In a memorandum March 18 to Mr. Marsh, Secretary Weinberger said he ''approved
in principle'' the Army's strategy. The meeting Tuesday, which is required
before Mr. Weinberger formally approves the plan, is expected to concentrate on
whether parts of the program are being rushed, whether adequate tests will be
scheduled before production begins and whether the costs are known to have
enough accuracy to justify going forward.

If the plan is approved, some of the year's biggest competition for major
weapons contracts will ensue.

''It is clearly understood that providing proper air defense for the Army is
going to cost money,'' said Julio Sierra, an executive at Ford Aerospace. The
company, which built the Sergeant York, is now offering missile systems to the
Army.

Indeed, the opportunity to supply billions of dollars worth of equipment has
dozens of arms merchants worked up into what one Army officer called ''a feeding
frenzy.''

Soviet Aircraft Modernized

According to Army documents, 27 military contractors from 10 nations have
proposed 37 different combinations of guns and missiles to replace the Sergeant
York.

The contractors are drawn to the competition because they know the Army is in a
hurry.

Ever since the mid-1970's, the Army pinned its hopes on the Sergeant York to
replace two 20-year-old weapons, the Vulcan gun and the Chaparral missile. And
in the following years, while the Sergeant York was canceled, the Soviet Union
embarked on an ambitious modernization of its aircraft.

''Progressively, we have worked ourselves into a corner,'' said John M. Collins,
a senior military specialist at the Congressional Research Service.

Mr. Collins, who joined the Army as a foot soldier in 1942 and left as a colonel
and a professor at the National War College in 1972, saw action in World War II,
Korea and Vietnam. In all three wars, he said, ''I never looked up when I heard
an aircraft and wondered whose it was - it was always ours.''

''There is nothing more comforting to the guy on the ground than air
superiority, not to mention air supremacy,'' he added. ''We have not got either
anymore.''

Testing Termed Inadequate

Critics of the Army plan contend that the military is rushing to deploy a system
without adequate tests or a complete understanding of the way the weapons would
work together.

''A lot of what I see popping up are not solidly evaluated programs or fully
tested ideas - they are working concepts,'' said Joseph Burneice, an independent
analyst who is frequently critical of Pentagon programs.

To some, the Army appears to be repeating the same approach to procurement that
served it so poorly with the Sergeant York.

''The Sergeant York's acquisition strategy contained some positive elements but,
on the whole, was detrimental to the program,'' said the General Accounting
Office, an investigative arm of Congress, in a report last May.

The accounting office characterized the strategy as a ''hands-off, skunk works''
scheme in which contractors were given as much leeway as possible in assembling
the weapon. Since the Sergeant York's radar, guns and chassis were all
previously in use on other military systems, the Army decided to delay some
testing until it was almost ready for full production.

According to the G.A.O., the minimal Pentagon involvement in designing and
testing the Sergeant York ''inhibited essential information on system
performance and program progress from reaching those who were to make funding
and programming decisions.''

Delays in Radar System

Recent memorandums written by senior Army officials show that the Army will
spend billions of dollars as early as next year, even though the precise mix of
weapons to be bought is still unknown. Once again, the Army says the risks are
low because most of the components being linked together have already been
developed.

One of the decisions to be made this week is whether to press forward with a
contract for the radar network that would warn of approaching aircraft, giving
ground troops time to shoot first.

This automatic system, which will cost more than $2 billion to deploy in the
field, has been delayed repeatedly. Air defense units remain linked by manual
systems. No matter what new weapons are used, experts say, they cannot be fully
effective without an automatic system.

But some Pentagon officials wonder whether the Army is ready to buy the new
equipment. Tuesday's meeting is expected to focus on whether there is too much
''concurrency'' in the plan -whether production is scheduled to begin while
important research remains undone.

The Army is also moving briskly toward purchasing the weapons themselves.
Production of some weapons is supposed to begin next year, with weapons fielded
by 1989. In a memorandum to Secretary Weinberger on June 23, Mr. Marsh, the Army
Secretary, said the schedule ''remains essentially on track.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. John Wickham Jr. (UPI) (page A10)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ON ISLAND IN PHILIPPINES, FEAR AND BURNED HOMES

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 979 words

DATELINE: BACTOLON, the Philippines, July 23


For months, Communist rebels had moved freely through the isolated hamlets
around this mountainside village, challenging the military to dislodge them, and
now the soldiers had come, scattering artillery fire and setting fire to the
thatched roofs of the farmers' homes.

Antonio Baculi fled, joining 2,000 refugees who left the area last month, the
latest victims in a 17-year-old insurgency that has shown little sign of easing
since President Corazon C. Aquino came to power in February.

The burning of some 50 homes was seen by many as an echo of American tactics in
Vietnam, and it was a setback for Mrs. Aquino's efforts to bring about
reconciliation and a cease-fire, further polarizing the conflict here on the
southern island of Negros.

The local commander, Col. Rene Cardones, asserted that only rebel military
installations had been destroyed, but Bishop Antonio Fortich of Negros said no
camps had been found, ''only houses.''

Charred Remains of Houses

On a visit over muddy mountain trails to one of the hamlets, Cagay, a reporter
found only the charred remains of one- and two-room houses and storage huts,
where returning refugees labored to salvage their small harvests of corn.

There was no sign of the bunkers or fortifications described by Colonel
Cardones.

Conversations with the villagers and others who know the area appeared to bear
out the colonel's contention that this was what the Communists call a
''liberated zone,'' where they commanded the allegiance, or at least the
acquiescence, of the people.

It was raining when the soldiers appeared from the jungle at Mr. Baculi's house
in the hamlet of Bolo, slogging through the underbrush with their ammunition in
heavy bandoleers across their chests. They pointed their guns at him, Mr. Baculi
said, and demanded, ''Where is the well?'' #4 Days of Shelling The shelling,
which marked a widening of the war in Negros, had already continued for four
days, he said, and most of his neighbors had evacuated their homes.

Lourdes Aburido said she had fled the hamlet of Baguymuyon with her father,
mother, husband and two children after a soldier fired in her direction as she
was gathering vegetables. She said smoke was already rising in the distance from
her neighbors' homes.

Anisita Concepcion, eight months pregnant, had fled with her husband, Enarcisso,
and their five children after the soldiers took their chickens, cooking pots and
clothing. ''Now I have no place to give birth,'' she said.

Dithit and Lorenzo Noniala and their 10 children said they had taken refuge in a
limestone cave for four days as the shelling continued, with only their sleeping
mats and pots of rice.

Gathered with the other refugees in Bactolon, a muddy village six miles from the
nearest electricity, Mrs. Noniala lit a cheroot from her tobacco field in the
hamlet of Vito and said, ''We ran from the sound of the big guns and because we
heard that the military sometimes kills civilians.''

Mr. Baculi, speaking in angry tones through an interpreter in the local language
of Ilongo, said that after asking for water, the soldiers, still pointing their
guns at him, asked if the rebels were nearby. #1,200 Rebels on Island ''No,
sir,'' he said he replied. ''Since you started shelling the place, I have not
seen any N.P.A. around.'' The N.P.A. is the Communist New People's Army, which
is estimated to field 20,000 or more armed men, 1,200 of them in Negros.

''They said, 'The problem with you people is that you don't say where the
N.P.A.'s are,' and I said: 'Please, sir, understand our situation. If we tell
you where the N.P.A.'s are, they will surely kill us.' ''

As the soldiers busied themselves commandeering his chickens and cooking pots,
Mr. Baculi said, he could see their companions farther up the hillside
ransacking the abandoned house of his cousin Dionisio Bocar.

Then he said one soldier, taking shelter from the rain under the eaves of his
cousin's house, struck a match and held it to the underside of the straw roof.

Mr. Baculi said that he and the soldiers watched silently as the fire grew, and
that when it was burning strongly, the troops disappeared down the mountain
trail.

In the weeks since the shelling, which took place in the last week of June, most
of the refugees have returned to their hamlets. But several hundred remain here
in Bactolon, sleeping in the schoolhouse. #50 Report Homes Burned Church workers
and the village counselor, Ulgarico Vingno, said that they had taken the names
of about 50 families whose homes were burned.

The refugees have received one sardine and one cup full of rice each day, but
even these small rations have almost been depleted.

In addition, a relief agency has sent several hundred packets of a dried diet
called Shaklee Old South Style Noodles and Chicken. The refugees, few of whom
read English, seem unaware that the packets describe their rations as a ''great
taste for anyone who wants a light meal, or for those who are watching their
weight.''

In June the rebels warned that they might strike back at what they saw as
aggressive deployments by the military, which had brought two new battalions to
Negros.

On June 20 the rebels attacked a truckload of Government troops near the
southern coastal village of Hinobaan and ambushed the reinforcements sent to
rescue them. Several soldiers were killed or wounded.

Rebel Recording Is Broadcast

But many in Negros said they believed that what infuriated the military, and
perhaps led to the harshness of the operation around Bactolon, was the
broadcasting by a local radio station of an N.P.A. tape recording of the ambush.

''Spread out a little bit more,'' whispers the voice of an N.P.A. commander who
had apparently attached a tape recorder to his chest. Then the action begins
with a series of popping gunshots and the shout: ''Attack! Attack! Attack!''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of the Philippines; photo of Paulino and Angelina Vallispin and
their family (NYT/John Giannini)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Veterans Need Access To Courts for Claims

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 258 words


To the Editor:

''Some Veterans Deserve a Day in Court'' (editorial, July 16) confronts a
serious national problem. Not only are Vietnam veterans affected by the $10
legal limit on attorney fees going back to the Civil War, but indeed all
veterans are denied their rights to litigate for such rights. Their rights as
citizens to demand redress for injuries is denied effectively by the legal-fee
limitation.

Proper presentation of a claim before the Veterans Administration requires the
same care and standard of advocacy as is demanded in any civil or criminal suit.
The service organizations that attempt to assist the veteran without charge
simply do not have the legal or forensic expertise to represent the veteran
properly. A cozy relationship has, unfortunately, developed between such
organizations and the Veterans Administration, to the detriment of the
individual veteran claimant.

Many legitimate claims are rejected by the V.A. for inadequate proof. What
compounds this problem is that a fire in 1973 destroyed millions of records in
the National Personnel Records Center in St. Louis. It is an extremely
difficult, if not impossible, matter to produce secondary proof of occurrences,
accidents, battle injuries and hospitalization records because of this fire
loss.

It would be most salutary for the Veterans Administration to know that it is not
a law unto itself. Only access to the court, at the option of the veteran, can
help guarantee to the veteran his full rights as a citizen. LESTER LICHTER White
Plains, July 16, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 578 words


CORPORATE NOTES Midday, outdoors and in the financial district the Lower
Manhattan Cultural Council is as busy this summer as a stock market ticker. The
nonprofit council is in league with such bottom-line scrutinizers as Olympia &
York, the real-estate giant, Continental Insurance and the Chase Manhattan Bank.
These partnerships are responsible for free concerts for downtown workers and
residents, who can see and hear a variety of artists - usually musicians and
dancers - in various locations on different days of the week.

Today, the seventh annual ''Women in Jazz Downtown'' concert series will begin
with Abbey Lincoln Aminata Moseka, the singer and actress. One of her earliest
acting appearances was in the 1957 film ''The Girl Can't Help It.'' In 1961, she
was a member of the cast of Jean Genet's ''The Blacks'' when it had its premiere
here. She later starred opposite Ivan Dixon in the acclaimed 1964 feature
''Nothing But a Man,'' and in 1968 joined Sidney Poitier in the romantic comedy
''For Love of Ivy.'' All the while she had been singing. Her voice continues to
have the grainy, warm quality critics noted when she began recording in the late
1950's and early 1960's.

Today's performance, and all others in the women's series, take place at 12:15
P.M. at the Chase Manhattan Plaza, at Liberty and Nassau Streets. Cobi Narita,
of the Universal Jazz Coalition, programmed the series, which continues Monday
through Friday, through Aug. 8. For information, call 269-0320.

Also downtown today, ''The Monday Music Series,'' which focuses on various
ethnic sources, will present Bernie Charles, a violinist, and his trio. He plays
what has been described as a barrelhouse, alley fiddle. The group will perform
in Vietnam Veteran's Plaza, on Water Street at Coenties Slip, one block north of
Broad Street, also at 12:15 P.M.

BACH AND HIGH TECH

In the second program of the Brooklyn Bach Festival, Matthew Sullivan will
perform on oboe today.

He will appear with assisting artists and C. Bryan Rulon, who refers to himself
as a synthesist. This term, he said, means that he works idiomatically with the
instrument rather than just being a keyboard player. The two men are members of
an improvisatory ensemble and this program will be one of improvisatory music
based largely on Bach and also including works by G. F. Handel, Erik Satie and
others.

The concert will be held in the chapel of the historic First Unitarian Church,
in Brooklyn Heights, at Monroe Place and Pierrepont Street, at 8 P.M. Admission
is $5. For information and reservations, call 787-0517.

MIDDLE EASTERN MOVES

''Egyptian Mood,'' ''Sous,'' ''Syriac Line'' and ''The Sama I.'' These are
Middle Eastern dances that Ramzi El-Edlibi and his dance company will be
performing this evening at the Donnell Library Center, at 20 West 53d Street.
The entire company will perform ''Syriac Line'' and ''The Sama I.'' The latter,
a piece based on Turkish rites of the whirling dervishes and said by Mr.
El-Edlibi to be a ''mysterious and unearthly veil dance,'' will be seen by the
public for the first time.

Mr. El-Edlibi said he had set out ''to preserve the traditions and spirit of
Middle Eastern dance and display the magic of oriental movement through the use
of costume, design and choreographic story line.''

The program is free and will begin at 6 P.M. For information, call (718)
956-3656. Entertainment Events is on C14. Sports Today is on C8.

C. Gerald Fraser

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 29, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET ANNOUNCES DECISION TO TRIM ITS AFGHAN FORCE

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1367 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 28


Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that the Soviet Union would withdraw six
regiments from Afghanistan by the end of the year, and asked that the move be
matched by a reduction of Western aid to the guerrillas.

In a televised speech from the Pacific coast city of Vladivostok, he also gave a
noncommittal response to President Reagan's recent letter on arms control, and
called for closer relations with China.

Western diplomats said the troop withdrawal would cut Soviet forces in
Afghanistan by 6 percent. The number of soviet troops in Afghanistan is
estimated at 120,000, and the number of Afghan guerrillas as high as 30,000.

Call for Verification

Mr. Gorbachev said the six regiments would be withdrawn in such a way as to make
possible verification by ''anyone interested,'' presumably meaning American spy
satellites. [In Washington, the Reagan Administration indicated it did not
attach great importance to the announcement. In another move, the State
Department proposed to a visiting Soviet official that the foreign ministers
meet in mid-September to begin planning for a summit meeting. Page A7.] In the
Vladivostok speech, Mr. Gorbachev said Mr. Reagan's reply on arms control had
been delivered over the weekend. The letter ''sets one thinking'' and is being
studied with ''responsibility and attention,'' Mr. Gorbachev said.

He said the Soviet reaction would depend on whether the American positions
''meet the principle of equal security'' and ''make it possible to reach
effective joint solutions in the field of ending the arms race and preventing
its spread to outer space.''

In Washington last week, officials said Mr. Reagan was prepared to delay
deployment of space-based missile defense systems for up to seven years on
condition that the Soviet Union agree to deployment after that period. Western
diplomats said the fact that Mr. Gorbachev did not criticize or reject the
latest American offer was a positive sign. But they cautioned that the Soviet
Union was likely to have reservations since the offer was contingent on the
continued development of space-based defenses.

On Afghanistan, Mr. Gorbachev said that the withdrawal of the six regiments
''must be answered'' by a reciprocal curtailment of Western aid to the
guerrillas fighting Soviet and Afghan Government forces.

It was the first announced withdrawal of Soviet troops since they entered
Afghanistan in December 1979.

Western diplomats said the withdrawal of the six regiments - one armored
regiment, two motorized rifle regiments and three antiaircraft artillery
regiments - was a token gesture that would not significantly reduce Soviet
influence in Afghanistan, but might improve the climate for efforts to reach a
political settlement.

Contingent on Western Response

Mr. Gorbachev indicated that no additional withdrawals would occur without a
cutback in Western support for the guerrillas. If aid continues, he said, ''the
Soviet Union will stand up for its neighbor.''

In the 1985 fiscal year, the United States gave the Afghan guerrillas $280
million in aid, mostly in the form of small arms, ammunition, support equipment
and clothing, according to American officials.

Mr. Gorbachev said, ''The Soviet Union is striving to speed up a political
settlement, to give it another impetus.''

He said that the Soviet Union and Afghanistan had worked out a timetable for the
withdrawal of all Soviet forces, and that this schedule might be speeded up if a
political settlement were worked out. He said there had been progress in
indirect United Nations-mediated talks between Afghanistan and Pakistan.

At a round of talks in June, the Afghans said their agreement with the Soviet
Union provided for a phased withdrawal over a four-year period. Pakistan and the
United States called such a drawn-out schedule unrealistic.

View on Summit Talks Affirmed

On a second meeting with President Reagan, Mr. Gorbachev insisted that the talks
should promote progress in arms control and help reduce tension.

The Soviet leader said he could not agree with the view that the accords reached
at the first summit meeting in Geneva could ''be reduced simply to the promise
of having more meetings.''

''No,'' Mr. Gorbachev said. ''The main thing on which we agreed last time with
President Reagan, and what we signed, is a consent to strive for normalization
of relations and for improvement of the international situation and to speed the
course of talks on the reduction of armaments.''

On the issue of medium-range missiles, he insisted that any proposed elimination
of Soviet missiles in Europe would mean just that - elimination - and not the
transfer of such missiles to Asia.

Mr. Gorbachev spent considerable time on the issue of Soviet-Chinese relations.
He said these had noticeably improved in recent years, and offered talks on
additional measures aimed at transforming what he described as the world's
longest land frontier into a ''line of peace and friendship.'' Troop Cuts
Offered to China He proposed talks on reductions in Soviet and Chinese land
forces and noted that the two nations had similar priorities in developing and
modernizing their economies. He suggested that the two countries might discuss
the best ways of achieving these aims.

''Why not support each other?'' Mr. Gorbachev said.

He disclosed that the Soviet Union and China were working out an accord to renew
joint water management projects in the Amur River basin on their border. Such a
program had been worked out in the 1950's, but was canceled when the two
countries began to drift apart.

Mr. Gorbachev said the Soviet Union was also preparing a ''positive reply'' to a
Chinese proposal to renew construction of a railroad linking the Xinjiang Uighur
Autonomous Region of China and the Soviet republic of Kazakhstan. Such a project
was also begun in the 1950's.

The Soviet leader added that Moscow had offered to train Chinese astronauts for
a joint space mission. Relations in Pacific Basin Reviewing political and
economic relations in the Pacific basin, Mr. Gorbachev said, ''We clearly
realize that that the United States is a great Pacific power with legitimate
economic and political interests in the region.''

But, since the mid-1970's, he went on, the United States has conducted a
military build-up that is turning the Pacific Ocean ''into an arena of
military-political confrontation.''

During the same period, according to the Pentagon, the Soviet Union has also
strengthened its forces in the Pacific.

To reduce tension, Mr. Gorbachev proposed, as a long-term objective, a
conference of Pacific nations that would work out an agreement for cooperation
similar to the 1975 Helsinki accord in Europe.

Even before such an ambitious undertaking, he added, the Pacific nations might
come together to consider confidence-building measures and the nonuse of force,
similar to measures now being worked out by the European nations in Stockholm.

He said such an Asian-Pacific security conference might be convened in a Soviet
Pacific city, possibly even Vladivostok, which as a naval base is among Soviet
cities now closed to foreigners. He said the Soviet Union might consider ending
this restriction.

''We would like it to be our widely opened window to the east,'' he said,
drawing an apparent analogy to the construction in the 18th century of the city
of St. Petersburg (the present Leningrad) as a ''window to the west.''

Among other diplomatic initiatives, Mr. Gorbachev called for an improvement of
relations between the Communist countries of Indochina - Vietnam, Cambodia and
Laos - and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, a regional grouping made
up of Burnei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.

Mr. Gorbachev also proposed Soviet-American negotiations aimed at a reduction of
Pacific naval forces, particularly nuclear-armed ships, and limitations on the
deployment of antisubmarine weapons.

He suggested that the United States consider removing some or all of its
military forces from the Philippines.

''If the United States gave up its military presence, say, in the Philippines,
we would not leave this step unanswered,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mikhail S. Gorbachev (Tass via AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 29, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Giving Back a Medal

BYLINE: By Wayne King and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 187 words


In protest over United States military involvement in Central America, an
American war hero plans today to return the Medal of Honor he was awarded for
carrying 20 men, dead and alive, out of a combat zone in Vietnam.

Charles Liteky, a former Army chaplain awarded the medal by President Johnson in
1968, said he would place it in an envelope addressed to President Reagan and
leave it at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial along with a note protesting against
aid to the rebel resistance in Nicaragua and United States activity elsewhere in
Central America.

At a news conference at 10 A.M. before delivering the medal, Mr. Liteky will be
joined by Representative David E. Bonior, Democrat of Michigan, who will
announce a ''Campaign of Conscience'' to oppose further United States
involvement.

Mr. Liteky, who will renounce all benefits attendant to holding the medal,
including a $200 monthly stipend and free transportation on military aircraft,
said: ''It's no longer a question of whether Central America will become another
Vietnam. It's already another Vietnam. I'm simply saying, 'My God, when will we
learn?' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 30, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NICARAGUAN FINDS REAGAN MAKING NEW VIETNAM IN CENTRAL AMERICA

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 854 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 29


President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua said today that the Reagan
Administration was moving toward another Vietnam by financing anti-Government
guerrillas in Nicaragua.

The Sandinista leader, speaking before the Security Council, also condemned the
House of Representatives' approval of $100 million in new contra aid, adding
that Nicaragua will continue to defend its right to self-determination in the
face of threats, blockades and other intervention by the Reagan Administration.

Mr. Ortega's 30-minute speech was greeted by a standing ovation from some
members of the audience, among them 100 guests invited by the Nicaraguan Mission
to attend the session. Birabhongse Kasemsri, the Council president this month
and the chief Thai delegate, at first made no attempt to stem the outburst but
then pounded his gavel, later reminding the Council that he would not permit
such disturbances.

Speaking to the Council, Mr. Ortega said: ''President Reagan must realize that
the state terrorism that the Administration is putting into practice against the
people of Nicaragua is immoral. President Reagan must realize that by this path
he is promoting another Vietnam in Central America in which North American youth
will also come to die in Central America.''

Refers to World Court

Mr. Ortega asked the United States to abide by a recent decision of the World
Court of Justice outlawing American support for the guerrillas, known as
contras, as illegal.

''We do not want confrontation,'' he said in a speech that many diplomats
described as more moderate than previous one he has given at the United Nations.
''We have not come to the Council to cast insults against the United States
Government, but to seek peace and respect for international law.''

The World Court, formally known as the International Court of Justice, is based
at The Hague and serves as the juridical arm of the United Nations. In June,
after more than two years of deliberations, the Court ruled that the United
States should halt all financial and military support for the rebels and urged
the United States to settle damage claims put forth by Nicaragua. The United
States rejected the Court's decision, saying that it had no jurisdiction over
the conflict in Central America.

Mr. Ortega said Nicaragua saw this session, its 12th Security Council session
since 1982, as ''an opportunity for the United States to reconsider its policy
and bring its conduct in line with the principles and norms of international
law.''

Backs Mild Resolution

He is expected to seek approval of a mild resolution asking for support of the
World Court decision, but will not ask for a specific condemnation of the United
States in an attempt to isolate the United States from the rest of the 15-member
council.

At a news conference immediately after his speech, Mr. Ortega again compared
Nicaragua to Vietnam, saying that President Reagan ''is wrong'' in thinking that
a military solution in Nicaragua ''would be relatively quick.''

Mr. Reagan, he said, ''doesn't realize that military intervention would mean
getting United States troops bogged down in Nicaragua.''

He sidestepped a question on whether Nicaragua would try to enforce the World
Court decision in American courts.

Walters Defends Rejection

Vernon A. Walters, the chief American delegate, defended Washington's rejection
of the World Court in a sharply worded attack against the Sandinista Government
and what he called its betrayal of its revolution.

''We are certainly not prepared to take lessons in international law from
Nicaragua, a country which as a matter of deliberate state policy has
consistently violated international law, including the most fundamental norms of
the United Nations charter, a country which has sought to overthrow the
governments of its neighbors and to deny its own people the right to
self-determination,'' he said.

Charging that Nicaragua ''sought to misuse the Court,'' Mr. Walters repeated the
position of the United States that the case was inappropriate for judicial
resolution, adding, ''To ask for the Court to solve the crisis does it a
disservice, for the only way to solve the crisis is through negotiations
involving all the parties.''

Mr. Walters said the United States was willing to resume direct talks with
Nicaragua, after a proposal by Mr. Ortega for a new round of negotiations with
the United States. But he repeated the Administration position that such talks
must be held simultaneously with a discussion between the Sandinistas and the
opposition, a condition the Sandinista Government has consistently rejected. #5
KILLED IN REBEL AMBUSH MANAGUA, Nicaragua, July 29 (Reuters) - Five people,
including a Swiss and a West German volunteer, were killed in an ambush by
United States-backed rebels, the Government radio said today.

The radio said a Swiss volunteer construction worker, Ivan Claude Leyvraz, and a
German volunteer worker, Bernhard Kalberstein, died Monday along with three
Nicaraguans when rebels ambushed their vehicle on a road 120 miles north of
Managua in the strife-torn Jinotega province.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 30, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GESTURE OF PROTEST:

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 52 words


Charles Liteky placing his Medal of Honor at Vietnam Veterans Memorial in
Washington. The action was a protest against United States support of the rebels
in Nicaragua. Mr. Liteky, a former Roman Catholic chaplain, won the nation's
highest military honor for heroism under fire in Vietnam. (NYT/Paul Hosefros)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 30, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HARRIMAN LAUDED ON STATESMANSHIP

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words


W. Averell Harriman was mourned, celebrated and honored yesterday at funeral
services that attracted some of the leading officials of the nation, the state
and the city - testimony to a career that spanned more than half a century and
the whole world.

Mr. Harriman, a former Governor of New York who was better known for his service
as diplomat, foreign policy negotiator, Cabinet member and adviser to four
Presidents, died at his home in Yorktown Heights last Saturday of kidney failure
complicated by pneumonia. He was 94 years old.

He was Ambassador to the Soviet Union and Britain and an Ambassador at-large. He
negotiated the nuclear test ban treaty, was an adviser to Franklin D. Roosevelt
at Teheran and Yalta and played a key role in Vietnam peace talks a quarter of a
century later.

Mr. Harriman administered the National Recovery Administration in the Depression
and the Marsall Plan in post-World War II Europe. He knew every Soviet leader
from Leon Trotsky to Yuri V. Andropov, the former Communist Party general
secretary whom he visited in 1983.

As a private citizen, he was heir to the Union Pacific Railroad fortune,
chairman of the board of that railroad, an investment banker, a noted polo
player and art collector and an ardent Democrat, a partisanship that was
reflected in the audience at yesterday's funeral.

Simple Service

''A great and extraordinary person has departed this life,'' said the Rev. Paul
Moore Jr., the Episcopal Bishop of New York at the simple service in the Gothic
interior of St. Thomas Episcopal Church at Fifth Avenue and 53d Street.

''To read his life story even in summary is a staggering experience,'' the
bishop told 900 mourners. ''To see history through the eyes of one who was
there, with sense and deep commitment to justice and peace and freedom, who was
there at almost every dangerous lurch of events in this strange century of
ours,'' Mr. Moore said.

''We do not paint a plastic saint today,'' said the Bishop, ''but we do paint a
man filled with the obligation of his nobility.

''He was one to whom much was given, and he gave and gave and gave much more to
us all. Would that everyone, however great or small his heritage, could be such
a steward of his talents. He spread himself upon the whole world.''

A Rousing Hymn

His was the only eulogy at the service, which consisted largely of scripture
readings, psalms and hymns, concluded by a rousing ''Battle Hymn of the
Republic'' in which the congregation joined a 14-member choir.

But there were many other eulogies in written statements and spoken on the
steamy sidewalk outside the church.

''The world has lost one of her most respected statesmen,'' said President
Reagan in a statement. ''The death of Averell Harriman closes a chapter in
diplomatic history which only someone of his talent and stature could have
written.''

In a letter to Pamela Harriman, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet General
Secretary, hailed Mr. Harriman for ''his devotion till the last days of his life
to the cause of strengthening mutual understanding between the Soviet and
American peoples and improving the relations between the U.S.S.R. and the United
States.''

'A Great Reassurance'

Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain wrote to Mrs. Harriman, ''Your
husband was a man of immense distinction, truly one of the great figures of
modern history.'' She added: ''The fact that so many different Presidents
recognized and drew upon his skill and experience was a great tribute to him as
well as a great reassurance to America's allies, who saw him as a trusted friend
and a firm champion of liberty.'' Mrs. Thatcher was represented at the funeral
service by Lord Oliver Franks.

Outside the church, Walter F. Mondale, the former Vice President and the
Democratic Presidential candidate in 1984, said that Mr. Harriman was ''a
remarkable human being.''

''His kind doesn't exist anymore,'' said Henry A. Kissinger, the former
Secretary of State who was joined by two other former Secretaries of State,
Cyrus W. Vance and Edmund G. Muskie.

Vernon A. Walters, the United States Ambassador to the United Nations, described
Mr. Harriman as ''a universal statesman.'' Mr. Walters, who was representing the
Reagan Administration, had worked with Mr. Harriman at the Vietnam peace talks
in Paris.

A Harriman Aide

Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who had been a Harriman aide in the 1954
election for governor and later assistant secretary to Governor Harriman, said
that ''as much as we are diminished by his death, we are enhanced by his life.''
The Senator from New York noted outside the church that he and his wife,
Elizabeth, had met in that campaign.

Former Gov. Hugh L. Carey recalled that in the midst of the city fiscal crisis
10 years ago, Mr. Harriman, although suffering from injuries received in a fall
at his Georgetown home, insisted on writing to various senators promoting
Federal loan guarantees for New York City.

Governor Cuomo and his wife, Matilda, and former Governors Carey and Malcolm
Wilson along with Mayor Koch followed the coffin into the church. Also present
were three former mayors, Robert F. Wagner Sr., John V. Lindsay and Abraham D.
Beame.

Mrs. Harriman led a family group that included two daughters, Mary Harriman Fisk
and Kathleen Harriman Mortimer, both of Manhattan; six grandchildren, and six
great-grandchildren.

Among the ushers were former Secretary of Defense Clark Clifford; Nicholas deB.
Katzenbach, the former Attorney General; McGeorge Bundy, John Kenneth Galbraith
and Arthur Schlesinger, foreign policy advisers to various Presidents, and
Sydney Gruson, vice chairman of The New York Times Company.

Senator Edward M. Kennedy and Ethel Kennedy led Kennedy family members and
former Kennedy aides who were friends as well as governmental associates of Mr.
Harriman.

The mourners filled the steps of the church between two rows of state troopers.
Other police including five New York City motorcycle officers had led the
funeral cortege to the church and after the service to the Harriman family
estate in Harriman, N.Y., where Mr. Harriman was buried. Family members and
friends later attended a reception at Arden House, the one-time Harriman estate
in the Ramapo Mountains near Harriman.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of W. Averell Harriman's coffin passing honor guard of state
troopers at St. Thomas Episcopal Church (NYT/Neal Boenzi)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 30, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, JULY 30, 1986

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 858 words


International

South Africa reacted hostilely to the latest Western initiative to promote a
dialogue on apartheid. President P. W. Botha told Britain's Foreign Secretary,
Sir Geoffry Howe, that Pretoria ''should be left in peace.'' Sir Geoffrey has
represented the 12-member European Community on a seven-day visit to southern
Africa. [Page A1, Column 6.]

The U.S. and Pretoria signed an agreement to increase textile imports from South
Africa by 4 percent, the Reagan Administrtion told Congress. The disclosure
prompted angry criticism on Capitol Hill, where legislators have been
considering the imposition of strict economic sanctions against South Africa.
The White House maintained that the accord would in effect limit Pretoria's
share of the American market, which has been rising rapidly. [A1:5.]

A car-bombing killed 25 people and wounded 180 in the second such incident in
the Beirut area in two days. An auto packed with explosives and mortar shells
exploded in a crowded marketplace in Moslem West Beirut. The blast occurred as a
funeral mass was being held at a Maronite Catholic Church in West Beirut for the
31 people killed in a Beirut suburb bombing Monday. [A1:5-6.]

Nicaragua charged that the Reagan Administration was moving toward another
Vietnam by financing anti-Government guerrillas in Nicaragua. President Daniel
Ortega Saavedra, speaking before the United Nations Security Council, said
Nicaragua would continue to defend its right to self-determination. [A2:3-4.]

National

The U.S. Football League suffered a resounding defeat in Federal District Court
in Manhattan when a jury found that the National Football League had violated
only one of nine antitrust and common law charges brought against it by the
U.S.F.L. and awarded the four-year-old league only $1 in damages. [A1:1-2.]

Senate panelists moved quickly to draw the lines of ideological engagement as
they began hearings on the nomination of William H. Rehnquist to be Chief
Justice of the United States. As they prepared for what is expected to be a
grueling examination of the conservative jurist today, several members of the
Judiciary Committee said they faced one of the most important decisions of their
careers. [A1:3-4.]

San Francisco has surpassed Philadelphia in population, becoming the nation's
fourth largest urban area, while Washington slipped two places to 10th, the
Census Bureau reported. It said New York remained well ahead of all other
metropolitan regions in the new population estimates for 1985, with Los Angeles
second and Chicago third. [A13:4-6.]

Spending for health care rose last year by 8.9 percent, the slowest rate of
increase in two decades, the Government reported. It said health-care spending
totaled $425 billion, an average of $1,721 for each person in the country.
[B9:4-5.]

Democratic politicians joined farmers suffering through a record drought when a
train carrying 77 boxcars of donated Indiana hay arrived in Columbia, S.C.
Lieut. Gov. Mike Daniel, the party's gubernatorial candidate, rode the
locomotive and waved as it rumbeled past television news cameras. [A12:1-2.]

The Senate approved TV coverage of all its proceedings on a permanent basis by a
vote of 78 to 21. The House of Representatives has allowed television coverage
since 1979. [A15:1-4.]

Metropolitan

Law enforcers have given up attempts to deport most aliens arrested for dealing
in drugs in New York City because the Immigration and Naturalization Service is
unable or unwilling to investigate the cases, according to officials of the
agencies. They say up to half of the hundreds of people arrested each month for
dealing in crack are aliens. [A1:1.]

Mourners honored Averell Harriman at a Manhattan funeral service that attracted
leading officials of the nation, state and city - a testimony to a career that
spanned more than half a century and the entire world. He was a former New York
Governor, diplomat, foreign policy negotiator, Cabinet member and close adviser
to four Presidents. [A16:1.]

Milton J. Petrie has given $10 million to the Beth Israel Medical Center,
officials of the Manhattan hospital said. The unrestricted gift brings to more
than $21 million the contributions Mr. Petrie, an 83-year-old businessman, has
made to the hospital. [B3:3-4.]

Immigrants have saved churches including the First United Methodist Church in
Flushing, Queens. The English-speaking congregation is small, barely 30 members
in all, and lacks the wherewithal to maintain the ample church building. But the
Korean congregation has 450 members, so many that it is spread out over two
Sunday services and can field a choir of 40 singers. [B1:1-3.]

Americans are eating more seafood, including some species considered worthless
by commercial fishermen just a few years ago, such as squid, shark and
butterfish. The trend is motivated by a search for less fatty, healthier diets.
Along the Long Island coast and the rest of the Eastern seaboard, the growing
demand for nontraditional fish has helped rescue scores of economically
hard-pressed fishermen. [A1:2-4.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 1, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POP/JAZZ;
BIG BANDS BRIGHTEN NEW YORK CLUB SCENE

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words


IT takes some nerve, and no little maneuvering, to assemble a big band in 1986.
Promoters and club owners are geared to smaller groups; record producers
cheerfully substitute synthesizers for horn sections. Yet musicians and
audiences still savor the chance to hear individuals creating an ensemble.
Against the odds, three big bands are in town this weekend - groups whose music
demands between 10 and 16 living, breathing, improvising players.

At Sweet Basil through Sunday, the bassist Charlie Haden has reconvened his
12-member Liberation Music Orchestra, a project he has been involved with
sporadically since 1968. Sunday night at the Village Gate, the 10-man Skatalites
from Jamaica will start a five-week series of dance concerts. And tonight
through Sunday, the saxophonist Illinois Jacquet will somehow squeeze his
16-member swing band onto the stage of the Village Vanguard.

Illinois Jacquet's big band re- creates the hard-riffing, smooth-blended
arrangements of the swing era, when he made his reputation with a
well-remembered solo on ''Flying Home,'' recorded with the Lionel Hampton band -
a solo that audiences now sing along with him. For Mr. Jacquet, starting a big
band became a necessity after years of playing in smaller groups. ''I must have
the sound of that music,'' he said the other day. ''I came up in the big bands,
and I wanted to hear some of the sounds I grew up with.''

Mr. Jacquet had his first performing experience as a tap dancer, in front of a
big band his father led. Growing up in Texas, he played drums in his high school
orchestra and saxophone in local bands. As both performer and fan, he soaked up
the extroverted Texas tenor-saxophone tradition exemplified by Herschel Evans,
the longtime Count Basie saxophonist. ''When the bands would come to our town,
the next day we'd try to buy a suit like they had, or a hat,'' he recalled.
''The music I heard then came from the heart, and every note was worth a million
dollars - even the one that they'd miss was good.''

Jacquet's Grass-Roots Approach

After his stint in the Lionel Hampton band, Mr. Jacquet worked in bands led by
Count Basie and Cab Calloway, and during the 1950's he was with the traveling
jam sessions that toured as Jazz at the Philharmonic, featuring tenor-saxophone
''battles'' that brought out his wildest shrieks and hollers.

''In jam sessions, when I was standing beside masters like Coleman Hawkins, Ben
Webster, Don Byas or Charlie Parker, they could find the harmony and find the
riffs on stage -they had keen ears. Now, you don't have a lot of guys who can
walk up and do that without music. With the big band, I can get arrangements and
hear that music again. Through the sounds of the arrangements, I can get the
inspiration to continue to create and never grow old.''

Mr. Jacquet's current band plays music from Basie and Ellington as well as
''Flying Home,'' with Mr. Jacquet as the main soloist on tenor and alto
saxophones. ''My goal is to re-create some of the original things I grew up
with,'' he said. ''The music comes from the roots right up to today. I don't
want to play something that goes over a regular guy's head.''

The Illinois Jacquet big band will perform tonight through Sunday at the Village
Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street (255-4037). Sets begin at 10
and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; there is a $10 cover and a one-drink minimum.

Skatalites Reunite

The Skatalites also re-create a bygone era - the early 1960's, when Jamaica was
just developing the music that would eventually become reggae. Nurtured on the
American jazz and rhythm and blues that came across the Caribbean on the radio,
as well as the Jamaican style (related to calypso and rumba) called mento,
Jamaican musicians developed their own hybrid of big-band jazz, rhythm and blues
and pop - a style called ska.

In 1963, an all-star instrumental group called the Skatalites was formed,
featuring jazzy trumpet, trombone and saxophone solos - like Mr. Jacquet, the
saxophonists Tommy McCook and Roland Alphonso were strongly influenced by the
Basie band's saxophonists - over the bouncy ska beat. In the studio, they
accompanied most of the leading ska singers; on their own, they recorded
instrumentals. As ska gave way to bluebeat and later reggae, the Skatalites
disbanded in 1965 - but 18 years later, nine of the original band members
reunited and began touring once again.

The Skatalites will be demonstrating their versatility this month at the Village
Gate, Bleecker and Thompson Streets (475-5120). Each Sunday, they will have a
different guest, beginning with the reggae vocal trio the Meditations and
continuing through with the reggae singer Horace Andy, the jazz saxophonist
Arthur Blythe, the salsa pianist Charlie Palmieri and the calypso-reggae singer
Brother Valentino. Sets begin at 9 P.M. and 12:30 A.M., and tickets are $12;
there is also a one-drink minimum.

Liberation Music Orchestra

Charlie Haden's Liberation Music Orchestra revives and extends an idea the
bassist had in the late 1960's. Mr. Haden, who made his reputation in Ornette
Coleman's groups, wanted to respond to the Vietnam War and the 1968 Democratic
Convention. The first Liberation Music Orchestra played embattled anthems -
mournful, dignified music from the Spanish Civil War along with politically
inspired pieces by Mr. Haden, Ornette Coleman and the orchestra's arranger,
Carla Bley.

''I wanted a group that would convey not just musical values to people but
concern for the country and the world,'' he said. ''That conception created an
entity that will never cease. I think of this group as having the sound of the
old brass bands that played in Europe and South America, while it also has the
personnel of the most gifted improvisers in jazz.''

Mr. Haden revived the Liberation Music Orchestra in 1982, with songs from El
Salvador, Chile and Portugal and more Spanish Civil War anthems. The group -
which includes Dewey Redman, Jim Pepper and Ken McIntyre on saxophones, Baikida
Caroll and Cecil Bridgewater on trumpets, Craig Harris on trombone, Sharon
Freeman on French horn, Bob Stewart on tuba, Bill Frisell on guitar, Fred Hersch
on piano and Paul Motian on drums - will play music from the two Liberation
Music Orchestra albums this week, while Mr. Haden is working with Ms. Bley on
new arrangements: music from Nicaragua, South Africa, Cuba and elsewhere. ''I
found a beautiful song from the Warsaw Ghetto uprising, and I want to find music
from the American Indians, from Australia's aborigines, from Haiti and the
Philippines,'' Mr. Haden said. ''And I've been thinking about doing the 'Battle
Hymn of the Republic.' I'm just now beginning to find out how much of this music
there really is.''

The Liberation Music Orchestra is appearing through Sunday at Sweet Basil, 88
Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street (242-1785). Sets begin at 10 and
11:45 P.M. and 1:30 A.M. tonight and tomorrow and at 10 P.M. and midnight on
Sunday; there is a $10 cover and a $6 minimum.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Charlie Haden; Photo of Illinois Jacquet and his band
(NYT/Peter Freed)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 2, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BILLS ON DEBT LIMIT GAINS AMENDMENTS

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FUERBRINGER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 680 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 1


The Senate, responding to the pressures of an election year, today loaded up
legislation to raise the Government's debt ceiling with a variety of extraneous
measures. They included bills to aiddrought-stricken farmers, combat terrorism
and give a tax advantage to the Lummi Indians in Washington State.

In addition, amendments tacked onto the debt ceiling legislation included
proposals to allow charitable deductions for the donation of hay or other
commodities to farmers in drought areas and to give nongovernment groups access
to surplus cheese for distribution to the poor.

The Senate stopped short of approving the debt ceiling bill tonight, however, so
the legislation could be held in reserve as a vehicle for the President's $100
million in military aid to the rebels in Nicaragua and economic sanctions
against the South African Government. These proposals are expected to be offered
as amendments before the Aug. 15 recess if the Senate can not agree to act on
them separately.

A Regular Senate Ritual

The packing of the debt bill is becoming a regular ritual in the Senate. Because
the bill must be approved to keep the Government operating, it is an ideal
vehicle for other legislation that might never get to the floor for separate
action.

''The debt ceiling is an annual event and many people attend,'' said Senator Bob
Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader. ''They bring along a lot of their
goodies.''

The speeches and the votes on the amendments presented an ideal opportunity for
exposure back home to many of the senators, whose floor actions are now
broadcast on cable television. Senator Dole called the scene on the floor ''all
fun and games now'' and suggested that many of the amendments would not survive
a conference with the House.

But with Republican control of the Senate hanging on this fall's election,
Senator Dole was careful Thursday night to assure that one amendment was offered
by Senator Paula Hawkins of Florida, one of the most vulnerable Republicans up
for re-election.

The amendment, which was approved on a voice vote, gurantees cost-of-living
increases for Social Security recipients every year by repealing the current 3
percent threshold.

Another Republican in a tight race, Slade Gorton of Washington, won approval of
an amendment that would exempt the cost-of-living increases for Federal civilian
and military retirees from the automatic spending cuts under the
budget-balancing law. It was approved on a voice vote. $11 Million for Farmers
Senator James Abdnor, Republican of South Dakota, who is fighting for
re-election, won $11 million in aid for farmers hurt by floods.

The pressure to approve the debt ceiling increase before the August recess in
two weeks is one reason many of the amendments might be dropped. If a compromise
can not be reached, the Senate and the House may have to consider a short-term
debt ceiling increase to cover the Government until Congress returns in
September, Senator Dole said.

The debt-ceiling bill, which would raise the Government's borrowing authority
$244 billion to $2.32 trillion, already includes proposals, approved earlier in
the week, that would restore the automatic spending cut mechanism to the
budget-balancing law.

The House and the Senate are expected to work out some resolution on the
automatic spending cut issue. The exemption of cost-of-living increases for
Government retirees from the automatic cuts might survive because the House has
approved the same proposal in separate legislation.

Senator Hawkins and Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, who is also
running for re-election, won approval of an amendment that would deny the
foreign tax credit to American companies or their subsidiaries doing business in
countries supporting terrorists. The countries named are Albania, Angola,
Cambodia, Cuba, Iran, Lybia, Outer Mongolia, North Korea, South Yemen, Sryia and
Vietnam.

The amendment for the Lummi indians protects the tax free status of the earnings
from the sale of salmon caught on their reservation north of Bellingham, Wash.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BASING NATIONAL POLICY ON PERSONAL EXPERIENCE

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 752 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AS has been the case from the start of his Administration, Ronald Reagan
continues to be influenced heavily by his personal experiences as he shapes, and
articulates, important White House initiatives. For instance, many of his
closest aides, asked to explain the foundations of his attitudes about South
Africa's minority Government, agree that he regards Pretoria as under siege by
violent elements. It is, these aides say, a condition similar to his experiences
while Governor of California in the late 1960's, when the assault came from
students opposed to the Vietnam War.

So, too, is the influence of Mr. Reagan's past apparent on his trade policies,
which are rooted in a firm resistance to any suggestion of protectionism. His
resistance has remained largely unchanged despite spreading alarm within his own
Republican Party that the President is providing Democrats in Southern textile
states and elsewhere with powerful ammunition.

That concern was undoubtedly heightened last week with the news that, despite
the falling value of the dollar, the trade deficit continued in June at a
record-breaking pace of $170 billion a year. Administration officials hoped the
deficit would be reduced somewhat under an agreement with Japan, announced on
Thursday, on the sale of computer chips. The President's special trade
representative, Clayton K. Yeutter, said the accord could increase the Japanese
market for American producers.

Earlier in the week, Paul A. Volcker, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, told
the House Banking Committee that the trade deficit was putting the economy into
''difficult and dangerous'' circumstances. Meanwhile, the House has passed a
bill that effectively requires the President to block some foreign-made products
from entering the United States. The Senate is expected to approve a similar
measure.

On Wednesday, the House is due to attempt to override the President's veto of a
bill that would limit textile imports by nearly 30 percent. At week's end,
Congressmen from several Southern states were denouncing as inadequate a new
54-nation textile agreement just announced in Geneva. Defending the accord, Mr.
Yeutter declared: ''We've been saying for months and months that the right way
to handle any textile and apparel problems is negotiations rather than
legislation.''

White House officials describe Mr. Reagan's resistance to trade barriers as
rooted in an unswerving belief that restrictions only serve to block a natural
economic order. He frequently cites as proof the economic damage that he argues
stemmed from the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1930, legislation signed by
President Hoover while Mr. Reagan was a student. The law, many authorities
agree, resulted in an international trade war.

Mr. Reagan, according to aides, recently added language to a speech before a
business group in Washington to reflect his recollections of that legislation
and its impact. ''I well remember the anti-trade frenzy in the late 20's that
produced the Smoot-Hawley tariffs, greasing the skids for our descent into the
Great Depression and the most destructive war this world has ever seen,'' the
President said. ''That's one episode I'm determined we will never repeat.''

''The Depression had a terrific impact on him, as it did on that generation,''
said a senior Presidential aide. The aide said Mr. Reagan had once recalled
looking in vain for work after graduating from Eureka College in 1932, and
suggested Mr. Reagan indirectly linked his difficulties to Smoot-Hawley.

John Sears, a long-time Reagan associate who managed his Presidential campaign
for a time in 1980, speculated that Mr. Reagan's views were influenced by the
liberal doctrine that rejected protectionism in those days. Mr. Reagan, who was
once a Democrat, grew up idolizing Franklin D. Roosevelt. ''One way or another,
his feeling can be traced back to the original free trade, liberal Democratic
belief,'' said Mr. Sears.

Hints of personal experences with influences that have lingered are also to be
found, it seems, in the President's ambitious plan to overhaul the Federal tax
codes. On several occasions, he has complained that years ago the tax laws
served as a disincentive for him to make additional movies while an actor.

''You'd come to a point in which you were in the 90 percent bracket and somebody
would offer you a fine picture, and you'd just love to do it,'' Mr. Reagan said
recently. ''But you said, 'I'm not going to do that picture for 10 cents on the
dollar.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHALLENGING THE KENNEDY 'MAGIC'

BYLINE: By GEORGE V. HIGGINS; George V. Higgins's latest novel, ''Imposters,''
was published in May by Henry Holt and Company.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3701 words


ALL POLITICS IS local,'' Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. is fond of saying, and the wisdom
of that remark has never been more evident than now, as O'Neill, at the age of
73, prepares to set his duties aside. This is his last term as a Representative
serv-ing 520,691 residents of the Eighth Congressional District of
Massachusetts, a post he has held for 34 years, and his last year as Speaker of
the House, his platform for the last 10. In Somerville, Belmont, Arlington,
Watertown and Cambridge, in Charlestown, East Boston, Back Bay, Waltham and up
on Beacon Hill, the people who first voted O'Neill into office and the ones too
young to remember are under siege by a squad of candidates who want his seat.

One of them, Joseph P. Kennedy 2d, enjoys an apparently potent patronymic
advantage. The others resent that, and wish it were not so.

With 62 percent of its registered voters avowed Democrats and only 9 percent
Republicans, the Eighth District is one of the most Democratic in the nation. In
1984, only 36 percent voted for Ronald Reagan, one of the lowest returns of his
re-election.

The constituency, which reflects a liberal bias, includes working-class voters
of Italian and Irish descent, a large, very closely knit Armenian population,
affluent professionals and students from the many colleges and unversities in
the area.

In 1952, when O'Neill called on supporters to send him to Washington, the 11th
District, as the district was then designated, was a comparable entity, a
reasonably homogeneous fief in which Democratic loyalists constituted just under
41 percent of the voters. Then, as now, the presumption was that the Democratic
primary would be the real election, the general polling in November serving as
an anointing. That presumption, notwithstanding Dwight D. Eisenhower's name at
the top of the ticket, was correct.

In his 17 campaigns, the Speaker has benignly overseen the regular alterations
of the district required by census figures. Affluent Brookline, harboring some
Republicans, has come in and then gone out. Working- and middle-class Arlington,
Belmont and Watertown have been added. Not without influence in his old
bailiwick, the General Court that carves up districts, O'Neill has motored along
through the decades, routinely racking up 70 percent majorities among voters.

When O'Neill announced in 1984 that he would retire at the end of this year and
declined to handpick a successor, the news presented some interesting
implications for ambitious Democrats competing to replace him. The dozen
aspirants crowding the preprimary field were addressing a district 30 years out
of practice in making such decisions; O'Neill was often unopposed in primary as
well as general elections. With a large number of contestants, the ability to
attract and identify voters loyal to their respective causes -and then to pull
them out on Primary Day in September -took on central importance. Or so most
then assumed.  Like the other candidates, State Representative Thomas J. Vallely
discerned immense possibilities in the Speaker's retirement announcement. And
like the others, he heard in various of the Speaker's remarks an epiphanic
summation of his own political ambitions.

Then 34 years old and in his third term on Beacon Hill, Vallely was smart enough
to see that he was getting bored and rich enough to do something more
interesting. Enough of a liberal on economic issues to claim a 75 percent rating
from Americans for Democratic Action, he was careful enough with his votes not
to alarm more conservative voters. He enjoyed a good press and his well-to-do
constituents liked him. But he desired to be a serious politician; he wished to
think that even after the completion of New Deal reforms, even after the
inception of mandatory racial equality, even after the end of the war in Vietnam
- where he had earned a Silver Star as a Marine infantryman -there remained
substantial work for resolute folk to do in the government.

In his early travels, Vallely encountered State Senator George Bachrach and
State Representatives William F. Galvin and Thomas M. Gallagher, among other
aspirants. Nonetheless, what he saw encouraged him. James Roosevelt Jr., a
Cambridge lawyer and grandson of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, had not yet entered
the race. And this was long before Joseph P. Kennedy 2d underwent a conversion
from his earlier public view that the political system was ''as slow as
molasses'' and determined to seek the nomination as well.

O N ELECTION EVE IN November 1960, I counted it a blessing to have insinuated
myself into Boston Garden, with every other human body that old barn could hold,
to hear John F. Kennedy wind up his cliffhanging campaign. When the light plane
carrying Senator Edward M. Kennedy crashed in an apple orchard in Southampton,
Mass., 14 years later, giving him the back injury that plagues him to this day,
I was among the Associated Press correspondents covering the story. My wife
worked in his press office until 1975.

I mention those connections not because they are rare in Massachusetts, but
because they are so common. Since John F. Kennedy opened the public political
performances of the family in the Bay State 40 years ago, thousands upon
thousands of Massachusetts residents have brushed up against its members. At
least since the 1956 Democratic National Convention three decades ago, the name
has been known nationally.

The Democratic primary isn't until Sept. 16. That bears remembering. This is the
time of every New England year when the Red Sox win the American League pennant
and go on to the World Series with five pitchers well-rested and the hitters all
healthy. (This year, they just might make it.) Most politicians, too, feel good
this time of year - it's Prospero's season in the Bay State, refulgent with the
stuff that dreams are made of, in baseball and in politics.

Some Massachusetts politicians, though, manage their dreams better than do fans
at Fenway Park. Massachusetts politicians do not sleep. They dream with their
eyes open, clutching telephones and commissioning private polls. When their
insubstantial pageants dissolve into thin air, the smart ones cut their losses
and get out, waiting for a better season. Tom Vallely got out when the getting
was good. Others, perhaps equally smart, consulted their true closest advisers
mornings in the bathroom looking glass, and determined to press on. J OHN F.
KENNEDY, still frail from war wounds, won the 11th Congressional District in
1946. His immediate predecessor was former Boston Mayor James Michael Curley. In
1952, the future President capitalized on the distraction of Republican Senator
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., who, deeming his re-election a sure thing, had undertaken
to work in Eisenhower's Presidential campaign. Lodge failed to perceive in time
the havoc being wreaked upon his future by swarms of Kennedy ladies holding tea
parties all over Massachusetts to introduce ''dear Jack.'' Kennedy parlayed a
three-term record in the House, notable chiefly for its high absenteeism, into
the upper chamber.

When Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., at 39, declared his intention to succeed Kennedy in
the 11th, he had the early foot in a crowded primary field; he had been a State
Representative since 1936. But his concept of the proper role of government was
quite different from Kennedy's. Kennedy sought office with an elegant air of
noblesse oblige. O'Neill did it because he had little else to do.

O'Neill was 21 when he graduated from Boston College in 1932. His family was of
modest means. Herbert Hoover was President. At 25, O'Neill won election to the
State Legislature, and it was a tossup whether he ran to improve his unpromising
insurance business or to get out of it.

It is almost impossible to divest a man of the notions he derives from adversity
in his early adult years. In 1928, when Tip O'Neill entered Boston College (now
ornamented by a new library and a chair in political science named for him), the
faculty was dominated by members of the Society of Jesus. The curriculum,
stringently Thomistic, was leavened by the patristic writings of such as St.
Augustine. It included much of the instruction delivered by Plato to Aristotle,
and it engraved on the brains of impoverished young men in the Depression the
absolute conviction that we are all in this together and that we must love one
another if we are ever to get out. It was quite as possible to flunk
''Redemption,'' a mandatory theology course at Boston College then, as it is
said to be to flunk redemption in the world to come.

O'Neill has conducted himself in office according to that vision of society.
When he broke with Lyndon B. Johnson on the war in Vietnam; when he spoke out
against Ronald Reagan's proposals to aid Nicaraguan con-tras and exhorted fellow
Representatives to vote not their politics, but their consciences, he was
perfectly sincere. When he finds himself in a situation requiring him to resist
his natural politician's desire to reach accommodation (and he did not achieve
the Speakership without a strong inclination to cut bargains and make deals), he
almost invariably tells his opponents: ''I'm sorry, but I think you're wrong on
this one.'' Not ''mistaken.'' Not ''misled.'' Not ''misinformed.'' Simply
''wrong,'' meaning ''unjust'' and ''unfair.''

Each of the early aspirants to succeed O'Neill in the Eighth District proceeded
on the assumption that the victor would be the one who most closely resembled
the man being replaced. Their inquiries developed different shadings of the
nature of the quiescent majority waiting patiently for the Speaker's heir to
appear, but each believed it would be someone who managed to convince the voters
he was a person of political gravitas.

W HAT EXCITED Vallely when he first inspected the Eighth was his conclusion that
it was tailored to his principles. ''Outsiders look at television and they see a
bunch of people in Harvard Square who want a foreign policy you can get on
bumper stickers,'' he said. ''But that's a minority - a small minority. You go
into Somerville and you see people who believe the government can help. They're
pro-government.''

Vallely thought he also discerned in conversations with voters in the Eighth
strong endorsement of his foreign-policy views, which include an extreme
wariness of any action that might imply American commitment to military force.
''Fifty-three percent of them knew who Tip O'Neill was,'' he said, ''but 59
percent had an opinion on the contras.''

Senator Bachrach set out in pursuit of what he called ''the sensible center'' -
consisting of a strong progressive bloc of working-class people concerned almost
entirely with bread-and-butter domestic social issues. A graduate of Trinity
College in Hartford, and the Boston University Law School, Senator Bachrach, 34,
is known among friends on Beacon Hill as a maverick reformer, and among enemies
as a troublemaking showboat. Averring the former, he proposes to emphasize in
his Congressional run ''a political sense of purpose, that I'm not out to please
everybody, that consensus is the key, that I stand for something and I will take
leadership to show it.''

Bachrach has mounted a man-killing effort to make himself familiar to voters
outside his State Senate district. Antagonists and admirers alike give him full
marks for his zeal. He takes his satisfaction from the sense that he has done
his homework well, tagging loyalists old and new for efficient marshaling come
Election Day.

Representative Thomas Gallagher, 37, commenced his drive to succeed the Speaker
convinced that the district would be the natural setting for a candidate of his
philosophy. Occasionally identified as a Democratic Socialist, he prefers
''populist'' - wisely, in a district that remembers how the late Richard
Cardinal Cushing inveighed adenoidally (and tautologically) against ''atheistic,
socialistic, godless Communism.''

By January 1985, Gallagher had three full-time workers in place. The 1970 Boston
College graduate pounded sidewalks and doors, seeking all who would listen to
his major points - among them, that Republican foreign policy injures our
national security by winning thousands of friends in despotic regimes while
making enemies of the millions they oppress, and that there is a need for a
national health service.

Fifteen months into his mission, polls showed support ranging from 2 to 7
percent. He was not daunted. He said that when Primary Day came, he would glean
at least the 20-plus percent of the turnout needed to win in an evenly matched
field, because he knew who his friends would be, and would make sure that they
voted.

Representative William F. Galvin, 35, a Boston College graduate with a Suffolk
University law degree, like Bachrach, appraised the Eighth as an enclave of
traditional Democratic voters, the moderate majority slumbering untroubled by
its image as the most liberal district in the most liberal state so long as good
old Tip remained in office. Now that the Speaker was retiring, Galvin proposed
to wake it up. Conceding that the Cambridge Civic Associa-tion (telegenically
vociferous on issues such as rent control and tenants' rights), and CPPAX (a
liberal grouping of Citizens for Participation in Political Action, and
originally formed to oppose the war in Vietnam) had adroitly muraled an image of
the Eighth as a hotbed of radicalism, he perceived his opportunity in the
three-decker houses of East Boston, Charlestown, Somerville and working-class
neighborhoods of Cambridge. He saw further bastions of backing in the
middle-middle-class neighborhoods of Arlington, Belmont, Watertown and Waltham,
and he went out gunning for it.

James Roosevelt Jr., who entered the race late in 1985, has practiced law (as a
partner in the white-shoe Boston firm of Nutter, McClennen and Fish); politics
(as legal counsel to the Democratic State Committee, Senator Edward M. Kennedy's
district organizer for his 1980 Presidential campaign, and Senator Kennedy's
legal counsel for his 1982 Senate campaign); and community service (to various
charitable boards and educational institutions). He said the Speaker's
retirement announcement provoked in him a sense of urgency. Now 40, he has long
wanted to be a Congressman, is not about to move to a new district, and cannot
afford to gamble that O'Neill's successor will not hold the office for the next
34 years. ''This is my time,'' he said. ''If I don't run this time, no matter
who else runs, it may never come again.''

Roosevelt believed when he announced that he appealed to the traditional,
straight-ticket, lunch-bucket Democrats who remembered what his grandfather had
done for them and who had trained their children and their grandchildren to
remember, too - the people, in other words, who had sent O'Neill to Congress in
1952 and kept him there all these years. Roosevelt was aware that few voters
knew him, and he expected a grueling campaign, ''grinding it out to September.''
But like Vallely, Bachrach, Gallagher and Galvin, he believed that he had
identified his natural constituency, and with work could bring it home.

Unlike the others, Roosevelt has a nationally recognized name. But he fears it
may not have the attraction of Joseph Kennedy's. He notes that unemployment in
the Eighth is about as close to zero as it's ever likely to descend in an
imperfect world. In hard times, he says, voters look to their Congressmen to
improve the citizens' lot. In times of relative plenty, he worries, they may
treat the vote as a luxury, discretionarily expendable as a nostalgic bow to the
memory of Camelot.

When rumors began to surface in the Boston press last spring that Edward M.
Kennedy Jr., the Senator's son who was then 23 years old, was considering entry
into the Eighth District race, they dampened fund-raising efforts by prospective
candidates. The reports moistened as well the decision-making processes of
political mercenaries whose principal criterion in selecting clients is their
likelihood of winning.

''Well, we weathered that all right,'' Galvin said. ''And then in December we
started hearing it was Joe. And then January came, and it was.''

Joseph P. Kennedy 2d, at 33 the eldest son of Robert F. Kennedy, is a graduate
of the University of Massachusetts at Boston. Seven years ago, he formed
Citizens Energy Corporation, a private, nonprofit organization seeking to
address the problems that high heating costs impose on lower-income and elderly
people in the New England winter. The company serves as a jobber, or middleman,
purchasing crude oil and raw natural gas at the sources at the best going rate.

But Citizens puts a wrinkle on the process. Instead of paying the refiner's bill
and looking toward a profit, it trades part of the refined product - in the case
of crude oil, gasoline - to the refiner as the price of its services. Citizens
sells the oil at a cut rate to the state, which in turn provides it to those in
need of assistance. The annual cash flow of the enterprise, according to
Kennedy, is now more than $1 billion.

On Feb. 1, less than two weeks after Joseph Kennedy's announcement, former
Massachusetts State Representative Melvin H. King announced his candidacy. King,
57, has a history of black activism dating back to 1961, when he ran for the
Boston school committee. In 1983, taking a page from the strategy book compiled
by his friend, the Rev. Jesse L. Jackson, he welded together a ''rainbow
coalition'' of activist whites, Asians and His-panic people that made him
(Continued on Page 39) the first ''person of color,'' in his phrase, to make the
finals of a Boston mayoralty contest. (He lost to Raymond Flynn).

King waded into the fray convinced that voter-registration efforts among the
thousands of students residing in the Eighth, and diligent identification of
long-time residents sympathetic to his views, could tally for him the 28 to 30
percent of the vote that he thinks will win. He estimates the minority-group
population in the district at around 11 percent. (Others place it between 2 and
5 percent). He said he can't enumerate his workers ''because we're getting more
of them every day.'' He says: ''Everyone I talk to, everyone who gets to know
me, they are coming in. It's really wonderful.''

Less than a month after Kennedy's Jan. 19 announcement, a poll conducted for
Vallely showed Kennedy leading the field with 38 per-cent. Bachrach was the
favorite of 17 percent; King drew 13. Vallely, Galvin, Roosevelt and Gallagher
each had less than 10 percent.

On March 12, Vallely withdrew, saying: ''I don't think I can win.'' On March 18,
Galvin withdrew. Each said Kennedy had usurped his voting bloc. As have other
candidates still running, both complained that Boston newspapers and broadcast
outlets had zoomed in on the Kennedy candidacy to the destruction of others'
chances. ''There's no way to beat this guy,'' Galvin said at the time. ''Not
with the media. They've got two weddings coming up,'' he said, referring to the
April marriage of Maria Shriver - daughter of Eunice Kennedy Shriver - and
Arnold Schwarzenegger, and the July 19 marriage of Caroline Kennedy and Edwin
Schlossberg. ''And if he's not ahead in August,'' Galvin said, ''they'll think
of some-thing else.'' Late in May, another poll showed Kennedy holding at 38
percent - with King, at 17, and Bachrach, at 16, neck-and-neck for second place.

On June 26, almost three weeks after the deadline for removal of names from the
ballot, Gallagher withdrew. He was $10,000 in debt, short of the volunteers he
expected and 34 points behind Kennedy in the polls.

Kennedy tries not to take a relaxed view of matters. He says he's quite unable
to gauge the impact of his various positions on specific segments of the
population, and therefore does not develop those positions with an eye to
gaining support. He says he expects to draw votes from all sectors of all the
communities involved. He laughed when asked the approximate number of volunteers
working in his campaign. He said he didn't pay much attention to that sort of
thing. He asked whether I would like him to give a number, ''say, a thousand?''
He said he really didn't know.

Accepting that number, I explained that my reason for asking was based on the
as-sumption that his organization would be devoting its exertions to identifying
Kennedy voters and making sure they got to the polls on Sept. 16. He said the
public excitement attending the race would bring out around 60 percent of those
registered to vote, so there was no need to worry.

Invited to describe the demographics of the coalition he had so speedily
acquired, and how he planned to maintain it and expand it through September, he
said: ''Demographics? Are you talking political analysis here?'' I admitted that
I was. ''I don't know anything about demographics,'' he said. ''That
political-analysis stuff - nothing about that. I don't pay any attention to
that.''

I asked him if he had been adopted.

B UOYED BY LATE spring endorsements from the 61,000-member Massachusetts
Teachers Association, the Massachusetts Association of Social Workers and a
caucus of homosexual men and women (''They don't think this is a coronation''),
Bachrach alleged with asperity that Joseph P. Kennedy 2d does not know the
Eighth, isn't even trying to, and probably won't stay with it. Said Bachrach:
''He isn't qualified. He's running on his name.''

Senator Bachrach was 11 years old and living in New York when Edward Moore
Kennedy contended in 1962 for the two years remaining in the Senate term won by
John F. Kennedy in 1958. I thought it likely that he had not heard of the
televised debate between Kennedy and Massachusetts Attorney General Edward J.
McCormack Jr. Sneering at Kennedy's campaign slogan, ''He Can Do More For
Massachusetts,'' the politically seasoned nephew of John W. McCormack, for nine
years the Speaker of the House, had snarled: ''If your name were Edward Moore,
your candidacy would be a joke.''

Came Primary Day, and it wasn't even close.

On hearing this, Senator Bachrach said: ''Well, yes, but that was over 20 years
ago.''

It was. And it's still August - the revels continue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Joseph P. Kennedy 2d, George Bachrach and James Roosevelt Jr.
at political rally (Ira Wyman/Sygma)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KLAUS BARBIE AND THE CONSCIENCE OF THE LITERATI

BYLINE: By BARBARA PROBST SOLOMON; Barbara Probst Solomon, the author of two
memoirs about her life in Europe, ''Arriving Where We Started'' and ''Short
Flights,'' is writing a novel, ''Playing After Dark.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2416 words


WORLD WAR II continues to haunt the French. Unprepared, the French military
capitulated almost immediately to Germany, and France was the only major
European power to be occupied. The coming trial in Lyons of Klaus Barbie, the
head of the Gestapo in that city, will resurrect France's deepest trauma: its
noble and ignoble history during the German occupation.

The Barbie affair, in particular the accusation that in 1943 he tortured and
murdered Jean Moulin, the head of the French Resistance, has threatened to
destroy the myth of the Resistance because of the claim that Moulin was betrayed
by his fellows.

Last month the public prosecutor of a French court ruled that three war crimes
against Resistance fighters allegedly committed by Mr. Barbie fell into the
category of crimes against humanity, which carry no statute of limitations. As a
result, Mr. Barbie will be charged with those crimes, in addition to crimes
against Jews: the deportation to death camps of almost 800 people, most of them
Jews. A trial date is to be set this fall, and many observers expect the trial
to take place early next year.

The court-broadened definition of crimes against humanity to include crimes
committed against members of the Resistance opens the possibility, alarming to
some French, that former collaborators, who had considered themselves safe,
could now be tried.

Also expected to cause a furor in Paris this fall is the new Marcel Ophuls
documentary about Mr. Barbie. Mr. Ophuls - the director of the classic 1969 film
''The Sorrow and the Pity,'' about France during the occupation - has
interviewed people in Ger-many, Latin America, the United States and France.

All this has raised painful questions for French writers concerning their roles
during the occupation. Because I went to school in France right after the war, I
have long been interested in talking to these writers about it.

Jerome Lindon, Samuel Beckett's publisher at Les Editions de Minuit, is among
those who oppose trying Mr. Barbie, whose lawyer, Jacques Verges, Mr. Lindon
told me recently, ''will mix in all sorts of things that have nothing to do with
Barbie. He will bring up Algeria, and say that as the French did thus and so
there, they've no right to try Barbie. I'd be content to see him die in
prison.''

Claude Lanzmann agrees. Though known here for the film ''Shoah,'' a
nine-and-a-half-hour oral history of the Holocaust, he has been for many years
an editor and a member of the inner circle of Les Temps Modernes, the
literary-cultural monthly magazine founded by Jean-Paul Sartre after the
liberation of France in 1944. He told me that, in trying Mr. Barbie, ''the
special significance of the deportation of the Jews will get drowned out by
Verges's tactics of putting France on trial. The notion that 'all of France was
in the Resistance' originally came about when the Resistance had no presence in
France, and needed to legitimize itself'' - during the Liberation, when it was
important for the French to delegitimize the Vichy Government. ''Of course,'' he
added, ''that was not true -but those who maintain 'there was no Resistance' are
completely crazy. After 1942 it was considerable. What you had between the
Petainists [those who supported Marshal Petain and Vichy collaboration during
the war] and non-Petainists was an undeclared civil war. Remember, two-thirds of
French Jews survived. My brother, sister and I were saved by a French family in
the country.''

Indeed, there was a real split between Sartre's generation - Albert Camus,
Raymond Aron and Maurice Merleau-Ponty (who wrote for Les Temps Modernes) and
Paul Ricoeur and Emmanuel Mounier (who wrote for Esprit, the independent Roman
Catholic-left cultural monthly magazine) - and writers like Alain Robbe-Grillet,
Nathalie Sarraute, Marguerite Duras, Claude Simon and Michel Butor, who are
identified with the nouveau roman. The former group became prominent at the time
of the Liberation. Their experiences during World War II and the occupation had
convinced them that writers and intellectuals needed to take strong stands; they
wanted to be politically engage.

Though French cinema did not really deal with the occupation until ''The Sorrow
and the Pity,'' French writers, from the end of the war through the early 50's,
were obsessed by it, and most of the really interesting information about the
occupation was published during that period, in newspapers, magazines and books.
But the French didn't like to be reminded of the reprisals -some justified, some
merely personal vendettas - after the Liberation against those accused of being
collaborationists and of the catch-as-catch-can trials that resulted in the
execution of such writers as Robert Brasillach, who had worked with the Gestapo.
It was after the humiliation of the French military in Vietnam in 1954 that
France embarked on a course of Gaullist grandeur (a grandiose nationalistic view
of its own supremacy in the world), and anti-Americanism and amnesia took root.

The nouveau roman group emerged during the mid-50's; its antihistoric stance and
rarefied prose style perfectly suited France's new mood of grandiosity and
amnesia. Alain Robbe-Grillet, one of the most celebrated practitioners of the
nouveau roman, has recently written a straightforward and oddly jolly memoir,
''Le Miroir Qui Revient'' (''The Recurring Mirror''), about his pro-Petainist,
Anglophobic, anti-Semitic family. Sandwiched between lyrical references to his
childhood love of kings and Kipling and his admiration for Roland Barthes is a
thoughtful definition of his parents. They believed that Jews threatened to
destroy the old Europe and create social and political disorder. The Nazis, for
them, represented order, decency and a chance for a united Europe. Though Mr.
Robbe-Grillet insists his parents never would have condoned the death camps, he
also says that until their death, in the 1970's, they believed the Holocaust was
merely propaganda invented by the Allies to justify their victory.

Since Mr. Robbe-Grillet waited 40 years to tell this story, he may be nervous
about his revelations. During the two occasions we talked, once in his Manhattan
apartment and once in mine, he asked me not to record our conversations. No
matter - it is all in his book. MR. ROBBE-GRILLET'S classmates nicknamed him
''K'' for Kollaborateur - for his willingness to join Service du Travail
Obligatoire (S.T.O.), the French labor force that the Vichy Government sent to
work in German war factories. He recalls that before he was shipped off to
Germany, the S.T.O. gave him a pair of new boots, a can of sardines and a ticket
to hear Edith Piaf sing. Though he saw an ominous sign in the factory where he
worked (''You are a number and that number is zero'') and a companion told him
of the existence of the death camps, his general impression was that he was in a
country of orderly adults and pretty blond children - until 1945, after the
Liberation and after news of the gas chambers became widespread, when his faith
in the idea of political order collapsed.

Mr. Robbe-Grillet's recollection of the occupation is that almost everyone was
pro-Petainist. According to this logic, no one is at fault; and it is precisely
this air of normality he bestows on people who were pro-Nazi that is disturbing.
Mr. Robbe-Grillet tones down the horror of Hitler. He discusses his postwar
disillusionment with the abstract idea of political order, which was what Hitler
represented to him, but he makes no mention of confronting his parents about
their unrepentant admiration of Hitler. Nor does he tell us what happened to him
and his family after the Liberation.

Ironically, at the same time Mr. Robbe-Grillet was looking forward to his
sojourn in Germany, Claude Simon was escaping a prisoner-of-war camp in Saxony.
Mr. Simon, an independent leftist sympathetic to the Spanish Republic, spent
time in Barcelona at the beginning of the Spanish Civil War. He remained opposed
to Gen. Francisco Franco until the dictator's death, in 1975, and has always
been much admired by both the French and the Spanish for his above-reproach
moral and political positions; this may have been a factor in his winning last
year's Nobel Prize in Literature. Perhaps because Mr. Simon has nothing in his
past to conceal, his novels have been more overtly autobiographical than those
of other nouveau roman writers.

At the PEN Congress in New York last winter, Mr. Simon talked to me about ''The
Flanders Road,'' considered by critics to be his masterpiece: ''It is what
happened to me in the war - the literary inventions of the 19th century bore me.
Reality, autobiography, is what it is about. In 1940 [he was 26], I was
mobilized in Collioure. I took a train and two days later I was in the cavalry,
in the rain. On May 10, we crossed the Meuse River on horseback and entered
Belgium. On the 14th, Hitler attacked. We were in a pine forest along the
frontier. We were surrounded by German tanks and planes. It was a massacre. All
that remained of our regiment was a colonel, a lieutenant, two troopers and
myself. Then the colonel and the lieutenant were killed by a sniper - in the end
there was just one other man and myself.'' Mr. Simon described the surreal
images of frightened horses surrounded by the machines of modern warfare. ''Can
you imagine?'' he said. ''The French still believed they could win a war with
the cavalry.'' He added that when he was in Stockholm to receive the Nobel
Prize, he ''didn't like the Swedish press referring to ['The Flanders Road'] as
a war novel. It is about many things. Erotic experiences, women, people,
flowers. My novels are not political.''

The bits and pieces of the world I remember having seen in 1948 are evoked in
''The War: A Memoir'' by Marguerite Duras. The book, published here in May, is
about the period just before and after the Liberation. Ms. Duras, a Communist
when she was a member of the Resistance, saved the life of President Francois
Mitterrand, then a Resistance leader, tortured members of the Gestapo herself
and was responsible for the death of a Gestapo agent who befriended her during
the occupation. Though she wrote the memoir in the 1940's, she also waited 40
years to publish it. Her description of trying not to overfeed her emaciated
husband, just released from a concentration camp, is shattering.

It is now easier for French writers to write more overtly about the occupation
because their country is now stressing reconciliation, forgiveness for whatever
wrongs were done then, and these confessional books foster a national catharsis.

A striking example of the change in the French view of what is acceptable is the
sudden boom in the popularity of Louis-Ferdinand Celine. Though he was always
acknowledged as a literary genius, until recently his raving anti-Semitism was
an embarrassment to the French. Now, for the first time since World War II, the
prestige of Celine is equal to that of the contemporary he most hated - Sartre.

In this rehabilitation, a distinction is made between Celine the fascist and
Celine the liberator of the French language. The cultural newsweekly L'Evenement
du Jeudi points out that a recent biography by Francois Gibault whitewashes
Celine, that it extols him for his prescient remarks concerning the dangers of
world Communism while neglecting to say that he also ranted against the
''dangers'' of Jews and Freemasons. Philippe Sollers, a novelist and the editor
of the dominant intellectual magazine of the 60's generation, Tel Quel, now
reborn as L'Infini, considers the present approach to Celine inadequate. In
Paris recently, he said that ''though Celine is a great genius, his widow's
refusal to let anyone see his inflammatory 1930's anti-Semitic pamphlets is
censorship.'' Mr. Sollers, who was young during the war, believes that the trial
of Klaus Barbie will have tragic results, because it will reawaken old conflicts
between rival groups in the Resistance, chiefly the Gaullists and the
Communists.

But Herbert R. Lottman - an American author who lives in Paris and who examined
the role of writers during the occupation in ''The Left Bank,'' and whose new
book, ''The Purge,'' is about the punishment of collaborators in France after
the war - said recently by phone that the main problem is that there are still
former collaborationists holding high Government positions. ''Another roadblock
for historians writing about that period,'' Mr. Lottman said, ''is that the
French Government has an odd amnesty law. This means that if a person was
sanitized - pardoned - you can no longer mention in print that he was sentenced
for collaborating. Many French don't know that people got sanitized.'' A YOUNGER
generation, those who were children or adolescents during the war, is searching
out the past in highly accessible novels and memoirs; the abstruseness and
emphasis on linguistic games associated with the nouveau roman are out of date.
In his novels - ''Les Boulevards de Ceinture'' (''The Avenues of the Outer
Belt'') and ''De Si Braves Garcons'' (''What Great Guys'') - Patrick Modiano
pursues the fate of his Jewish family; and in his novel, ''Cat's Grin''
(recently published in this country), the French publisher Francois Maspero,
whose brother was in the Resistance and whose family was then sent by the
Germans to concentration camps, describes his anguish at being too young to join
the underground. How strange, as this century draws to a close, with the Dreyfus
affair still being reexamined (as witnessed by the recent popularity of ''The
Affair: The Case of Alfred Dreyfus'' by Jean-Denis Bredin), that France has
defined as its two great novelists such polar opposites: Marcel Proust, the
passionate defender of Dreyfus whose ''Remembrance of Things Past'' ends with
World War I, and Celine, the obsessed anti-Semite whose ''Journey to the End of
Night'' starts at the point Proust stops. If excessive delaying tactics prevent
Mr. Barbie from being tried, that fact, like the Dreyfus case, will become an
important piece of French history. Though it was not so long ago that many
people felt that Jewish writers harmed the purity of French culture, ironically,
in the second half of this century, the fate of the Jews has become intermingled
with the fate of France as it is portrayed in French literature in a way I would
not have dreamed possible when I first arrived there, after those dark times
that had seemed like the end of the world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Klaus Barbie in Nazi uniform (Serge and Beate Klarsfeld)
(Pg.27); Photos of Claude Simon, Alain Robbe-Grillet, Louis-Ferdinand Celine and
Albert Camus (Reuters/Cartier-Bresson/Magnum) (Pg. 27)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SHUT TIGHT THE MEMORY BAG

BYLINE: By LARRY McCAFFERY; Larry McCaffery, a professor of American literature
at San Diego State University, is co-editor of the literary journal Fiction
International.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1141 words


ZOMBIE JAMBOREE By Robert Merkin. 335 pp. New York: William Morrow & Company.
$16.95.

 ZOMBIES. The living dead. Alienated creatures who think they're alive and
simulate life's activities but who are dimly aware that all their passions and
desires are counterfeit. As George Romero suggested in his wickedly funny movie,
''Dawn of the Dead,'' these zombies are all around us. They haunt our shopping
malls, riding escalators and listening to background music, emptily searching
for the next bargain item; they sit in our suburban ranch-style homes,
mesmerized by images and slogans that engage their fake emotions and programmed
longings. Robert Merkin's ''Zombie Jamboree'' is a painful yet often hilarious
indictment of the processes that produced a specific group of zombies -Vietnam
veterans.

Early in ''Zombie Jamboree'' Richard Heiser, one of the novel's two
protagonist-narrators, accurately prophesies what awaits him when he returns
from Vietnam: ''We'll be zombies. We'll be people who were supposed to have
died. The living people who agreed to send us to the war won't want us around.
The same thing happened to German soldiers after both the world wars. The lucky
ones died. The same thing happens to every soldier who comes home from a losing
war.'' Heiser's description is chilling because it sums up the situation of
Vietnam veterans so accurately. Despite their persistent efforts to force the
American public to acknowledge them, Vietnam veterans remain for this country
mostly embarrassing reminders, unpleasant images that fortunately can be
replaced by more gratifying, less troubling images - say, the latest installment
of ''Rambo,'' or news clips of our recent successful raids on Libya.

One of the strengths of Mr. Merkin's novel is its implication that news media
images and political slogans usually don't help people understand what happened
(and what is happening) to the men who fought in Vietnam. The approaches favored
by the best-seller, blockbuster, or docudrama mentality -''When I got back from
Nam I started doing drugs, and then. . . .'' or ''So after I was wounded, I
never could seem to. . . .'' - trivialize those men, in part because they steal
and rearrange memories and events into formulas whose main function is to sell
more beer or shaving cream.

But as Heiser explains in a moving passage describing his lost years after
coming home, questions about what happened are difficult for returning veterans
to answer not simply because the responses are complex but because veterans fear
exposing their memories: ''If I'd had easy answers to unspoken questions like
that, it would have made these chance meetings during the Lost Years so much
simpler for me and them, so much easier for everyone all around. But even if
there were any fairly good and moderately concrete answers to be found back at
the shack in my tightly tied memory bag, that was the ultimate thing I could
never do, I could never open that bag and pull from it some reasonable
explanation about what had become of me. There were answers in there. No way was
I going to pull them out and display them to anyone.''

Of course, not everyone who went to Vietnam became a zombie - some managed to
hold on to a sense of personal identity in the midst of war. A few even managed
to retain a sense of humor, found some fun in raising hell or tossing monkey
wrenches into the military machinery (turning up Jimi Hendrix if the shrieking
gears got too loud). Enter David Becker, the other central character in ''Zombie
Jamboree,'' a draftee high on rebellion who serves as a perfect foil for the
passive, serious-minded Heiser. The source of much of the novel's verbal energy
and adolescent humor, Becker is a defiant affirmer of life, the merriest
prankster since Ken Kesey's McMurphy gave Nurse Ratched so many headaches in
another era's zombie ward in ''One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest.'' The different
ways Becker and Heiser react to their experiences supplies the novel's dramatic
tension.

The trajectory of ''Zombie Jamboree'' is familiar. The book opens at basic
training (Fort Benning, Ga., 1970) and introduces the usual assortment of tough
drill sergeants and kooky recruits anxious to hide their growing fear about what
awaits them with jive talk and practical jokes. The scene then shifts to the war
itself, which is hellish indeed, though in different ways for Heiser and Becker,
who have been given different assignments (Becker lofts balloons, retrieving
weather information, in relative security; Heiser, an infantryman, winds up
accused of murder and mutiny when a nightmarish skirmish results in the fragging
of a lieutenant). We then see the two returning home, Heiser slowly disappearing
into zombieland, Becker discovering that the right combination of mescal, sexy
women and a deserted stretch of moonlighted beach can do wonders to reanimate a
man. MR. MERKIN, who served as a United States Army journalist from 1969 to 1971
and is the author of one previous novel, ''The South Florida Book of the Dead,''
wants his readers to sympathize with Heiser's complex, fragile, puzzled
responses to what he's confronting; but clearly we're meant to admire, even
applaud Becker's stance as (in the novelist Tom Robbins's words) ''a
metaphysical outlaw.'' The key to this stance is simple: stay alive, stay human,
never go along, avoid the numbing shell shock (evident in Heiser) produced by
finding yourself suddenly a willing cog in a monstrously inhuman system. Becker
insists that it's essential to engage the ''ancient remedies'' - sex, drugs,
music - that have always consoled the oppressed; above all, he wants to make
sure he never gets used to his situation or accepts it.

The central themes of ''Zombie Jamboree'' are familiar ones: the dangers of
becoming ''flag simple''; the need to assert human values in the face of
allegiances to bloodless abstractions, and society's willingness to ignore the
moral implications of its collective actions - specifically, the way this
refusal to confront our actions has turned some of our citizens into ghostly
apparitions. And although Becker's struggle to retain his essential ''little
shaft of freedom'' is presented in the context of the Vietnam conflict, it's
obviously a struggle we all share in.

But what this novel does best is ''defamiliarize'' these themes by transforming
them into incidents and prose - especially the benzedrine rush of Becker's voice
- that startle, anger, amuse, provoke. There is a lot of crudeness and
adolescent humor in ''Zombie Jamboree,'' but an equal measure of moral
conviction and outrage. It's the kind of primitive, penetrating artistry of a
Neil Young song - short on felicities of technique and abstract analysis, long
on heartfelt emotion and a sense of what's important. As they say, it's close
enough for rock-and-roll.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LATIN AMERICAN STUDIES EMERGE FROM THE ACADEMIC SHADOWS

BYLINE: By Larry Rohter

SECTION: Section 12; Page 48, Column 1; Survey of Education Desk

LENGTH: 3467 words


On a wall near the entrance to Columbia University's School of International
Affairs, someone has scrawled ''CIA Out of Central and South America.'' At
Northwestern University, outside of Chicago, a faculty member was denied tenure
after she had disrupted a speaking engagement by anti-Sandinista guerrilla
leaders from Nicaragua. Recalling the ferment generated by the war in Vietnam,
the heated national debate over United States policy toward countries such as El
Salvador and Nicaragua has sparked intense interest and reflection on the
nation's campuses.

But this interest is manifested in much more than demonstrations. It has also
resulted in increases in enrollments in courses on Latin American history,
economics, politics, religion and anthropology and in the introduction of major
new programs and institutes of Latin American studies at several schools. In
addition it has raised questions among specialists in the field as to how and
what to teach about Latin America in an atmosphere that is so politically
charged.

Indeed, President Reagan, whose strong views on Central America are responsible
for much of the controversy, has also seen fit to venture into this discussion.
At a luncheon with newspaper editors last March, he complained about an article
on Nicaragua by E. Bradford Burns, a professor of Latin American history at the
University of California at Los Angeles. The President singled out the article
as an especially glaring example of the ''disinformation'' spread by what he
called a ''network'' of ''probably well-intentioned'' supporters of the
Sandinistas. ''If that is what he tells his students,'' Mr. Reagan said, ''God
help them, because it was pure propaganda.''

For specialists in Latin American studies, the sudden spotlight on their field
comes as a mixed blessing. Many worry about being dragged into the increasingly
impassioned political debate or being vilified for opinions that decision makers
- or campus political groups - may not want to hear. But virtually without
exception, they also welcome the infusion of interest and talent into a field
that a decade ago was treated as a poor relation on many college campuses.

''Not since Fidel Castro marched into Havana have we seen a surge of interest
comparable to that of the last few years,'' said Gilbert W. Merkx, director of
the Latin American Institute at the University of New Mexico and editor of The
Latin American Research Review. ''We have courses that are now standing room
only, not because they are filling up with majors, but as a result of students
who are curious about Latin America because they keep hearing and reading about
it and want to know more.''

''Revolution does for Latin American studies what no other event does,'' added
Mark B. Rosenberg, director of Florida International University's Latin American
and Caribbean Center, which was founded in Miami seven years ago - around the
time the Sandinista Revolution was taking place in Nicaragua. ''Before 1979,
nobody was interested in Central America, and those of us who were in the field
had no funding, no status and no legitimacy.''

At universities around the nation, administrators and department heads say their
main worry these days is how to accommodate the interested students, not how to
attract them. In a typical example, undergraduate enrollment in courses on Latin
America at Notre Dame has nearly tripled since 1979, according to university
officials. On the graduate level, the same thing is beginning to happen: Joan
Dassin, a Latin American specialist at the Social Science Research Council,
reports an ''upsurge of scholarly activity in Latin America'' with more research
projects ''than was previously the case before 1979, in almost every area you
can think of,'' from traditional social-science and humanities disciplines to
newer subjects such as environmental and women's studies. As today's
under-graduates go on to earn graduate degrees, the increase will become even
more dramatic, she predicted.

At a number of colleges, the upsurge in enrollments has been accompanied by an
expansion of courses and programs, on both the undergraduate and graduate
levels. The University of California at San Diego, which has hired 12 Latin
American specialists in the last two years, including three for endowed chairs,
has added undergraduate courses on the church in Latin America, peasant
movements and Central American politics. The University of New Mexico has
introduced five new master's degree programs since 1980. Tulane University, in
New Orleans, has begun a new Ph.D. program in Latin American Studies, intended
not to develop future professors but to train clergy, military officers,
businessmen and bureaucrats who intend to spend their careers in the region.

As recognition of the importance of the region grows, some colleges have gone
even further. Tulane, for example, with 82 Latin American specialists now on its
faculty offering 150 different courses, has required since 1984 that in order to
obtain a degree, every student at the school take at least one course on Latin
America. ''It's a degree requirement for everyone, even if you're getting a B.S.
in biology,'' said Richard E. Greenleaf, director of Tulane's Roger Thayer Stone
Center for Latin American Studies. ''This is a city with a tradition of ties to
Latin America and the Caribbean, and we wanted to internationalize the curricula
and make sure people knew something about the world.''

Specialists in Latin American affairs say it would be incorrect, however, to
ascribe the upsurge in interest solely to the crisis in Central America.
Especially at universities in the Southwest and California, they say, Mexico and
the related problem of migration have also captured the attention of students
and local communities. And they note that classes are filling up with students
whose curiosity about the region has been awakened by exposure to the novels of
Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Mario Vargas Llosa and other exponents of the Latin
American literary boom.

Even more important as factors that have stirred awareness and interest in Latin
America and its problems are what scholars call ''the three D's: debt,
democratization and dictators.'' The return to popular sovereignty over the last
six years of countries such as Argentina, Brazil, Peru and Uruguay after long
periods of harsh military rule is a process that fascinates scholars and
students alike and stands as a happy contrast to the situation in Central
America. Equally compelling, but in no way reassuring, is the huge foreign debt
accumulated by Brazil and Mexico,which has drawn the interest of business, trade
and economic-development specialists.

''Concern about Central America doesn't mean that universities are now suddenly
pouring money into Guatemalan studies,'' said Paul Drake, director of the Center
for Iberian and Latin American Studies at the University of California at San
Diego. ''There is also a general interest in the region that extends beyond the
immediate political crisis to broader issues, such as migration and debt.'' BUT
with this sudden intellectual prosperity has come a series of new problems. The
expansion of interest in Latin America has not been accompanied by an expansion
of the traditional sources of funding for such programs, scholars complain. In
fact, despite the need for scholars and professionals who understand the
region's history, culture and languages, Latin American studies has been
affected by general cutbacks in Government funding for education ''not only in
real dollar terms, but even in nominal dollar terms,'' Dr. Drake said. At the
same time, many of the foundations that supported Latin studies have scaled down
their activities over the last decade or so, as events in Latin America were
overshadowed by crises in other regions. Some are abandoning area studies
altogether for other academic fields, while others have chosen to encourage the
development of scholarship in Latin America itself. But the result is the same:
it forces American universities to look to new sources of funding to pick up the
slack.

Many of the longest established and most widely respected programs in Latin
American studies are at public universities, with those at California at
Berkeley, Florida, Texas and Wisconsin traditionally dominating the field,
together with such private institutions as Stanford and Cornell. But two major
new centers that seem well on their way to rising to the top echelon, the Helen
Kellogg Institute for International Studies at the University of Notre Dame and
the Institute of the Americas on the campus of the University of California at
San Diego, were started and have made their mark because of generous
contributions from local foundations that are little known on the national
scene. The 15-year-old Florida International University, with a Hispanic
enrollment of more than a third, primarily Cuban-American, is widely cited as
another especially impressive newcomer.

The Notre Dame institute was founded in 1982 with a $10 million grant to study
international issues from the John L. and Mary Kellogg Foundation of Chicago,
whose money came from the family that made its fortune in breakfast cereals. The
university has chosen to focus on Latin studies, with a specific concentration
on the so-called ''Southern Cone'' countries (Argentina, Chile, Paraguay and
Uruguay), and has attracted leading scholars from those countries as well as
organizing seminars on topics such as liberation theology and democratization.

The San Diego program, which is technically independent of the university though
still on its campus, was begun two years ago with a pledge of more than $6
million in ''seed money'' from the Gildred Foundation, established by a family
with extensive business interests in Mexico. It joins three other programs on
campus that concentrate on Latin studies: a brand-new Graduate School of
International Relations and Pacific Studies, specializing in Latin America and
Asia; the Center for Iberian and Latin American Studies, and the Center for
United States and Mexican Studies. These four programs make the University of
California's San Diego campus, founded in 1964 and situated less than 25 miles
from the Mexican border, one of the premier centers in the nation for the study
of Latin America.

Some scholars in the field, though, worry about the prominence of foundations
and corporations with extensive business interests in Latin America as sources
of financial support. While no evidence of a conflict of interest between the
academic and business worlds has yet surfaced, they say, that troublesome
possibility exists. ''The private sector will generally support academic
projects as long as those projects have a direct relationship to the needs of
the private sector,'' said Dr. Rosenberg of Florida International. ''Most times,
though, the needs of academia and the private sector are quite distinct, so we
have in essence to create projects that go beyond our own institutional needs in
order to get the funding.''

As a result, Dr. Rosenberg said, many Latin American scholars now spend ''much
of their time thinking of ways in which they can get support from the private
sector rather than in addressing ongoing and more traditional academic issues.''
Corporations, he notes, are ''not interested in funding research on 17th-century
Argentina,'' which he and other scholars feel is work that needs to be done if
the university is to fulfill its function. ''As funding dries up from
traditional sources, it could distort academic productivity at a time when the
Americas are increasingly convulsive.'' ONE SOLUTION to the financial crunch has
been for universities to pool their efforts and resources. Perhaps the most
innovative program of this sort is in Washington, where Georgetown, American,
Catholic and George Washington universities joined in 1984 with the Organization
of American States and the Inter-American Development Bank to form the Center
for the Advanced Studies of the Americas, known as CASA.

In this consortium arrangement, each of the member schools has selected a
specialty. Georgetown, for example, has elected to build up even further its
traditionally strong Brazilian program, while George Washington will focus on
studies of the Andean nations. Students at each of the participating schools are
eligible to take courses at the others, so that a George Washington course on
''Revolution in 20th-Century Latin America'' is open to students from Catholic
University, and students at American University who are interested in liberation
theology can enroll in Catholic University's course on ''The Church in Latin
America.''

Over all, the consortium counts 127 participating faculty members offering more
than 400 courses on the region, according to L. Ronald Scheman, the executive
director of CASA. In addition, students at the four universities are eligible to
take part in intern programs at the two international organizations involved in
CASA and to have access to their archives for research. ''It's cost-efficient,''
Mr. Scheman said. ''In a day when universities have to find ways to get the most
benefits for their students, this arrangement enables us to offer a full range
of Latin American studies that none of our members could afford to do on our
own. Individually we may all be small, but together we are a powerful group.''

Perhaps just as troublesome as the problem of finding money, according to
scholars, has been the problem of finding people with the proper academic
qualifications to teach the most popular courses in the field, those dealing
with the Central American nations or revolutionary movements in Latin America.
Demand, they say, far exceeds the supply of scholars with strong backgrounds in
these fields.

''Five years ago, when Central America burst onto the front pages, there were
not more than two or three real experts on any of those countries,'' said Peter
Bell, a board member of the Kellogg Institute and the Institute of the Americas.
''What has occurred is that there are a number of self-made experts, very few of
whom have a deep scholarly knowledge of the area.''

''There is a frantic catching-up going on among faculty because of student
demand,'' acknowledges Richard Simkin, who recently completed five years as
director of the Latin American Studies Association, the professional
organization for specialists in the field. ''People end up teaching classes who
don't know an awful lot about the subject.'' But to meet that demand, he and
other scholars said, faculty members are now acquiring the needed expertise
through research and study.

In the long run, though, clearly the most important issue confronting Latin
American scholars today is how and what they should teach. In the days when
Latin America was considered a backwater of scholarship that may have been less
of a problem; but with Central America currently one of the main points of focus
of national attention, many professors, especially those who teach history,
politics and economics, say they feel the pressure every time they step into the
classroom.

''When you get to the contemporary period, there's no way around the
controversy,'' said William Leogrande, who teaches Latin American politics at
American University. ''Even the most basic facts have become politicized, and
there's no agreement on them.''

The ''overwhelming majority of Latin American scholars think the Reagan
Administration's policy in the region is off the wall,'' Dr. Leogrande said. And
many of them have expressed those views in opinion pieces for leading newspapers
or through the Latin American Studies Association, which has passed resolutions
that ''deplore'' American policy in Central America and ''call for an end to
U.S. military intervention'' in the region.

''There is a general consensus among Latin Americanists about the causes of the
crisis in the region, but not the solutions,'' said Dr. Rosenberg. ''My sense is
that most Latin Americanists believe the problems are a function of internal
dislocations and a history of U.S. support for authoritarian and dictatorial
governments, which together over time have had a cumulative impact.''

In general, ''the left is much more outspoken than the conservatives,'' said
Luis Aguilar of Georgetown University, who describes himself as ''opposed to
dictatorships of the left and the right.'' But, he added, there are ''many
professors who have expressed doubts'' about revolutionary processes in Latin
America and believe ''that once you accept Marxism-Leninism, you end up with a
totalitarian state.'' IN FACT, Dr. Simkin, the former director of the Latin
American Studies Association, said it would be a mistake to equate criticism of
Reagan Administration policies with an endorsement of leftist governments or
guerrilla movements in Latin America. Criticism of American policies, he said,
often comes ''from people like me, who are not particularly crazy about the
Sandinistas.''

''You have to convey the notion that Latin America has its own dynamics but that
historically the U.S. has also been very important, especially when it comes to
Central America,'' Dr. Leogrande said. ''You can't talk about U.S. imperialists
imposing their will on the region, but on the other hand you can't pretend that
the U.S. role is nothing but benevolent and that everything that goes on down
there is an autonomous development.''

''To be objective doesn't mean you have to be a eunuch,'' added Dr. Aguilar, a
Cuban-American who is regarded by many of his peers as one of the leading
conservative voices within the field. ''You should try to avoid passionate
political polemics or imposing your perspective on your students, but one of the
reasons you are there is the possibility of sharing with them what you know.''

To some observers, most notably Accuracy in Academia, an offshoot of the
self-described media-watchdog group Accuracy in Media, such attempts have not
proved sufficient. As they see it, some Latin American scholars regularly ignore
the difference between fact and opinion, advocacy and academic impartiality.

''It comes down to a question of the line separating political activism and
scholarship, and Latin American studies is a perfect example of how that line
gets crossed,'' said Christopher Alario of Accuracy in Academia. ''There are
professors on the campus who admit they are recruiting revolutionaries and who
are using their positions to legitimize the Sandinista regime.'' DR. SIMKIN
dismissed such charges of bias.

He said that ''people in the scholarly world tend to be opposed to dictatorial
regimes'' of every stripe and that the opposition among specialists in the field
has arisen not because of leftist tendencies but from ''the feeling that U.S.
policy in Central America will not accomplish its stated goals, that is to bring
about a peaceful, democratic, pluralistic environment.''

Almost always, in fact, the most passionate outbursts on campus are the
responsibility of people outside Latin American studies. When the Nicaraguan
''contra'' leader Adolfo Calero attempted to speak at a meeting at Northwestern
University, in Evanston, Ill., a Chicago suburb, last year, it was an English
professor, Barbara Foley, who was accused of inciting students to shout him
down. In the tumult that followed, Mr. Calero was splattered with blood and
escorted away by security guards concerned for his safety. Professor Foley was
subsequently found guilty of ''grave misconduct'' by a faculty committee, and
this year she was denied tenure.

On the other hand, American and Nicaraguan guest speakers not deemed
sufficiently anti-Sandinista have been prevented from speaking at some campuses
in the Miami area by Cuban and Nicaraguan exiles using the same tactics evident
at Northwestern.

As long as the national debate over Latin American policy continues, the debate
over how to teach controversial aspects of Latin American history, politics and
economics is unlikely to diminish. No one in the field dares to predict what
course official United States policy will take over the next several years, but
they do agree, based on events of the last decade, that whatever the outcome of
that policy, the need for trained Latin America scholars will expand as United
States involvement and interest in the region deepens - and that their
responsibility is to prepare for that.

''I think the field will tend to grow over the next couple of decades, despite
the boom-and-bust cycles we have experienced,'' Dr. Greenleaf of Tulane said.
''I think it is clear that social revolution in Latin America is here to stay
for the next 30 years, and we in the United States need to have people who
understand why and how that occurs.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHY ASIANS ARE GOING TO THE HEAD OF THE CLASS

BYLINE: By Fox Butterfield

SECTION: Section 12; Page 18, Column 1; Survey of Education Desk

LENGTH: 4810 words


Le Thi Ngoc, a 32-year-old computer technician in Fremont, Calif., follows a set
schedule when she comes home from work. After preparing dinner, she spends the
next two hours helping her 10-year-old son, Alan, with his homework. Alan is not
allowed to watch television on weeknights, and if he plays with his G.I. Joe
toys when he is supposed to be doing his schoolwork, his mother throws them
away. ''Helping my son to do well in school is a sacred duty; you want your
family to do well,'' said Ms. Ngoc, who fled Vietnam in 1975. ''I'm not like
Americans who believe in freedom, freedom to let their kids do whatever they
want.''

Not surprisingly, Alan is near the top of his fourth-grade class, another in a
rapidly growing list of academically successful Asian-American students.

Suddenly they seem to be everywhere. Last spring Asian-Americans were awarded
the top five prizes in the Westinghouse Talent Search, the most prominent
science award open to American high school students. Asian-Americans typically
score around 520 out of a possible 800 on the math section of the
college-admissions Scholastic Aptitude Test, about 30 points higher than whites.

Although Asian-Americans make up only 2.1 percent of the population of the
United States, they are surging into the nation's best colleges like a tidal
wave. At Harvard University they constituted 8 percent of all undergraduates and
11 percent of the freshman class in the last school year. At the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology they made up 19 percent of the school's undergraduates
and 21 percent of the freshmen. In California, which has the heaviest
concentration of the nation's 4.8 million Asian-Americans, the figures go even
higher. One-quarter of the undergraduates last year at the University of
California at Berkeley were Asian-Americans. And at the University of California
at Irvine, outside Los Angeles, Asian-Americans accounted for more than a third
of the freshman class.

This extraordinary record by Asian-Americans has prompted a new series of
studies to find out what lies behind their success. So far there is little
agreement on the answers. Some scholars believe Asians are genetically superior,
possessing higher I.Q.'s. Dr. T. Berry Brazelton, Harvard's eminent
pediatrician, suggests that Chinese and Japanese babies are more alert and
sensitive at birth, making them faster learners. Other specialists feel the
secret is cultural, rooted in the emphasis people like Ms. Ngoc place on the
traditional Confucian values of education and the family. Still others caution
that the Asian-American children doing so well today are the offspring of a
unique group of immigrants, drawn largely from the intellectual and professional
elite of their home countries. Why, they ask, didn't earlier generations of
students from the nation's older Chinatowns do as well as Asian-American
youngsters perform now?

Whether they favor nature or nurture, the new studies also offer challenging
insights into the state of the American family and school. ''There is something
going on that's not related to the family processes that we as Americans know,''
said Sanford M. Dornbusch, a professor of sociology and education at Stanford
University. In a survey he recently conducted of 7,836 students in six San
Francisco area high schools, Professor Dornbusch found that Asian-Americans
consistently got better grades than other students regardless of their parents'
level of education or their families' social and economic status.

Indeed, the more English that was spoken in the students' homes, the less well
they tended to do in school. ''To put it bluntly, America may be a melting pot
with low standards,'' Professor Dornbusch said.

Similarly, a report on 6,800 Indochinese refugees who have arrived in the United
States since 1978 found that their children's performance in school was not
adversely affected by having large numbers of brothers and sisters at home. All
previous studies of American children have found a strong correlation between
family size and school grades, with the greater the number of children in the
family the lower the scores. In the study, directed by Nathan Caplan, a
professor of psychology at the University of Michigan, one-quarter of the
Indochinese earned straight A's and 44 percent got an A average in math, though
two-thirds of them arrived in the United States knowing no English. BUT THE MOST
provocative findings come in a six-year study headed by another University of
Michigan psychologist, Harold W. Stevenson, who compared students in
kindergarten, first grade and fifth grade in cities in the United States, Japan
and Taiwan. Taking 240 children at each grade level in each of the cities
-Minneapolis, Sendai and Taipei - Professor Stevenson found no difference in the
students' I.Q. levels. But he found significant disparities in performance.
''What we found was that whether it was kindergarten, first grade or fifth
grade, the Japanese kids were on top in math,'' he said. ''The kids in Taiwan
started out just below the American kindergarten kids in math, but they were
better by the first grade. And as the American kids do progressively worse in
math, the gap widens.''

Using carefully devised standardized tests, Professor Stevenson's team of
researchers found that in reading, the Chinese children scored the highest, with
the Americans in the middle and the Japanese lowest. But he attributed the poor
performance of the Japanese students to the greater difficulty of learning to
read Japanese, one of the most complex written languages.

In seeking to explain these differences in academic performance, Professor
Stevenson discounts the genetic factor. ''We didn't find any difference in
I.Q.,'' he said. ''But if the differences are already appearing at age 5 in
kindergarten, there must be something in the home.'' It is here that almost all
the studies converge. They find that Asian or Asian-American parents are able to
instill in their children a much greater motivation to work harder. ''My bottom
line is, there's no question these Asians are working a heck of a lot harder,''
said Professor Dornbusch of Stanford.

In his survey in the San Francisco area, he found that male Asian-Americans
spend an average of 11.7 hours a week doing homework, compared with 8 hours for
whites and 6.3 hours for blacks. Among girls, the figures were 12.3 hours a week
for Asian-Americans, 8.6 for whites and 9.2 for blacks. Asian-Americans also
registered the best figures on other measures of work: attendance, cutting
class, paying attention to the teacher and daydreaming. Professor Dornbusch said
these numbers, taken together, represented what he termed a ''powerhouse
statistic in effort.'' His findings are repeated in virtually all studies.

A recent nationwide survey titled ''School Experiences and Performance of
Asian-Pacific American High School Students,'' for example, found that nearly
half of Asian-American sophomores spend five or more hours per week on homework,
compared with less than a third of whites and a quarter of blacks. The author,
Samuel S. Peng, of the United States Department of Education, also found that
half the Asian-American high school students were never absent from school,
compared with only a quarter for whites. Asian-American high school students
were also more likely to enroll in college-preparatory courses than other ethnic
groups, earned more total credits and took more courses in science, math and
foreign languages. The Department of Education survey studied 400
Asian-Americans among 58,000 students in 1,015 high schools across the nation.

The results are even more striking in Professor Stevenson's comparative study of
Chinese, Japanese and Americans in elementary school. The American first-graders
spent an average of 14 minutes a night on homework and hated it; the Japanese
spent 37 minutes and the Chinese youngsters 77 minutes and both liked their
homework. Because Chinese and Japanese children go to school on Saturday
mornings and have fewer holidays, they attend school for 240 days a year. By
contrast, American elementary-school children generally go only 178 days a year.

There are also more subtle differences. In observing classrooms, Professor
Stevenson's team found that American students spent a third less time engaged in
academic activities in class than their Chinese and Japanese counterparts and
that the American teachers spent more time giving directions and less time
imparting information. Moreover, the researchers also discovered that even when
American fifth-graders were known to be at school, they were out of the
classroom 18 percent of the time, running errands for the teachers or at the
school office. Among Chinese and Japanese students this happened well below 1
percent of the time.

''It's an old-fashioned story, if you work hard, you do well,'' said Thomas
Sowell, a conservative economist at the Hoover Institution at Stanford who has
written extensively about race and education. ''Work works,'' he concluded.

Asian parents ''are teaching a lesson that otherwise isn't being taught in
America anymore,'' said Mr. Sowell, who grew up in Harlem and attended Harvard.
''When you see a study that says Asian kids study harder than white and black
kids and are getting better grades, it tells you something.''

The real question, then, observed Julian Stanley, a professor of psychology at
Johns Hopkins University, ''is why Asian-Americans work so hard. That's the
fascinating thing.'' Professor Stanley is director of a program at Johns Hopkins
called The Study of Mathematically Precocious Youth. To qualify for inclusion in
his study, students must score at least 700 on the S.A.T.'s math section before
the age of 13, an achievement reached by about 1 in 10,000 youngsters. At
present, 22 percent of his 292 subjects are Asian-Americans, including half the
girls in the program.

Professor Stevenson feels Asian-Americans work harder largely because they share
a greater belief than do other Americans in the efficacy of hard work and the
malleability of human nature.

''When we asked the parents what determined success in school,'' he said, ''the
Japanese mothers gave the strongest rating to the idea that anyone can do well
if they study hard.'' Conversely, he said, the American mothers attributed
success to natural talent. These findings suggest to him that the old American
belief popularized by Horatio Alger - making good by sheer hard work - may no
longer be widely held.

This conclusion was underscored by other data in the report. Mr. Stevenson's
researchers found that American mothers consistently gave their children the
highest average ratings for intellectual ability, and Japanese mothers the
lowest, although the Japanese did so much better in math. Professor Stevenson
attributed this to ''an excessively positive attitude'' by the American parents.
In addition, the American mothers expressed more satisfaction with their
children's teachers and schools than did the Chinese or Japanese mothers.
Equally striking, ''The average American kid rated himself above average, while
the average Asian kid rated himself average or below,'' Professor Stevenson
related. ''When you are so satisfied with yourself, you don't feel the need to
work as hard.''


Confucian Ethic Is a Dynamic
Factor in Asian Behavior

The belief that people can always be improved by proper effort and instruction
is a basic tenet of Confucianism. This philosophy, propounded by the Chinese
sage in the fifth century B.C., in time became a dynamic force not only in China
but also in Korea, Japan and Vietnam, sanctifying the family and glorifying
education. In the view of William Liu, a sociologist who directs the
Pacific-Asian American Mental Health Research Center at the University of
Illinois in Chicago, the Confucian ethic remains the strongest determinant of
behavior by Asian-Americans. ''In the Confucian ethic,'' he said, ''there is a
centripedal family orientation that makes people work for the honor of the
family, not for themselves. In Confucianism, one can never repay one's mother
and father, and there is a strong sense of guilt. It is very compelling, like
the Protestant ethic in the West, a great inducer of motivation.''

A classic exemplar of these values is Katherine Chen, who graduated in June at
the top of her class from Lowell High School in San Francisco. Dating from 1856
Lowell has been the city's most prominent public school, with admission based on
a combination of grade-point average and competitive exams. Until the 1950's it
was heavily Jewish, according to Alan Fibish, the principal. But it is now 65
percent Asian-American, and 45 percent of the students are of Chinese ancestry.
Almost 60 percent of the students are female.  Miss Chen, who plans to enroll in
Stanford in the fall and eventually to become a doctor, was a straight-A student
at Lowell. ''In the Chinese family,'' she said, ''education is very important
because parents see it as the way to achieve. With that environment, it's
natural to study. My friends are that way, too. It's not a chore. They know the
benefits.'' Miss Chen's father, who was from Taiwan, died in 1970 while studying
for his Ph.D. in physics at the University of Minnesota, and her mother then
took her back to Hong Kong, where she had been a nurse. But when Katherine
reached the age of 10, they moved to San Francisco for her education.

In high school she regularly did four hours of homework every night. She did
watch some television after dinner, she said, ''because my mom makes it a point
that I relax.'' But Katherine, in common with many Asian-American students, does
not date. The preoccupation of American teen-agers with the opposite sex is seen
as dangerous and distracting by many Asian parents accustomed to a more
traditional society where children grow up more slowly.

That Asian-Americans have replaced Jews as the predominant group in academically
demanding institutions such as Lowell High School is not a coincidence, many
educators believe. Much the same thing has happened in New York City, in schools
like Stuyvesant High School, one of the city's three elite schools that require
an examination for admission and that emphasize science and math. About 36
percent of the 2,600 students at Stuyvesant are now Asian-American, according to
Murray Kahn, the assistant principal. ''The Asian-Americans are very similar to
the Jewish immigrants of the 1930's and 40's,'' Mr. Kahn said, ''with their
emphasis on learning and the family and the sheer energy they get from their new
opportunity in America.''

The importance of the sanctity of the family and education are themes that recur
in interviews with successful Asian-Americans. Mia Chung, for instance, who
graduated from Harvard this June, is a Korean-American who hopes to become a
professional pianist. At 13 she played with the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra and
at 14 performed Beethoven's ''Emperor'' concerto with the National Symphony
Orchestra at the John F. Kennedy Center in Washington. Whenever she performs,
her father, mother, grandmother and two brothers (one is now a student at
Harvard Medical School, the other at Harvard Business School) join her to pray.
''My family is there to help,'' she said. ''They are a support group for each of
us.''

Miss Chung's father, an accountant, converted from Buddhism to Christianity
after immigrating to America. A strong faith in Christianity now is critical to
the family's life - in a way that is like a transmuted form of the Confucian
ethic, Miss Chung acknowledged. Partly because of her religious views and partly
because of her devotion to practicing the piano, Miss Chung still does not date.
''There will be plenty of time for that,'' she said. ''Americans place more
importance on their social life than we do.''

College officials find this single-mindedness of many Asian-Americans charming
but sometimes limiting. Fred Hargaden, for 15 years dean of admissions at
Stanford and now a vice president of the College Board in New York, recalled
that the university decided to turn down some Asian-Americans because their only
strength was good grades. Stanford, in common with many other schools, uses what
he termed ''an academic plus factor'' in deciding on admissions and looks for
students with other interests, such as sports, music or extracurricular
activities.


'Academic Plus Factor' Stirs
College Admissions Dispute

Despite gaining admittance far out of proportion to their numbers, some
Asian-Americans in the last few years have begun to argue that the ''academic
plus factor'' has been used to discriminate against them in admissions. And some
educators are troubled by what has become the increasingly difficult issue of
deciding between class balance and individual merit.

In addition, some American students have begun growing nervous, and at times
resentful, about the academic success of Asian-Americans.

Donald Kennedy, Stanford's president, recalled an incident in which a professor
of engineering called in a white American who had received a B on an exam when
the teacher felt the student could have done better. ''What do you think I am,
Chinese?'' the student asked.

Others tell of white students who withdraw from courses with a large number of
Asian-Americans because they feared their standings on the grading curve would
suffer. And more and more the term ''grind'' has been directed at
Asian-Americans by some of their classmates in particularly uncomfortable ways.

Probably the most controversial research on why Asian-Americans do well has come
from Arthur Jensen, the educational psychologist at the University of California
at Berkeley whose theories about differences in intelligence between whites and
blacks have been widely assailed. Professor Jensen conducted a study several
years ago among 500 students in San Francisco's Chinatown, most of them new
immigrants from Taiwan and Hong Kong. The results, he said, showed that the
Chinese had an average I.Q. of 115, 15 points above the national average. ''They
scored remarkably well, like upper-middle-class white children,'' Professor
Jensen said.

This summer he is evaluating test-score data he gathered in Hong Kong from a
representative sample of 8,000 schoolchildren. His preliminary analysis, he
said, is that the Hong Kong students scored about the same as the San Francisco
Chinese. He is cautious, however, about interpreting what these high I.Q. scores
mean. They may simply reflect the selectiveness of the sample, he said, which is
composed of the children of ambitious immigrants. Richard Lynn, a British
psychologist, is more definite, maintaining that the Japanese score 11 points
higher on I.Q. tests than the American average. His conclusions have been
challenged by Mr. Stevenson, of the University of Michigan, among others, who
charge that his methodology is faulty.

Dr. Brazelton, the Harvard pediatrician, whose books on child development are
read around the world, also questions any claims that Asians have higher I.Q.'s.
But he has put forward one of the most novel theories about Asians' performance.
During research in the Goto Islands in Japan and visits to Hong Kong and Peking,
he has applied his Neonatal Behaviorial Assessment Scale, a widely accepted
means of scoring an infant's response to his environment. He was impressed that
Chinese and Japanese babies, from birth up to two weeks old, appeared more
''quiet, gentle, sensitive and alert'' than American babies.

''This sets them up for the rapid acquisition of knowledge,'' Dr. Brazelton
said, especially given the different way Asians have of learning. ''They do it
by modeling,'' he said. ''The teachers model it and the kids sit passively and
imitate it. We do it more by experimentation, with infants watching and then
acting it out, trying it out bit by bit.''

Dr. Brazelton traces the alertness of Chinese and Japanese babies to ''a
different intrauterine shaping.'' This is partly a result of their different
genes, he speculated, and partly a consequence of their mothers' environment.
''Their mothers lead a less stressful life during pregnancy than Americans,'' he
asserted. ''They are not rushing around as much, there are fewer horns honking,
things are quieter.''


Current Immigrants Viewed
As the 'Cream of Their Societies'

Ezra Vogel, a Harvard sociologist who has written extensively on both Communist
China and the reasons behind Japan's economic success, suggests that all these
theories should be treated with caution. It is important to remember, he said,
that the current group of Asian immigrants, whose offspring are doing so well in
American schools, ''are a very biased sample, the cream of their own
societies.''

The first of these groups were students from China who got stuck in the United
States after the Communist triumph there in 1949 and the outbreak of the Korean
War in 1950. Then there have been the brain-drain groups of engineers, doctors
and scientists from Taiwan, South Korea and the Philippines who found better
jobs in America than at home. I.M. Pei, the architect, An Wang, the
computer-company pioneer, and Samuel C.C. Ting, the Nobel laureate in physics,
are all members of this wave of migration. So too are the parents of Katherine
Chen and Mia Chung.

''If you could get the grades for kids from Chinatown before World War II, they
wouldn't be in the same league,'' Professor Vogel contended. Their forebears,
often illiterate laborers who came to the United States to work on the
railroads, represented a very different segment of Chinese society.

Jeanne F. Nidorf, a psychologist at the University of California at San Diego
who works with young Indochinese refugees, thinks a similar argument explains
the success of many Vietnamese and Cambodians in the United States. ''I call it
Social Darwinism,'' said Ms. Nidorf. Not all Indochinese youngsters do well when
they reach the United States, she is careful to point out. But those who do
succeed are often from middle-class families whose parents were well educated
themselves. Then the hazards of refugee experience - persecution by the
Communists, a mortality rate of 50 percent among boat people and the hardship of
life in the camps in Southeast Asia - create a caste of survivors, Ms. Nidorf
said.

''Those who survive are physically, mentally and emotionally stronger,'' she
added. They also still have their traditional values of family cohesiveness and
respect for education to support them, she noted.

Take the case of Kim Chi Trinh, a 15-year-old Vietnamese girl with sparkling
eyes. When she was 8, Kim Chi's father, who was a teacher in Saigon during the
war, put her on a fishing boat in the hope she could escape. But before the boat
reached safety in Malaysia, it was attacked by pirates, the supply of food and
water ran out and 18 of the passengers drowned. Then, after two miserable years
in a refugee camp, Kim Chi in 1982 managed to get to the United States, where
she has been shunted through five foster families. Despite these hardships, and
her initial embarrassment over her poor English, Kim Chi has earned straight A's
in school, skipped ahead a grade and was valedictorian of her junior high school
class in San Diego. For good measure, this spring she won a citywide science
prize.

One of the unanswered questions is whether Asian-Americans will continue their
record of achievement as they are assimilated into American society.

Barbara Schneider, a professor of education at Northwestern University who
studied Asian-Americans in two Chicago area high schools, thinks they may not.
''One of the disturbing things we found,'' she said, ''when we looked at first-,
second- and third-generation Asians, was that the highest level of academic
performance came in the first and second generation. By the third generation
they were more socialized in American ways and less interested in school. So my
suspicion is that the curve for Asians will level off.''

But the experience of Rob Ohno, a third-generation Japanese-American who
graduated from Harvard this June, suggests that some Asian-Americans may find
new, more American ways to draw on their resources. Mr. Ohno, a center on
Harvard's hockey team, which finished as runner-up in the intercollegiate
championship this year, belies the stereotype of the bookish Asian-American. His
nickname around Harvard was ''Mad Dog.'' Because he grew up in Bloomington,
Minn., where there were few Japanese and he dated ''mostly blondes,'' Mr. Ohno
doesn't see himself as Asian.

But he proudly carries some of his traditional Japanese values. His family still
comes first in his life, he said, out of a feeling of duty. And his father
taught him the importance of hard work and education. ''It's something innate in
me,'' he said. This summer he is going off to Europe to play professional hockey
for a year. Then he plans to come back to business school.

SHIFT IN ORIGINS

ONE problem in trying to penetrate the mystery of why Asian-Americans do so well
academically is that the term Asian-American itself can be misleading.

The situation was simpler before 1965, when President Johnson changed the
immigration law, dropping the old quota-based restrictions that had effectively
limited Asian immigration since the 1920's. At the time, two-thirds of all
Asian-Americans were of Japanese or Chinese descent and most were members of
families that had been in the United States since the late 19th or early 20th
century. But now Asian-Americans are the nation's fastest-growing racial group
on a percentage basis, according to Leon F. Bouvier, vice president of the
Population Reference Bureau in Washington, a private demographic research group.
Their number jumped from 1.4 million in the 1970 census to 3.47 million in 1980,
and Mr. Bouvier predicts there will be 6.5 million by 1990 and almost 10 million
by the turn of the century. By the middle of the 21st century, he estimates,
Asian-Americans will be as big a proportion of the United States population as
Hispanics are now: 6.4 percent.

Equally important is a dramatic shift in the origin of these new immigrants.
Where in 1970 Japanese formed the largest group, in the 1980 census Chinese had
surpassed them. Since the end of the war in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia in 1975,
750,000 Indochinese, and an even larger number of Koreans and Filipinos, have
joined their ranks, By 1990, in fact, Mr. Bouvier predicts, Filipinos will
become the largest Asian group. There are also a half-million Indians and
Pakistanis whom demographers are not quite sure where to place.



MASTERY IN MATH

FOR the last decade, Asian-Americans have scored about 30 points higher than
whites on the math portion of the Scholastic Aptitude Test - about 520 of a
possible 800, compared with 490 for whites.

Some experts believe the explanation is simple enough. They suggest that though
Asian immigrants are troubled by learning English when they arrive in the United
States, they do not have similar problems with math because the numbers and
symbols employed are a universal language. Lending possible evidence to this
theory is the fact that Asian-Americans score lower on the verbal portion of the
S.A.T. than do whites - 404 last year compared with 449.

Other specialists believe the explanation may be more complex. Harold W.
Stevenson, a professor of psychology at the University of Michigan, found, for
example, that grade schools in Japan and Taiwan spend much more time teaching
math than do their American equivalents. By contrast, American schools put more
stress on reading.

Some scholars have suggested that Asians are better at math because they feel
more comfortable with abstract symbols, given the nature of the Chinese and
Japanese written languages, which use characters rather than an alphabet. Other
authorities regard this as oversimplified, since other Asian languages,
including Vietnamese and Indian and Pakistani tongues, do use alphabets.

Jeanne F. Nidorf, a psychologist at the University of California at San Diego,
points out that immigrant children from Europe and Latin America, who also face
a language barrier in the United States, do not do nearly so well in math as do
Asians. Ms. Nidorf, who works with refugee children from all parts of the world,
says she has been especially struck by how Asian youngsters take pride in their
math abilities. She also said she had observed that Asian girls in school did
not have the same fear of math that many non-Asian girls do.

''The troubled Asian kids who come to me in my office always want to show me how
good they are at math,'' she said. ''It's also true of the girls, which is very
unusual. I'm prepared to believe there is something genetic about it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph of S.A.T. averages by ethnic group, 1985 (Source: College Board);
photo of Mia Chung (NYT/Joe Wrinn) (page 19); table lists percentage of high
school sophomores who spend 5 or more hours per week on homework, by ethnic
group (Source: ''School Experience and Performance of Asian-Pacific American
High School Students,'' published by U.S. Department of Education, 1982) (page
21); photo of

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHY ASIANS ARE GOING TO THE HEAD OF THE CLASS 'I Promised My Father to Uphold
Our Family Honor'

BYLINE: By Fox Butterfield

SECTION: Section 12; Page 20, Column 1; Survey of Education Desk

LENGTH: 586 words


WHEN Jason Tang arrived in the United States in 1980, after two years in a
refugee camp in Malaysia for Vietnamese boat people, he barely spoke English.
All he could say was, ''How are you? I'm 12.'' What was worse, Jason had not
been in a regular school since 1975, when the Vietnam War ended and he was a
second-grader. The new schools set up by the victorious Communists ''only taught
about Lenin and Marx and Ho Chi Minh,'' he recalled. So his family kept him
home.

Instead his father, an ethnic Chinese shopkeeper, saved money and borrowed more
to buy passage on a fishing boat for Jason and his three sisters, hoping they
could escape and find a better life in the United States. Jason's parents stayed
behind.

With great personal effort and devotion to his father's wishes, Jason has
succeeded. In June, at the age of 18, he was graduated from Brighton High School
in Boston with a straight-A average. His achievements earned him a four-year
scholarship to Boston University, where he intends to major in electrical
engineering.

How Jason succeeded against so many obstacles offers insights into what has
helped Asian-Americans achieve their record of academic excellence.

A slight young man who now speaks with only the trace of an accent, Jason
rejects the idea that Asians are more intelligent than Americans. ''Some
American kids are really smart, but they just don't work as hard as Asians,'' he
said. ''If they did, I wouldn't have gotten a scholarship to B.U. Asians pay
more attention to their teachers, then go home and spend more hours doing their
homework instead of watching TV or going on dates. American kids are spoiled by
America.'' Jason says this not with a sense of contempt or smugness but only as
an observation. He himself has become Americanized enough to love playing
basketball and wish he could be ''Larry Bird's younger brother.''

What has helped his motivation, Jason said, is his sense of obligation to his
faraway parents. ''I promised my father to do good and to uphold our family
honor,'' he said. ''My father spent so much to send me here, and I am determined
to repay him.''

Jason writes to his father once a month, and he has been able to preserve his
family ties because he still lives with two of his sisters, one of whom is a
student at Northeastern University, the other at the University of
Massachusetts, both in Boston.

They came to Boston because they had an uncle who lived in the city, and they
have been virtually self-supporting. Jason and his sisters share a small
two-bedroom apartment in Allston, a lower-middle-class section, and manage to
pay the $400 monthly rent out of their joint earnings from part-time jobs.

Jason's story is not unusual at Brighton, one of Boston's local high schools
that do not require an examination for admission. Of Brighton's 900 students
this last year, 200 were Asian-American, including 100 Vietnamese and 25
Cambodians, said Virginia DiFranza, the assistant principal. While they make up
less than a quarter of the total, Asian-Americans accounted for 18 of the
school's 30 members of the National Honor Society, and more than 90 percent of
the school's Asian-American students will go to college, compared with 55
percent of the rest of the students.

The school's valedictorian this year was also a Vietnamese, Dien Lan Nguyen. The
young woman, who received a scholarship to the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, is part of a family that is so poor that they live in a tiny
apartment without a telephone.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jason Tang (NYT/Joe Wrinn)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SOUTH AFRICA VISIONS

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1033 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG, Aug. 3


When President P. W. Botha announced his newest rebuff to the West last week, he
did so with the air of a man sure of both his destiny and his moral rectitude.

''If we are forced until our backs are against the wall, we will have no
alternative but to stand up in self-respect and say to the world: you won't
force South Africa to commit national suicide,'' he said.

From the distant vantages of Western capitals, his comments might have seemed a
reflection of obduracy, a white reflex to the pressure for black power imposed
from without and within the nation.

Yet increasingly it is possible to gain the impression here that, just as black
and white perceptions are estranged, so, too, are the visions of those outside
the country who are seeking change, and those inside the country and its
Government who say they are seeking it.

While those in the United States and elsewhere who call for sanctions against
South Africa do so in the name of a moral crusade, their motives are being
interpreted in South Africa as no more than the scratchings of
self-gratification by a remote liberalism unaffected by the nation's realities
and tensions.

Iran and Vietnam Cited

Traditionally, that has been the view of the Afrikaner minority that has
governed here for 38 years. Yet the idea seems to be spreading.

Business Day, Johannesburg's financial daily, which normally challenges the
white authorities, might almost have been echoing them with an editorial
comparing Western attitudes toward South Africa with those displayed toward
Iran, Cambodia and Vietnam.

With tangible bitterness, the editorial chronicled the fortunes of those
countries after fundamental changes of government, suggesting an equation by
which the countries' decay was justified because ''the conscience of the West
has been put at rest.''

''The search for a new South Africa cannot stop,'' the newspaper said. ''But
while that search proceeds, it is right and moral to do everything possible to
preserve this industrial economy against the assault of those in the West who,
outraged beyond endurance by injustices they do not themselves endure, are
willing to send the country the way of Iran or Cambodia in order to find rest
for their souls.''

By this argument, South Africa's agony has become, in the United States and
elsewhere, not so much the pain of a sad land, but a touchstone of perceived
moral values in Western countries that need not bear the consequences of such
long-range morality.

'Torpor of Moral Health'

Once the Shah had gone from Iran, Business Day said, Westerners could ''subside
again into the torpor of those whose moral health is beyond question.''

The argument is convenient for those confronted with the impotence of being a
target.

Yet, other commentators suggest, the argument does not mask the realities of a
country whose leaders seem to seek to undermine and oppose those whom the
outside world - perceived from here with increasing hostility -regard as
mediators and moderates.

Mr. Botha and his advisers often assert that the world does not give them credit
for what they have achieved by way of change. But his actions, seem, too, to
play into the hands of critics who assert that survival in control, by reform or
coercion, is the paramount concern of the nation's Afrikaner elite.

Last week, after a court overturned part of the emergency decree, Mr. Botha
simply issued an executive order annulling the court's ruling, seeming to
undermine his Government's argument that, whatever else, South Africa offered a
vision of judicial liberty unparalleled on the continent.

In his latest rebuff to the West last Tuesday, President Botha told the British
Foreign Secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe, that South Africa should be left in peace
to solve its own problems and would not be lectured to by foreigners.

The reaction seemed familiar among a defiant white minority being asked to
contemplate black demands. Yet, in the diplomacy of stalling for time - a
speciality Pretoria has perfected in the long and so far fruitless negotiations
over the future of South-West Africa -Mr. Botha also seemed to be closing off
avenues of negotiation, at the risk of increasing international pressure for
sanctions.

Briton 'Can Bring Nothing New'

When Sir Geoffrey, acting on behalf of the European Community, meets
representatives of the outlawed African National Congress, The Star, which
opposes apartheid, said in an editorial, ''he can bring nothing new to show them
from Pretoria.''

Mr. Botha's reluctance to offer any hope to those who come in quest of change is
not new. In July Bishop Desmond M. Tutu, recipient of the 1984 Nobel Peace
Prize, sought out a meeting with the President on behalf of some of the
country's clerics.

The talks lasted two hours. For Bishop Tutu, meeting Mr. Botha carried the
intrinsic risk of losing a constituency among radical blacks who violently
oppose any kind of contact with the white authorities or their representatives.
But the discussions seemed inconclusive, offering Mr. Botha only a chance to
belittle Bishop Tutu's standing among South Africa's many churches and to
reiterate his faith in the nation's newest emergency decree, which the Bishop
had sought to have lifted.

Both Mr. Botha and Sir Geoffrey, The Star said, had sought to leave an
impression that doors remain open. ''But only professional optimists,'' the
newspaper said, ''will believe that these doors could really lead anywhere.''

If there were clues to Mr. Botha's position, then they lay in his statements
that the newest emergency decree, imposed June 12, will silence protest to the
extent that the white authorities will once again be free of challenge to their
effort to mold the nation's future in a manner favorable to the white minority
and to those blacks ready to collaborate with it.

''There are enough authentic and representative leaders in this country with
whom we can iron out our future dispensation,'' Mr. Botha said.

But he made clear that those potential interlocutors would not include the
African National Congress and its jailed leader, Nelson Mandela, until they
renounced their insurgency, in effect demanding their surrender.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

EDITOR-NOTE: The dispatch from South Africa was written in compliance with press
restrictions imposed as part of the emergency decree. The restrictions prohibit
reporters from referring without official authorization to the movements and
actions of security forces and from reporting statements deemed to be
subversive.

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 514 words


SUMMER TREATS One of this summer's midday cultural events at various downtown
locations is the Monday Music Series at the Vietnam Veterans Plaza. Today
Brazuka, a Brazilian group directed by Cliff Korman, will perform its country's
music using both traditional Brazilian and modern electronic instruments. The
group merges South American rhythms with New York sounds, sort of a samba with a
funk twist, according to Tony Whitfield, associate director of the Lower
Manhattan Council and organizer of this program.

Mr. Whitfield has put the series together by focusing on young New York bands
with ethnic roots that are incorporated into their music. He believes New York
is the hub of artistic innovation and hopes the concerts reflect some of this.

Today's presentation, sponsored by the council with a good deal of corporate
assistance, will begin at 12:15 P.M. and is free. Vietnam Veterans Plaza is
located on Water Street at Coenties slip, one block north of Broad Street. For
information, call 269-0320.

PIANO AND ALL

Laurel and Hardy, Rudolph Valentino, Charlie Chaplin, Lon Chaney and John
Barrymore are some of the legendary film stars who will be seen, but not heard,
in the Silent Film Festival beginning today at the Market in the Citicorp
Center.

About three dozen films made between 1919 and 1936, some short but most of
feature length, will be screened in the course of the festival. Every day
through Aug. 24 a single feature, sometimes a double feature or three shorts
will be screened. The pianist Donald Sosin will provide accompaniment. Some of
the festival's highlights include ''Phantom of the Opera'' with Lon Chaney
(1926) on Aug. 8; ''Wings,'' the 1927 epic that was the first film to win the
Academy Award for Best Picture on Aug. 14; ''Putting Pants On Phillip,'' (1927)
said to be Laurel and Hardy's first film as a team; Chaplin's ''City Lights''
(1931) on Aug. 7, and ''The Kid'' (1921) on Aug. 24.

The series opens today with ''The General,'' a 1926 comedy starring Buster
Keaton. Each screening begins at 7:30 P.M. in the Atrium. Admission is free. For
daily information, call 559-2330.

SPICY

There are, for some reason, many categories under the general heading of popular
music. For example, there is ragtime, jazz, blues, Dixieland, rhythm-and-blues,
swing, Latin, Afro-Cuban, be-bop, rock-and-roll, salsa, fusion, funk and heavy
metal. There is a good deal of stylistic overlap and each has its venue, its
audience and its practitioners.

On Mondays for the past seven years, the Village Gate has been presenting Latin
jazz, primarily the Latin jazz-American jazz mixture played in New York and
referred to as salsa. One featured musician is Tito Puente, the Puerto
Rican-born percussionist. Another is Fernandito Villalona, a singer from the
Dominican Republic, and his orchestra, and Chico Freeman, the tenor saxophonist
from Chicago.

The Village Gate is at 160 Bleecker Street, at the corner of Thompson. Sets are
at 9:30 P.M. and midnight. There is a $15 music charge and a one-drink minimum.
For information, call 475-5120.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1058 words


THE TREE OF LIBERTY: A Documentary History of Rebellion and Political Crime in
America. Edited by Nicholas N. Kittrie and Eldon D. Wedlock Jr. Illustrated. 714
pages. Johns Hopkins University Press. $39.50.

IT is rare to find a reference work that is not only factual but readable. In
books related to writing, readability is fairly common because of the nature of
their themes - think of H. W. Fowler's ''Dictionary of Modern English Usage,''
William Strunk Jr.'s and E. B. White's ''Elements of Style,'' Theodore M.
Bernstein's ''Careful Writer.'' In addition to delivering what their titles
promise, all happen to have at least two uncommon virtues in common: wit and
daring.

By contrast, most historical reference books are more spinach than fun. Now a
university press brings out an important and welcome exception that beautifully
succeeds in blending both story and history in one sturdy volume.

The subject of ''The Tree of Liberty,'' edited by two constitutional and
criminal-law scholars, Profs. Nicholas N. Kittrie of American University and
Eldon D. Wedlock Jr. of the University of South Carolina, is summed up in its
subtitle: ''A Documentary History of Rebellion and Political Crime in America.''

The book carries a second subtitle that reveals still more about what the
co-authors have achieved: ''A Legal, Historical, Social, and Psychological
Inquiry into Rebellions and Political Crimes, Their Causes, Suppression, and
Punishment in the United States.''

That sounds like a mouthful, but the 450 documents in the book each tell a
pointed story. Although they may not be fun, as such, they are exciting,
enlightening and often infuriating. Here are the towering Presidents and Chief
Justices as well as the visionaries and scoundrels who captured the attention of
Washington, the courts and the country up to our own time.

''The Tree of Liberty'' stands on its own and also supplements the longtime
fundamental work and argument settler in this field - Henry Steele Commager's
''Documents of American History.'' The new documentary history also informs and
reminds us that freedom grew out of the Revolution and the revolutionary ideas
in every American century.

The Statue of Liberty celebration this summer might have benefited by a touch of
Thomas Jefferson (who gives the book its title and thrust):

''I hold it that a little rebellion now and then is a good thing, and as
necessary in the political world as storms in the physical . . . It is medicine
necessary for the sound health of government.

''God forbid we should ever be twenty years without such a rebellion.

''What signify a few lives lost in a century or two? The tree of liberty must be
refreshed from time to time with the blood of patriots and tyrants. It is its
natural manure.'' These documents provide factual ammunition for any reader -
including politicians who prefer to derive their ideas from history's lessons
instead of from popularity polls - interested in religious freedom, the rights
of women, domestic terrorism, the treatment of Indians, the deprivations of
blacks, the sanctuary movement for refugees from Central America, protest and
civil disobedience in war and peace.

The documents begin with the Colonial heritage, when kings decided the nature of
treason and sedition; continue through the Revolutionary War and the dawn of the
Republic; cover the schisms of suffrage and the notion of citizenship; include
secession and the Civil War, social and industrial strife; go on to political
activities during the two World Wars, and then to the policing of individuals
and organizations accused of subversion in the cold war years.

In erudite headnotes for each document and broad strokes of interpretation, the
authors link past and present:

''In an America which had, through the design of destiny, constitutional
doctrines, and pragmatic politics, perfected the unique art of peaceful power
sharing and transference, so necessary for continuing change and progress, there
was no need for violent political, social, or economic conflicts.

''But the riots in the urban ghettoes and the student and Vietnam-connected
unrest of the 1960's produced an awareness of the uses of political dissent and
violence and a revision of the traditional or change-through-consensus view of
United States history. When black activist H. Rap Brown asserted that mass
political violence was 'as American as apple pie,' the public was shocked.
Serious scholars, however, soon joined in debunking the myth of peaceful
progress.''

Heroes and villians come on stage through their voices and writings: Washington,
traitor to his King; John Brown, leader of an armed raid upon the Harpers Ferry
armory; Lincoln, explaining the legality of wartime arrests in a famous sentence
(''Must I shoot a simple-minded soldier boy who deserts, while I must not touch
a hair of a wily agitator who induces him to desert?''); Jefferson Davis, a
constitutional scholar heading the rebellion against the Union; Susan B.
Anthony, imprisoned for her militancy in urging women's suffrage; Eugene V.
Debs, the labor leader, disobeying court injunctions; Martin Luther King Jr.,
engaged in unlawful demonstrations against the authorities in Alabama; Philip
Berrigan and Daniel Ellsberg, who broke the law to expose what they saw as the
folly of the Vietnam War; Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, convicted and executed in
peacetime for communicating atom-bomb secrets to the Soviet Union; Philip Agee,
the former Central Intelligence Agency employee who sought to publish names and
facts about United States agents abroad.

''But however these figures ultimately are disposed of by the judgment of the
ages,'' the authors say, ''their activities at first glance meet the criteria of
political crimes, although it might be said in some cases that such status is
tenuous.''

From all these documents (and one cheer ought to be reserved for the detailed
concordance, proper-name index and table of cases at the end of the book),
Professors Kittrie and Wedlock conclude on a note of optimism. They demonstrate
that there has been a dramatic shift from rebellions and direct advocacy to the
legislative halls and, particularly, to the courts. And they believe that
unorthodox and extralegal political methods represent a reformist rather than an
insurrectionary posture in America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Nicholas Kittrie and Eldon Wedlock Jr. (De Turro)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GRUMMAN'S CHIEF TEST PILOT DIES IN CRASH OF WORLD WAR II BOMBER

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section D; Page 22, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 783 words


The chief test pilot of the Grumman Corporation, a highly decorated former
Marine aviator who had flown 330 combat missions and tested some of the world's
most sophisticated aircraft, was killed yesterday in the crash of a World War
II-vintage torpedo bomber in a remote section of northeastern Connecticut.

The 56-year-old pilot, Charles A. Sewell, of Setauket, L.I., was believed to
have been alone aboard the Grumman-built Avenger when it crashed and burned in a
wooded, swampy area off Route 6 near Brooklyn, Conn., at 10:19 A.M., shortly
after takeoff from nearby Danielson Airport.

One witness told the Connecticut State Police that he saw black smoke coming
from the sputtering propeller-driven engine as the plane flew 100 feet over the
treetops. Then, he said, the engine cut out and the plane crashed upside down
and burst into flames.

Clear a Path

Firefighters from nearby communities had to clear a path to the crash site and
then took nearly four hours to extinguish the fire, which fed on magnesium, a
metal used in the construction of the Avenger, a carrier-based plane that saw
heavy service in the Pacific theater.

Mr. Sewell's body was recovered about 3 P.M. and taken to the state medical
examiner's office in Farmington. Authorities said the cause of the crash
remained under investigation by state and Federal officials.

Chauncey Twine, an investigator for the National Transportation Safety Board,
said the pilot was taking the plane to Florida for its annual inspection. He
said the plane was owned by a private corporation, which he could not
immediately identify.

A Grumman spokesman, Michael Drake, said the pilot liked to fly vintage planes,
but that neither he nor Grumman owned the Avenger.

'A Source of Pride'

''Chuck was a good friend,'' Grumman's chairman, John C. Bierwirth, said last
night. ''His bravery and skill was a source of pride for everyone at Grumman.
Our aircraft are America's front line of defense because of men like Chuck, who
pushed them to the limit. ''

Mr. Sewell, Grumman's chief test-pilot since 1971 and a flier for 36 years, flew
110 combat missions over Korea and 220 more over Vietnam and Laos in a 20-year
military career, earning decorations that included the Legion of Merit, two
Distinguished Flying Crosses, 15 Air Medals and two Purple Hearts.

He was shot down in Korea in 1951, spent three days evading North Korean patrols
in a wooded area, made his way to the coast and, despite a shrapnel wound in his
arm, began swimming for an offshore island. He was picked up at sea, taken to an
American cruiser and was soon back in combat. In Vietnam, he led a fighter
squadron.

Mr. Sewell retired from the Marines in 1969 as a lieutenant colonel and joined
Grumman, whose headquarters are in Bethpage, L.I., later that year. He became
chief test pilot two years later.

With more than 10,000 hours of flying time, he had piloted some 140 types of
aircraft, including the F-14, A-6, and F-111 fighter-bombers, and had tested
virtually every plane in Grumman's inventory, using the company's 4,000-acre
test airstrip at Calverton, L.I.

In December 1984 he became the first pilot to test Grumman's X-29, an
experimental aircraft with wings swept forward rather than back. The plane,
crammed with state-of-the-art technology, is still in the testing stages.

Romance of Airplanes

Born in Fort Worth, Tex., on July 10, 1930, he fell captive to the romance of
airplanes at the age of 14 in Texas and Oklahoma. He won his Marine wings at the
age of 21.

He attended the College of William and Mary, George Washington University, the
University of Maryland and the New York Institute of Technology. He is survived
by his wife, Bonnie, whom he married 33 years ago; a son, Richard, of Port St.
Lucie, Fla., and a daughter, Cynde Bell, of Melbourne, Fla.

Unlike Hollywood's image of the brash, swaggering test pilot, Mr. Sewell was
short, trim and baldish, with an intense manner that reflected years of
dangerous living. Mr. Sewell, who had to bail out several times, often referred
to test flying as his ''black art.''

''There was always a high degree of risk in what he did,'' Mr. Drake said.
''Chuck was the total professional. That reduced the risk, but there's always
risk.''

Mr. Sewell, one of a dozen test pilots at Grumman, was regarded by colleagues as
an expert in spin testing, in which the engines are shut down and the plane
falls from high altitude, sometimes backward, often spinning around its own axis
like a leaf twirling in the wind.

''I can't think of anything I'd rather do than fly,'' he told an interviewer
last January. ''I like it - you have to depend on yourself, improvise quickly.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Charles A. Sewell (NYT)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 7, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING IS MAKING OFFER TO VIETNAM

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 353 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 6


China has offered Vietnam ''tremendous'' aid to rebuild its economy and closer
diplomatic relations in an effort to persuade Hanoi to withdraw from Cambodia,
Prince Norodom Sihanouk said at a news conference here today.

Although the Prince, a former Cambodian head of state, did not say when the
Chinese offer was made, it apparently is still on the table at a time when Hanoi
is choosing a new generation of Communist Party leaders.

Diplomats in the region have been watching to see if Vietnamese officials who
favor improved ties with China will gain in the leadership contest, or whether
the next generation will remain pro-Soviet.

Both Chinese and Vietnamese officials say Hanoi has made several overtures to
improve relations with Peking in the last few years, only to be rebuffed.
Chinese officials have long held that after making sacrifices to aid Hanoi's war
against the United States, they were betrayed by Vietnam's pro-Soviet alignment
after the war.

Prince Sihanouk heads a three-part resistance coalition fighting a
Vietnamese-installed Government in Phnom Penh.

The Prince said today that Soviet leaders had told Peking that they would not
put pressure on Hanoi to end its occupation.

But the Prince said Peking, despite its failure to move Moscow or Hanoi on the
Cambodia issue, was nevertheless showing greater flexibility itself.

He said Hu Yaobang, the Chinese party General Secretary, told him in a meeting
July 3 that Peking was prepared to order a reduction in Khmer Rouge guerrilla
forces after a Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia.

This, the Prince said, would reassure both the Vietnamese and the non-Communist
partners in the guerrilla opposition that the Khmer Rouge, who were responsible
for the deaths of millions of Cambodians during their rule from 1975 to early
1979, could not seize power again in Phnom Penh.

China supplies the Khmer Rouge with weapons, training and money.

Prince Sihanouk again de-emphasized the importance of Pol Pot to the Khmer
Rouge, saying the organization's former leader ''had a health problem, malaria''
and that he ''is getting very weak.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 7, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
Politics of Protection

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 736 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


The surge of American protectionism that has just fallen short of victory in the
House of Representatives is a bipartisan disaster. President Reagan and
Congressional Democrats share responsibility for a phenomenon that threatens the
whole postwar pattern of international economic growth and prosperity. And the
House's narrow failure to override the Reagan veto of a textile quota bill will
not end the phenomenon.

To blame the President may seem odd. He has vigorously denounced efforts to put
up barriers against imports, calling the textile bill ''destructionist,'' and
there is no doubt of his passion on the subject. He is a believer in free trade
- a belief that seems to have hung on from his days as a New Deal Democrat.

But Mr. Reagan created the conditions that have nurtured protectionism in recent
years. He did so with his tax and budget policies, with specific actions on
trade and with his tuning of the national psychology.

The growing U.S. trade deficit, now up to $170 billion a year, feeds the
protectionist trend. It is a frightening imbalance, and the Reagan fiscal
policies have played a large part in producing it.

Mr. Reagan's determination to cut taxes and raise defense spending produced the
biggest budget deficits in American history: $230 billion in the current fiscal
year, by the latest count. The Federal Reserve had to keep interest rates and
the value of the dollar high to attract foreign money to finance that deficit.

The overvalued dollar crippled American exports, as everyone now recognizes.
Lately the Administration and the Fed have talked and maneuvered the dollar
down. But it always takes time, a long time, for cuts in a currency's valuation
to correct a trade imbalance. The U.S. deficit, and the fear, continue.

On the specifics of trade, President Reagan has been schizophrenic. He went all
out for free trade in allowing Japan's restraints on automobile exports to this
country to lapse. But he pandered to protectionist sentiments on other issues;
just now he violated international trade rules by approving sales of wheat to
the Soviet Union with subsidies paid by the American taxpayer.

The broader point is psychological. As President Mr. Reagan has appealed to the
nationalism in us, talking about American strength and using American power
unilaterally. If there is more patriotism in the air, there is also more
truculent jingoism - more of a feeling that we can do without the world, of a
belief in Fortress America. One aspect of that feeling is protectionism.

The Democratic Party was historically the party of free trade. Now many
Democrats in Congress have abandoned that principle for what could be called a
sleazy populism. It is the worst kind of populism in the American tradition,
ignorant and anti-foreign.

The Democrats' calculation, by all signs, is cynically political. They are
telling themselves: Since Vietnam too many voters have seen our party as soft
and insufficiently pro-American; now here is a chance to look tough toward
foreigners, to out-Reagan Reagan.

There are real hurts in communities represented by some of those Democrats - and
by the Republicans who deserted the President on the textile quota bill.
Imported fabrics in clothes and shoes have taken over significant parts of the
American market.

But many Democrats hoping to capitalize on the hurt know full well that
protectionism is not a rational answer. In the postwar world, with its booming
trade, old industries such as textiles have inevitably moved to low-wage
developing countries.

Japan understood and let that business go. It retrained workers and adapted
factories, concentrating on new and more profitable fields. Why should we try to
hang on to the dying industries?

Even as politics, the Democratic tactic seems shortsighted. If by any chance
Congress should succeed in building protectionist walls around this country,
would Americans really be grateful? Do they want to pay much more for video
recorders and other electronic products? Do they want less choice in food and
cars and clothes? Do they want to see an international trade war that puts all
economies at risk?

The forces of protectionism are narrow and local, the kinds of forces that so
easily find voice in Congress. But national elections require a national voice.
The Democrats are not likely to find an alternative to Reaganism in the patent
medicine of trade barriers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 7, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 853 words


REGRETS ONLY. By Sally Quinn. 556 pages. Simon & Schuster. $18.95.

MAKING BELIEVE. By John Leggett. 295 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $16.95.

SADIE GREY, the leading female character in Sally Quinn's first novel, ''Regrets
Only,'' is a secret writer. The leading male character, Desmond Shaw, asks to
see her work. She lets him read a story called ''Fay's Last Chance,'' about a
middle-aged married woman who has an affair with the tennis pro at the country
club but can't make up her mind to run off with him. Desmond thinks the story
shows promise and encourages Sadie to continue writing under his tutelage. Sadie
decides to turn ''Fay's Last Chance'' into a novel. ''Regrets Only'' could
plausibly be the not wholly successful result.

In certain respects, the novel represents a creative expansion of the story. The
principal characters are more exalted: instead of a suburban housewife and a
tennis pro, the lovers are the First Lady of the United States and the
Washington Bureau chief of a national newsweekly. The theme is grander, too -
the stress of political power on the relations of men and women. There are more
plot complications, and a bigger, richer cast of characters.

But in too many damaging respects, the novel is little more than a version of
that short story pumped up to fill over 500 pages. Too often, gratuitous
language fills up the expanded space: ''This man might die,'' reflects a
character upon learning that an already sick man has suffered a paralyzing
stroke. Or absurdly trivial details, like a piece of food that catches in the
heroine's teeth at a White House dinner. (''It wasn't all that bad, hardly
noticeable, but for God's sake, what if it had been spinach?'') Or nonsensical
redundancy: ''I've been thinking this one over since it happened, giving it a
lot of thought.''

Worse, the action of ''Regrets Only'' - or what little there is of it -never
lives up to its potential grandeur. Ms. Quinn - a former style reporter for The
Washington Post and former co-anchor for CBS Morning News - has achieved
something enviable through her knowledge of the capital social scene. She has
created the possibility of high drama, if not something approaching classical
tragedy. But out of her mountains of prose comes a mole hill. For the investment
of time and emotional energy, we would have been better off reading ''Fay's Last
Chance.''

John Leggett's new novel, ''Making Believe,'' is sparer, drier, cooler, and in
every way more professional, which shouldn't surprise us, considering that the
author has four previous novels to his credit, and ''Ross and Tom,'' the double
biography of two men destroyed by success.

Mr. Leggett, since 1970 the director of the Iowa Writers' Workshop, has always
been fascinated by self-destroying geniuses, and in ''Making Believe'' he
describes with just the dramatic economy we miss in ''Regrets Only'' the
spectacular rise of a maverick priest in the American religious establishment.

And yet there is something disturbingly bloodless in the story of Royal Train's
ascension to the position of Episcopal Bishop of Iowa; there is something that
makes us long for Sally Quinn's unfocused passion. What is the problem? Can it
be the speed with which Roy Train progresses from being a skeptical theology
student at New York City's General Theological Seminary to a paradigm of
''relevant activism'' in the pro-civil rights, anti-Vietnam War movements of the
1960's and 1970's?

Or are we simply put off by Mr. Leggett's weak sister of a narrator, Ethan
Soames, whose only virtue is to be Johnny-on-the-Spot, no matter whether Roy
Train is leading a black demonstration in Tully, Ala., or organizing a student
protest in Iowa City against America's invasion of Cambodia, or facing down his
church's censure for ''conduct unbecoming a clergyman''?

Granted, the drama of ''Making Believe'' is such that we put off attaching a
definitive label to our dissatisfaction. We are willing to wait and see.
Suddenly, in what seems a whimsical plot development, Bishop Train goes off to
Egypt in search of the man who discovered the Dead Sea Scrolls, and gets lost in
the desert between Nag Hammadi and Luxor. Naturally, it occurs to us at this
point that Mr. Leggett is roughly fictionalizing the career of Bishop James A.
Pike, the controversial clergyman who died in 1969 of a fall from a rocky ledge
in the Judean wilderness near the Dead Sea.

Unfortunately, this offers one explanation of what is wrong with ''Making
Believe.'' Mr. Leggett has Bishop Pike's career to shape the novel's plot but he
has not gotten inside his model's character sufficiently to provide an adequate
motive for the plot. He has tried to make his hero more approachable by offering
us an intermediary in the form of the narrator, Ethan Soames, who loves and
tries to understand Royal Train, even if we cannot. But this strategy only
serves to make Ethan Soames into a stick figure. We go along with him, but we
don't particularly care. The novel may show how Bishop Train makes himself
believe in God by playacting, but ultimately it fails to make the reader
believe.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sally Quinn (Sigrid Estrada); photo of John Leggett (Jock
McDonald)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 8, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REHNQUIST PANEL GETS MORE MEMOS

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 761 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 7


Democratic members of the Senate Judiciary Committee today requested and
received access to additional documents dating from William H. Rehnquist's
service as head of the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel.

But despite the widening inquiry, several key senators said that nothing
appeared likely to emerge that could threaten Justice Rehnquist's confirmation
as Chief Justice of the United States. It seemed unlikely that Justice Rehnquist
would be asked to appear again before the committee, which is to vote next
Thursday on his nomination and that of Judge Antonin Scalia to be an Associate
Justice.

Senator Paul Simon, an Illinois Democrat, said the new request was prompted by
references in the initial 24 documents, delivered to the committee Tuesday
night, to other conversations and memorandums.

Senator Simon, who played a key role in pressing the initial request, described
the request for some two dozen additional documents as a follow-up, adding, ''I
don't anticipate there will be anything sensational.''

The Justice Department complied with the request late today, providing four
additional documents under the same conditions of secrecy by which it gave the
committee access to the initial documents. The Administration, facing the
likelihood of a vote by the Judiciary Committee to subpoena the original group
of documents, backed down Tuesday from its position that it would not supply the
material.

''Thus far I have not found a smoking gun,'' Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of
Delaware, the committee's ranking Democrat, said today.

Senator Patrick J. Leahy, a Vermont Democrat, said, ''I don't see anything there
that would lead to having anyone run down shouting, 'Look at this!' ''

Senator Arlen Specter, a Pennsylvania Republican, said he saw ''no reason to
question the ultimate confirmation'' of Justice Rehnquist. Senator Specter
provided key support for the committee's Democrats in the effort to obtain the
documents.

Prepared in 1969-71

The documents at issue were prepared by or for Mr. Rehnquist in the period from
1969 to 1971 when he served as an Assistant Attorney General in the Nixon
Administration. As head of the Office of Legal Counsel, he provided legal advice
to the Attorney General, John N. Mitchell, and other Administration officials.

For example, there is a memorandum from Mr. Rehnquist to John W. Dean 3d, then
the White House counsel, discussing executive orders dealing with access to
classified information. Another memorandum to Mr. Dean summarizes Supreme Court
cases dealing with the constitutional rights of criminal defendants.

None of the documents have been made public, and senators have been noticeably
circumspect in describing the material in any detail. The most vivid description
was provided by Senator Edward M. Kennedy, who has been the strongest opponent
of the Rehnquist nomination.

Senator Kennedy said that after reviewing the material he had ''no question''
that Mr. Rehnquist ''was very much involved in fashioning and shaping Government
policy in spying on domestic groups and individuals during the antiwar period
and in the use of the Army and the F.B.I. during the May Day period.'' He was
referring to a mass protest against the Vietnam War in Washington on May 1,
1971.

Kennedy Plans Investigation

The Massachusetts Democrat said his staff would spend the next few days
determining precisely what the documents showed about Mr. Rehnquist's role in
those activities and how that portrait compared to various statements he made
over the years. ''It gets back to the issue of how forthcoming he has been
before committees of Congress,'' Senator Kennedy said.

Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, an Ohio Democrat, said he also had unresolved
questions about Justice Rehnquist's ''candor.'' He said some Democrats might
move to have Justice Rehnquist called back to the committee for further
questioning.

But Senator Strom Thurmond, the South Carolina Republican who heads the
Judiciary Committee, said that while Justice Rehnquist was welcome to come
before the committee, his appearance would not be requested. A majority of the
18 members would have to vote to overrule the chairman.

Asked whether Justice Rehnquist would be called back before the committee,
Senator Leahy said, ''As a practical matter, he's not coming back.'' He added,
however, that he was sorry he had not seen the documents before Justice
Rehnquist's confirmation hearing last week. ''I could have asked better
questions and we could have had a better hearing,'' Senator Leahy said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 8, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Change in Will Linked To Saigon Aide's Death

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 137 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 7


A former South Vietnamese envoy and his wife had disinherited the son who is
charged with murdering them here last month, a police detective said today.

The detective, David Forbes, said in a Superior Court hearing that wills dated
1969 and 1977 were found in the home of the former envoy, Tran Van Chuong, who
was 88 years old.

The 1977 will said about the son, Tran Van Khiem: ''Khiem has behaved like an
exceptionally ungrateful and bad son, and has been too often a source of worry
and sorrow. Such behavior cannot be forgotten and forgiven in a traditional
Vietnamese family.''

The 1977 will did not leave an inheritance to Mr. Khiem, who is 60. The 1969
document had given him a house in Vietnam.

Mr. Khiem is charged with first-degree murder in the July 23 deaths. A grand
jury is investigating the case.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 9, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TV: BILLY CRYSTAL ON HBO

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 500 words


The notion that everybody is in show business may be as old as entertainment,
but it is given a new glitzy twist by the comedian Billy Crystal. Underneath the
most genteel, button-down exterior, he proposes there is in all of us a
flamboyant ham longing for recognition.

Mr. Crystal's most famous character, Fernando, who calls everybody ''dah-link''
and finds everything ''mah-velous,'' has become an endearing symbol of this
liberated alter ego. With his gray hair absurdly overstyled, and wearing shirt
collars that spread to the tips of his shoulders, Fernando is a contradictory
symbol of unchained late-middle-aged male narcissism and life-affirming
gregariousness.

Fernando is one of many characters who parade through Mr. Crystal's one-hour
comedy special, ''On Location: Bill Crystal - Don't Get Me Started,'' which airs
tonight at 10 on Home Box Office pay-cable channel. In the ambitious comic
experiment that takes up the first half of the show, Mr. Crystal has several of
his characters meet and mingle. His impersonations of Sammy Davis Jr. and of the
veteran insult comedian Buddy Young Jr. interact with the real-life comedian
Brother Theodore and with Rob Reiner playing Marty DiBergi. Mr. DiBergi, you may
recall, was the fictional director of ''This Is Spinal Tap,'' Mr. Reiner's mock
documentary about a heavy-metal band.

Along with a film crew, the characters have been invited by the ''real'' Billy
Crystal to make a comedy special, directed by Mr. DiBergi, in a luxurious
mansion. Things quickly go awry. Fernando phones from his car that he is
stranded on an Oklahoma highway. Mr. Young leaves the set upon learning that his
mother-in-law has died. And Mr. Davis flees the scene after being attacked with
a baseball bat by Brother Theodore. So much for the show that might have been.
This opening sequence, performed in the subtle, deadpan style of ''This Is
Spinal Tap,'' offers a Pirandellian vision of the world that one rarely finds on
television, let alone comedy.

The second half of ''Don't Get Me Started'' is a taped stand-up performance of
the comedian at Hofstra University in Hempstead, L.I. It carries Mr. Crystal's
talent for detailed, sharp-edged mimicry into the world of everyday people. We
meet the comedian's chain-smoking bass-voiced Aunt Sheila and watch an ersatz
1956 home movie that inadvertently captures a family fight. The comedian's 20th
high school reunion is remembered by ''Rick,'' a lovable but not very bright New
Yorker who served in the Vietnam War and whose happiest memories are all of high
school days.

''Don't Get Me Started'' was produced by Mr. Crystal, directed by Paul Flaherty
and written by the pair with Dick Blasucci. With this show, Mr. Crystal enters
the serious comic territory occupied by Lily Tomlin, Woody Allen and only a
handful of others. There are no cheap laughs in this fascinating special, which
reminds us that no matter how seriously we take ourselves, we are all going
through life doing our own shticks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET DIPLOMACY GIVEN A NEW LOOK UNDER GORBACHEV

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1680 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Aug. 9


The Soviet Union's foreign-policy apparatus has been undergoing a major
overhaul, including the most thorough reorganization of the Foreign Ministry in
memory, according to Soviet officials and Western diplomats.

The structural and personnel changes have resulted in a shift of authority away
from the Foreign Ministry to the party's Central Committee.

The key person in policy making is now Anatoly F. Dobrynin, the former
Ambassador to the United States, who, as a national party secretary, became a
member of the top Soviet leadership in February.

New Challenges for the West

The changes have contributed to the development under Mikhail S. Gorbachev of a
more flexible, less dogmatic foreign policy that presents new challenges,
problems and opportunities for the West, the diplomats said.

Western diplomats cited Soviet overtures to China and Israel as well as improved
relations with the United States as evidence of a less ideological approach
among Russians.

''There is a degree of suppleness they have not shown before,'' a Western
diplomat said this week.

The recent movement in arms-control talks stems in part from Soviet proposals in
June that bore Mr. Dobrynin's pragmatic stamp, diplomats said. Arms Talks in
Moscow Moscow proposed a compromise on medium-range missiles and offered cuts in
strategic forces in exchange for an extension of the 1972 Antiballistic Missile
Treaty that would have the effect of delaying American development of a
space-based missile defense.

The United States and the Soviet Union are due to hold arms-control talks here
this week, apparently in an effort to pave the way for a summit meeting later
this year.

A Western diplomat suggested that the Soviet diplomatic offensive might
eventually force the United States to re-evaluate some of its policies.

Diplomats have been particularly struck by Mr. Gorbachev's praise of China in a
recent speech, including a call for discussion of economic institutional changes
in the two countries.

Moscow announced Monday that Soviet and Israeli officials would meet this month
to discuss the opening of consulates, the first move toward improved relations
since the Soviet Union broke diplomatic ties during the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
Soviet officials said the consular talks did not signify a basic change in
policy toward Israel and would not necessarily lead to the resumption of
diplomatic relations. Many of the Soviet policy changes are being attributed by
diplomats to the influence of Mr. Dobrynin, who in his new post has emerged as
Mr. Gorbachev's foreign-affairs strategist. Under his direction, the
International Department of the Central Committee has developed into a center
for the development of policy options.

Deputy Moved From Ministry

Mr. Dobrynin''s senior deputy is Georgi M. Korniyenko, who gave up his job as a
First Deputy Foreign Minister to move to the International Department. He was an
aide to Mr. Dobrynin in Washington in the early 1960's.

A Foreign Ministry confirmed that major decisions were now being made a ''senior
party levels.''

In the past, the International Department handled mainly relations with foreign
Communist parties and did not play a major role in foreign policy in general,
according to Soviet officials.

Mr. Dobrynin has maintained a high profile since returning after 24 years as
Ambassador in Washington, meeting with foreign leaders and delegations and
delivering policy speeches.

Accessible to the U.S. Envoy

He has also met several times with Ambassador Arthur A. Hartman of the United
States and with visiting American officials. Although active in formulating
policy, Mr. Dobrynin has apparently left the day-to-day conduct of diplomacy
with the United States to Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze and his
deputies.

A Western diplomat said Mr. Dobrynin was ''interested in talking about general
policy questions, not in making specific deals.''

In Washington, Mr. Dobrynin often served as a ''back channel'' in dealings
between the two countries, establishing direct relations with Presidents and
their national security advisers.

Until a year ago, the dominant player in the development and management of
foreign policy was Andrei A. Gromyko, the longtime Foreign Minister, who was
promoted to the mostly ceremonial post of President last summer.

Ministry's Power Under Gromyko

Because of his long experience, Mr. Gromyko was able to make the Foreign
Ministry the locus of power in foreign affairs. But Mr. Gorbachev made clear
soon after assuming office in March 1985 that he wanted the party to take
control, according to Soviet officials and Western diplomats.

They said Mr. Gromyko, although a member of the Politburo, appeared to have a
diminished role in policy making.

The sources discounted rumors that Mr. Dobrynin's enhanced role in the party
would bring him into conflict with Mr. Shevardnadze.

''You must not forget that Shevardnadze's roots and power base are in the party,
not in the Foreign Ministry, so he and Dobrynin are more allies than
competitors,'' a Soviet official said.

Other officials said Mr. Shevardnadze, still learning about foreign affairs,
seemed content to execute policy while leaving more conceptual work to Mr.
Dobrynin.

Former Georgian Party Leader

Before becoming Foreign Minister last year, Mr. Shevardnadze was the party
leader of the Trans-Caucasian republic of Georgia, one of the 15 constituent
states of the Soviet Union.

The changes at the Foreign Ministry include the appointment of a new team of
diplomats under Mr. Shevardnadze, the creation of departments to deal with such
issues as arms control and human rights and a realignment of regional offices
that replaced a system basically unchanged since czarist times.

There are two new First Deputy Ministers - Yuli M. Vorontsov, previously
Ambassador to France, and Anatoly G. Kovalev, who moved up from Deputy Minister.
Mr. Vorontsov is another close associate of Mr. Dobrynin. They worked together
in Washington for 11 years.

New Deputy Ministers include Vadim P. Loginov, formerly head of the Fifth
European Department, which handles the affairs of southeast Europe; Boris N.
Chaplin, who was Ambassador to Vietnam, and Vladimir F. Petrovsky, who headed
the Foreign Ministry's International Organizations Department.

Others promoted to Deputy Minister are Anatoly L. Adamishin, who ran the First
European Department, supervising relations with Western European countries, and
Valentin M. Nikiforov, a former deputy chief of the Central Committee's Party
Organizations Department.

U.S. Specialist Promoted

Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh was also promoted to Deputy Minister from his post as
head of the ministry's United States Department. Mr. Bessmertnykh, who served
with Mr. Dobrynin in Washington for 12 years, appears to have been given
responsibility for handling relations with the United States. He is considered
to be representative of a new generation of Soviet diplomats, well versed in the
ways of the West, fluent in foreign languages, pragmatic rather than
ideological.

In another change, Mr. Gorbachev has replaced two foreign policy specialists in
the Central Committee who were long on the personal staff of the party's General
Secretary - Andrei M. Aleksandrov-Agentov and Anatoly I. Blatov. Mr. Gorbachev's
new staff adviser is Anatoly S. Chernyayev, a former deputy chief of the Central
Committee's International Department.

The new team, in general, is younger and less dogmatic than its predecessors,
Western diplomats said.

On a structural level, the Foreign Ministry has established new departments that
have attracted interest in the diplomatic community.

New Arms-Control Department

These include a Department of Arms Limitation and Disarmament, headed by Viktor
P. Karpov, the chief negotiator in the Geneva arms talks.

There is also a new Department for International Economic Relations, headed by
Ivan D. Ivanov, formerly a deputy director of the Institute of World Economy and
International Relations, and a Department for Humanitarian and Cultural
Relations, headed by Yuri B. Kashlev, who used to be chief of an Information
Department in the Foreign Ministry. Mr. Kashlev's new department is concerned in
part with human rights issues.

The ministry's former Press and Information Departments have been consolidated
into an Administration for Information, headed by Gennadi I. Gerasimov, a
journalist who is now the ministry's spokesman. Western correspondents have
found him more accessible and less polemical than his predecessor in the Press
Department post, Vladimir B. Lomeiko.

The realignment of regional offices ended a number of anomalies rooted in
19th-century diplomacy.

Australia and New Zealand, for example, were removed from the Second European
Department, which they had shared with Britain, Ireland, Canada and Malta, and
transferred to a new Department of Pacific Countries.

Canada Put in U.S. Department

Relations with Canada are now handled by a Department of the United States and
Canada, just as academic research on the two countries has long been combined in
the institute of the Academy of Sciences that is headed by Georgi A. Arbatov.

A new Department for Arab Countries has been created, incorporating nations that
formerly were divided between the First African Department and the Near East
Department.

The Scandinavian Department has been abolished and its countries have been moved
to the depleted Second European Department.

East Germany, which had been grouped with West Germany and Austria in the Third
European Department, concerned with central Europe, was shifted over to a new
Department of Socialist Countries of Europe. This office also absorbed other
Eastern European countries that had been clustered with Western neighbors in
other departments.

China, North Korea and Mongolia, which had belonged to the First Far Eastern
Department, were merged with Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia from the Southeast Asian
Department in a new Department of the Socialist Countries of Asia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Anatoly F. Dobrynin (Page 10)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DRUGS AND PARENTS' FEAR TAINT WASHINGTON HTS.

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 28, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1043 words


Angel Gonzalez, 14 years old, left a note on the kitchen table, as he always
does before going out to meet his friends on St. Nicholas Avenue and 175th
Street. ''Mom,'' he wrote, ''I'm going bike riding. I'll be back later.''

His mother, Iris Gonzalez, said that Angel is a good boy, obedient to his
parents, devoted to his priest - and wise beyond his years about the people who
buy and sell drugs outside their Washington Heights apartment.

Still, she said, when she saw the note, she shuddered. And when Angel was late,
she said, she feared for his safety until he returned. ''The minute he steps out
the door, I'm praying,'' she said. ''Not just for him, for all of them.'' Mrs.
Gonzalez and other parents pray for their children in a neighborhood where
nearly 3,000 drug-related arrests have been made in the four months since the
34th Precinct dedicated itself to stemming the cocaine traffic that flourishes
near the bridges and highways connecting upper Manhattan to New Jersey and
Westchester County.

Many Arrested Are Outsiders

In more than half of the drug-related arrests, those held came from New Jersey
or Westchester or Rockland Counties. outsiders who have come to think of
Washington Heights as a place people go to buy drugs, not a place where people
live.

But for the Gonzalez family and others like them, the streets of Washington
Heights are home. The weakest among them are at special risk to become users or
sellers of the cocaine so readily available in the area. And even the strong
know that a simple walk to school or the supermarket can be dangerous.

Like most of her neighbors, Mrs. Gonzalez knows there are more police officers
on the streets these days, and in certain spots fewer drug dealers, and she is
grateful, she said.

Children Told to 'Be Careful'

But she also said she knew that the illegal drug trafficking continues, that the
people who are arrested reappear within days, that young men from across the
hall or across the street are dying of overdoses or gunshot wounds, and that her
son and his friends must fend off the dealers who offer teen-agers cheap crack
and high-paying jobs.

''When you tell them, 'Be careful,' it's not that you don't trust them,'' she
said. ''You just never know when an innocent will be the one that pays.''

The other day, at the Church of the Incarnation on West 175th Street and St.
Nicholas Avenue, an addict visited the Rev. John Paddack for the occasional
counseling he has sought since succumbing four years ago to the temptations of
the steets. Now the addict, a 29-year-old resident of West 174th Street, tells
the priest his dream is ''to get away from here.''

''This used to be one pleasant neighborhood,'' the addict said. ''Now, it's like
Vietnam. If it would be a confrontation with the 34th Precinct against the
dealers, they'd need an army. The dealers have as many weapons as the police -
Uzis, all kind of machine guns.''

Across the street from Angel's apartment on 172d Street, a young man called
Johnny was killed by one of those guns last week.

Offers of $300 to $1,000 a Week

Angel and his friends from the Incarnation School said they felt protected by
the priests and nuns, by their mothers and fathers. But they said they still
heard stories about youngsters just like them who either use drugs or work for
the dealers, who offer the children from $300 to $1,000 a week to work as
lookouts or drug runners. And they said they felt outnumbered in a place that
seemed to have more bad people than good.

''They practically control the neighborhood.'' Angel said. ''There are more of
them than us.''

''You see how much money they have, the cars they own, the girls they attract,''
said Ruben Mateo, who was born in the Dominican Republic and, like Angel, is a
recent eighth-grade graduate. ''The people who have the most around here are the
druggies, and they're feared.''

Milk Machines, Fancy Cars

On Audubon Avenue, Angel pointed to a milk machine outside a grocery where he
said dealers hid crack. On 174th Street, Parrish Mateo, Ruben's twin brother,
identified a blue Toyota as a dealer's car because of its fancy radial tires and
tinted windows. On 175th Street, Ruben gestured toward the covered windows of
apartments -known in the neighborhood as ''major offices'' - where he said big
deals were made.

All three boys scoffed at a panel truck with New Jersey plates that slowly
circled the block, its passengers craning their necks like tourists.
''Obvious,'' said Parrish. ''Pathetically obvious.''

Angel and the Mateo twins live in strict two-parent households, a rarity in the
neighborhood, according to Mrs. Gonzalez, who works as a secretary. Often, she
said, she gets angry at neighbors who deal drugs from their apartments or let
their children run wild. Sometimes, too, she said, it is hard not to blame the
deterioration of the neighborhood on recent immigrants from the Dominican
Republic, who have become the dominant group in the neighborhood.

Work for Illegal Aliens Scarce

''It's real hard for illegals to find work,'' Ruben said of the situation faced
by many of his countrymen. ''And when they come over here, they don't expect the
Government to do anything.''

The Dominicans of Washington Heights, new to the United States, sometimes
illegal aliens and often not speaking English, face unusual obstacles in
fighting for the neighborhood. In increasing numbers, police officials said,
they call the precinct hotline with tips about drug dealing, but usually only
after overcoming a powerful fear of deportation or retaliation.

Residents, clergymen and police officers in the area said the community lacked
tenant associations, mothers' groups or other politically active organizations
likely to understand the workings of government and how to demand city services.

Mrs. Gonzalez has lived in the neighborhood most of her life and had long
resisted her husband's suggestion that they move. But now, she said, they are
shopping for a little house in Queens Village.

''I wanted to make roots someplace,'' she said, ''but here you really can't
anymore. I'm losing sleep, lying in bed at night thinking 'What about this? What
about that? Suppose this. Suppose that.' It's just too scary.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the Rev. John Paddack with Ruben Mateo and his twin brother
Parrish on St. Nicholas Avenue (NYT/Gary Guisinger)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: WORKING PROFILE: Marino de Medici;
A Scribe at the Circus Maximus on the Potomac

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 42, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1206 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 9


Marino de Medici, Washington correspondent for the Italian newspaper Il Tempo,
thinks he has one of the world's best beats.

''There are only two capitals to cover in the world today,'' he said recently.
''One is Washington and the other is Moscow.''

Mr. de Medici, 52 years old, has been covering this city for more than a quarter
century, longer than anyone else among the more than 500 accredited foreign
correspondents from 60 countries who now make up Washington's foreign press
corps.

He has covered every White House since John F. Kennedy's, traveling to the ranch
with President Johnson, to Central America with President Nixon, to India with
President Carter, to Geneva with President Reagan. He has written about
Watergate, Vietnam, civil rights, Presidential primaries and political
conventions. And, most of all, he has reported on economic and political issues
that directly affect his own country.

Foreign correspondents in Washington, like foreign correspondents everywhere,
work under a handicap, Mr. de Medici says. Their bylines, newspapers or
broadcast stations are not widely known here. As a result, they are often
ignored by politicians who, unless they are running for President, are more
interested in projecting their image at home than abroad.

Still, Mr. de Medici says, compared with most other capitals, Washington offers
easy access to information, even for foreign correspondents. Given that, he
adds, it is up to the individual reporter to get what can be got, using the same
trick employed by domestic correspondents - ''personal contact, knowing the
right people.''

This is where Mr. de Medici, long a familiar figure to members of the Washington
power structure, has an advantage over his colleagues. Many of them are
transferred out every three or four years, but he has stayed on.

As a one-man bureau, he must be alert to all that goes on in the capital. He
monitors White House, State Department and Pentagon briefings from the Foreign
Press Center, where they are piped in. Then he is off to Capitol Hill, the World
Bank or the Commerce Department, or to a luncheon at one of the research
organizations in town, such as Assistant Secretary of State Rozanne L. Ridgway's
recent luncheon discussion of trade policy at the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace.

''The big thing is not to be scooped by an American newspaper on news concerning
your country,'' he said. ''I don't want to learn about the appointment of a new
ambassador to Italy from The New York Times.''

What he sends back home is a mix of reporting, inside gossip and editorial
comment. He must educate his readers as well as report the news. ''For
instance,'' he said, ''during Watergate and the Nixon impeachment hearings I
found it difficult to explain to Italians that it was not a political maneuver
to take over the White House but a moral, constitutional and judicial matter
where the final outcome was not dictated by politics but by the full force of
the law.'' Washington, he says, has changed in many ways, not all for the
better, since he came here to work for ANSA, the Italian news service, before
joining Il Tempo four years later. He names some:

* The trivialization of White House coverage. (''It is like a three-ring circus
with everyone playing to an audience.'')

* The growing polarization of American poltiics. (''Consensus building is
changing in America.'')

* The lost tradition of public service. (''People used to come here because they
wanted to change things. Now they are here for power, the ego trip.'')

* The increased security measures. (''I used to walk into the Pentagon without
credentials. You could walk into the State Department freely. Now this city
resembles an armed camp. It is sad.'') In the early 1960's when he was new in
town, Mr. de Medici says, Washington reporters considered the White House beat a
prestigous posting but the reporters themselves were largely anonymous figures.
That has changed today.

''There are the lion tamers,'' he said, ''the sword swallowers and the clowns,
and President Reagan is the ringmaster. But nobody is in the stands -they all
want to be in the circus. Television has turned journalism into a participatory
profession.''

He also sees another troublesome aspect in today's coverage of Washington: ''A
healthy degree of skepticism is essential, but you have members of the press who
make a profession out of disputing and challenging what the Administration is
saying. They are like the paparazzi.'' At one time, he said, members of the
foreign press thought they could adequately cover Washington from New York City.
''But today they recognize they cannot play the game unless they are based
here,'' he said. ''Unless they have the access, the contacts. For example, I've
interviewed Reagan three times in five years.''

According to the Washington Foreign Press Center, the number of foreign
correspondents working in Washington has tripled since 1969. ''The city has
become a banking and economic center as well as a political center,'' said Yale
Newman, a program officer with the center. ''This is where the money has shifted
suddenly.''

Cologne and a Gold Chain

Mr. de Medici, a dark-eyed, dapper man with sideburns lightly touched with gray,
first came to the United States in 1954 on a Fulbright scholarship to study
journalism at the University of Washington in Seattle. ''I was a young, green
reporter coming to a country that, for me, was a great cathedral of
journalism,'' he recalled. ''I wore cologne and a gold chain and they thought me
very strange.''

He never intended to make a career out of covering the capital. But he has been
captivated by American politics.

''I love American politics - the interaction of politics with public opinion,''
he said. ''In the final analysis, it is public opinion that decides, and that is
uniquely American.'' Which reminded him of a distinct interest in one
Italian-American who happens to be Governor of New York.

''My wife, Nicky, tells me, 'We are not really going back to Italy because you
want to see Cuomo running for President.' ''

He paused, then said with a smile: ''I'm already stuck, I know it.''

EUROPEANIZATION

From an article by Marino de Medici published in Il Tempo, then translated and
adapted for Public Opinion, a publication of the American Enterprise Institute:

After several decades of Americanization, Europe is now retaliating in kind.
From food to fashion, from politics to economics, the evidence of a European
invasion is everywhere. Along with the pasta and espresso, Americans have
discovered the now famous underground economy, that part of a nation's gross
national product that is not measured by official statistics.

It is an old friend in Europe. It involves not reporting or underreporting
income from business and other financial transactions, hiring undocumented
workers (whose income also goes unreported) or professional barter. What's
contributed to the spread of the underground economy in this country is a
breakdown of the old American sentiment that paying taxes is every citizen's
patriotic duty. Today, tax evasion is seen as a way to beat an unfair system, as
well as a display of one's financial acumen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Marino de Medici (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LABOR DEPARTMENT DIPLOMAT: WILLIAM BROCK 3d;
Walking a Tightrope Between Business and the Unions

BYLINE: By KENNETH B. NOBLE

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1981 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WHEN Bill Brock was named Secretary of Labor last year, there was much talk of
his becoming a pro-labor voice in an Administration viewed as hostile to labor's
interests.

Union leaders hoped he would reinvigorate the moribund Labor Department and make
it more receptive to their concerns than did Raymond J. Donovan during his
stormy and ideologically rigid tenure.

Republican loyalists saw his appointment as a chance to soften labor's criticism
of the Administration and to help the G.O.P. make inroads among union members.

Conservatives and some business leaders even feared Mr. Brock would go too far
to please labor and betray President Reagan's social agenda.

But although Mr. Brock, the former United States Special Trade Representative,
has given labor reason to cheer and conservatives reason to worry, some 15
months after his appointment he appears to be in no danger of straying too far
from the Administration's policies.

''Certainly, it's a much more open department,'' said Lynn R. Williams,
president of the United Steelworkers of America. But pressed to say what labor
has gained in Mr. Brock, many labor watchers say it is tough to point to
anything concrete. ''He uses charm and diplomacy to his advantage, but his
agenda clearly is not in enacting labor reforms,'' said Mark De Bernardo, head
of labor law at the United States Chamber of Commerce.

Mr. Brock's abilities as a facilitator and political broker have gone far to
turn around the image of the Labor Department under Mr. Donovan, whose relations
with organized labor were nearly nil. He has even brought in a former union
activist to head up labor-management relations, an area he has targeted for
special focus. And he now employs the highest-ranking black woman in
Governmnent, Paula V. Smith, the agency's wage-and-hour administrator.

But, say some, partly out of loyalty to his President and his party and in part
because of budgetary constraints, Mr. Brock often stops short of effective
action - going instead for a mix of bold rhetoric and caution.

He has loudly and persistently complained of the ''tragedy of 43 percent
unemployment among black teenagers,'' but has supported cutbacks in the Job
Corps, a Federal youth retraining program, as necessary under the
Gramm-Rudman-Hollings balanced-budget law. He has also continued Mr. Donovan's
quest for the sub-minimum wage for teen-agers - a proposal labor views as
anathema to its interests.

He has beefed up enforcement of Federal health and safety laws at the agency's
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, but at the same time is expected
soon to propose new regulations lifting a 43-year-old ban on commercial work at
home - a practice unions regard as a close cousin to the sweatshop.

''He makes all the right noises; by my book, he has credibility as an
individual,'' said Kenneth Blaylock, president of the American Federation of
Government Employees. ''But let's face it, he's on a string, he's limited as to
what he can do.''

Mr. Brock doesn't have much to work with. He has taken over an agency whose
staff has been cut to 18,000, from 23,000 in 1980, and whose $28.2 billion
budget remained stagnant during the Donovan years.

OSHA has been hobbled, too. In the early days of the Reagan Administration, the
White House, lashing out at what it considered overzealousness at the agency,
pushed through budget cuts resulting in the closing of about 40 OSHA field
offices and the firing of nearly 25 percent of the agency's 3,000 employees. The
agency has been issuing a steady stream of new workplace regulations, including
those limiting exposure to hazardous substances, but there are questions about
its ability to enforce the rules.

''Brock is basically serious about a more meaningful health and safety program;
but even if you have ambitious goals, I'm not sure the agency is capable of
implementing them, given what's left there,'' said Margaret Seminario, the
A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s chief health and safety official.

Even OSHA's move last April against the Union Carbide Corporation - smacking the
company with $1.3 million in fines, the largest ever sought by the agency, for
safety and health violations at the company's Institute, W. Va., plant - has
failed to reassure labor. ''There have been a number of cosmetic changes at
OSHA, but the basic damage inflicted by the Administration under Secretary
Donovan has not been repaired,'' said Eric Frumin, occupational health director
for the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers.

Mr. Brock bristles at charges that the agency has been lax in enforcement. ''You
don't turn these ships around overnight,'' he said. ''We're doing a lot better
than a year ago.'' WILLIAM EMERSON BROCK 3d was born 55 years ago into a wealthy
family in Chattanooga, Tenn. His grandfather was a United States Senator,
representing Tennessee the way politicians did in the last century - as a
Democrat.

Mr. Brock eventually followed his grandfather into public life, but somewhere on
the way from his job at the family's Brock Candy Company to the House of
Representatives in 1962, he became a Republican.

Initially, he made his reputation in Congress as a somewhat tart-tongued,
unswerving conservative who, among other things, voted against major civil
rights laws.

In his 1970 campaign for the Senate, Mr. Brock took hard-line conservative
positions on busing, school prayer and the Vietnam War. In his four terms in the
House and one term in the Senate, he was usually a sure vote against
A.F.L.-C.I.O. positions. His labor-union detractors often noted with
exasperation that the Brock Candy Company had always been staunchly nonunion. In
1972, as a Senator, he earned his lowest rating from the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s
Committee on Political Action - a zero.

Then came Watergate. Mr. Brock lost his seat in the tide that swept dozens of
Republicans from office in the 1976 elections. But Watergate also proved to be a
boon for Mr. Brock. After the scandal, he became chairman of the Republican
National Committee, and this transformed his image from that of a provincial
conservative to that of a national figure.

In those years, he argued that Republicans ''have to stop talking just to each
other,'' and he moved to broaden the party's base to blacks, Hispanics and
blue-collar workers. At a 1978 convention of the liberal Communications Workers
of America, Mr. Brock said the party was trying to end ''years of neglect'' on
worker issues and invited the unionists to help reshape the G.O.P.

Such political savvy earned Mr. Brock a large measure of credit for the party's
robustness as it struggled to overcome Watergate. He also became known as a
political strategist who did not fit automatically into any ideological camp.

Still, he never secured a place in the Reagan inner circle, partly because by
then he was viewed as too moderate for some tastes.

So despite the impressive G.O.P. gains in the 1980 election, Mr. Brock was
passed over for first-tier Cabinet posts and given the Special Trade
Representative job - a position some felt was below his talents.

But there his evolution from prickly conservative to concilatory moderate
continued. Unlike some Administration officials, for example, who treated the
A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s headquarters across the street from the White House as enemy
territory, Mr. Brock made frequent treks to confer with labor leaders on trade
matters.

By all accounts, he thrived at the trade office job, a position he held when the
Administration's anti-protectionist trade policy started to come under
increasing pressure on Capitol Hill and in business circles. He is said to have
confided to friends that the job could prove advantageous to his post-Government
career.

It was with great reluctance, therefore, that Mr. Brock heeded the President's
plea to head the Labor Department after Mr. Donovan resigned in March 1985 in
the wake of fraud and larceny charges. ONCE at the Labor Department, Mr. Brock
took about six months to quietly remove the top dozen or so Donovan people, some
of whom had had bitter policy disputes with career employees. Mostly, they were
replaced by Brock loyalists from the trade office. None were particularly
pro-labor, but many fell into the moderate, rather than the conservative, camp
of the G.O.P. The appointments were lauded at the agency, if only because they
indicated the end of the Donovan days.

Less quietly, Mr. Brock brought in Stephen I. Schlossberg as Deputy Under
Secretary for labor-management relations. Because Mr. Schlossberg had been
general counsel and Washington representative for the U.A.W. for about two
decades, the appointment spurred outcries among conservatives.

''Hiring Schlossberg as the Department's labor-management relations official is
like having a fox guard a hen house,'' said Stephen Goodrick, executive director
of the Center on National Labor Policy, a conservative legal foundation. In a
letter to Mr. Brock, 11 House Republicans called the Schlossberg appointment
''extremely unwise'' because of his union background, and urged the Secretary to
insure that ''his duties will be as narrow as possible.''

At OSHA, meanwhile, Mr. Brock replaced agency chief Robert A. Rowland, a Texas
lawyer and G.O.P. fund-raiser, with John A. Pendergrass, a health and safety
specialist from the 3M Corporation. He also set about reviewing a controversial
decision by Mr. Rowland that farmers did not have to provide sanitation
facilities for half a million field hands throughout the country.

Mr. Brock overruled the decision, which had been called ''one of the most
shameful decisions ever made by the department'' by Senator Howard M.
Metzenbaum, the Ohio Democrat. But in a compromise with some in the
Administration, he gave the states involved 18 months to pass their own laws
before the Federal Government steps in. HE has had to steer a similarly tricky
course in the area of affirmative action, where he has clashed with Attorney
General Edwin Meese 3d. Mr. Meese wants to rewrite a 1965 Presidential order
requiring Federal contractors to set timetables to meet numerical goals in
hiring women and minorities. Calling such goals ''quotas,'' Mr. Meese says
instead that it is sufficient to encourage the companies to make special efforts
to recruit minorities.

Mr. Brock, whose agency administers the executive order, says he is flexible
about this, but wants the Labor Department to retain the right to impose
numerical goals if need be. And in speeches and testimony before Congress, he
has repeatedly sought to defuse the charge about quotas, saying, ''I have no
knowledge of any quotas being applied in this department. It's not only a
violation of law, it's a violation of regulations, and we're not going to put up
with it.''

Some business groups and conservative critics are still fuming, saying that the
numerical goals are quotas and that they penalize whites and do little to help
minorities. Still, even his detractors agree that the fight with Mr. Meese has
probably enhanced Mr. Brock's image as the Administration's chief pragmatist.

It has also won him the gratitude of civil rights and women's groups. But labor
has continued its criticism of the Administration - and Mr. Brock - in other
areas, citing especially the failure to give anything more than lip service to
the problem of joblessness among minority youth.

Skeptics even say his often-voiced concerns about this and other labor problems
are motivated by a hidden political agenda, perhaps a spot on the 1988
Republican ticket as vice president.

Mr. Brock vigorously denies any interest in another Administration job. And he
seems to take the assaults from both labor and business quarters in stride.
''The fact is, I've got to work for the only man in that whole bunch who was
elected, and that's Ronald Reagan,'' Mr. Brock says. ''I believe in his
programs. I'm part of that team.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of William Brock 3d (NYT/George Tames)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MOSCOW SEES A BIGGER ROLE FOR ITSELF IN THE PACIFIC

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 943 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK


THE Soviet Embassy called in the Bangkok press corps last week to direct
attention to a July 28 speech in Vladivostok by Mikhail S. Gorbachev.

The Soviet leader, said Boris I. Zhilyaev, the embassy charge d'affaires, had
affirmed that Asia and the Pacific were now as important as the Americas or
Europe. Playing to his listeners' interests, Mr. Zhilyaev described the region
as ''a center of civilization'' that is entering ''a renaissance with huge
potential.'' He added, ''the Soviet Union is also an Asian-Pacific state, not
indifferent to how things are going on here.''

This was not news to Asians, who have been intently discussing Mr. Gorbachev's
Pacific overtures, notably for better relations with China and a Helsinki-style
accord in the Far East. For more than a year, the Russians have been campaigning
to expand their economic, political and military influence in the Pacific basin.

Moscow will mount its first industrial exhibition in Thailand in October, and
Soviet trade delegations have been frequent visitors to Thailand and other
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the Philippines,
Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and Brunei. These Asean countries, suffering from
falling commodity prices, complain that they are being further undercut by
American protectionist moves.

In the Western and South Pacific, cash-short nations such as Kiribati and
Vanuatu are being offered payment for access by Soviet fishing fleets. Vanuatu
is also considering Soviet requests for airline landing and port facilities.
Meanwhile, Pacific fishery talks with the United States drag on. The small
states say American tuna fleets have been hauling away without payment their
only natural resource.

A new kind of Soviet diplomacy, buttressed by high-level official delegations,
is making its presence felt. Embassies have opened their doors to journalists,
interest groups and government officials. The Foreign Ministry has been
reorganized around ''political realities,'' with a new department for the Asean
countries and another for the Pacific islands, Mr. Zhilyaev said.

Soviet diplomats are encouraging antinuclear movements, notably in Indonesia.
They are also pressing hard on other, less-publicized issues. A high-level Asean
official said the Russians have been relentlessly lobbying against a United
States plan to relinquish its United Nations trusteeship in Micronesia - the
Caroline, Marshall and Marianas islands - and create pacts of association with
them instead. Washington, which would thus gain military privileges, ''had not
given the people the right to express their will.'' Mr. Zhilyaev contended. The
issue is expected to be taken to the United Nations Security Council.

Moscow's naval presence in the Pacific has also grown - to 410 ships, the
Pentagon says. Its Pacific fleet includes at least 115 submarines, 30 of them
armed with nuclear missiles. Two of the three relatively small Kiev-class
carriers are based in Vladivostok, a city closed to outsiders, and 25 fighting
ships are thought to be more-or-less permanently based at strategic Cam Ranh
Bay, Vietnam, in American-built facilities. A Kirov-class nuclear cruiser armed
with missiles and two other advanced fighting ships were added to the fleet last
winter. There are also advanced MIG-23 war planes in Vietnam and North Korea,
the Pentagon says.

Thai security officials, who suggest that Moscow may be building stepping stones
across the Indian and Pacific Oceans, perhaps with designs on Sri Lanka, closely
monitor Soviet activities in the Cambodian port of Kompong Som, formerly
Sihanoukville. The port and its link to Phnom Penh, the capital, are far from
secure; last week, Cambodian Khmer Rouge guerrillas said they had blown up a
Soviet munitions train.

Meeting in Fiji

The United States, meanwhile, saw its Anzus alliance fracture after New Zealand
barred visits by nuclear ships. The long friendship with Australia, where there
are American bases, has been challenged by Australian farmers angry at
competition from subsidized American wheat. Prospects are also murky for the
huge United States air and naval bases in the Philippines.

Prime Minister David Lange of New Zealand, despite his ban on visits by nuclear
ships, has warned of growing Soviet influence in the traditionally pro-Western
region. The 13 countries of the South Pacific Forum were expected to discuss
these concerns this weekend at their annual meeting in Suva, Fiji.

Moscow contends that the greater threat comes from Washington, which, it says,
has been increasing its nuclear-armed ships and submarines since the 1970's. The
Navy says it has 230 ships in the Pacific, many of them larger and more
up-to-date than the Soviet ones.

''A barrier to nuclear proliferation must be put up now,'' Mr. Zhilyaev asserted
in Bangkok. The Russians say they want to discuss arms reductions with China and
the United States as well as security of the sea lanes and international
terrorism. Mr. Gorbachev proposed a Helsinki-style conference that would address
all the concerns of Asia and the Pacific and adopt confidence-building measures.
Soviet diplomats say the conference could be held in Hiroshima, Japan. Or
Vladivostok.

SOVIET MILITARY FORCES IN THE PACIFIC
Aircraft carriers                    2

Battle cruisers
helicopter cruisers
destroyers and frigates             83

Patrol ships, missile
corvettes, mine warfare
ships, amphibious ships            120

Support, replenishment,
research and intelligence
ships                               90

Submarines
(nuclear and conventional)         115

Naval Aircraft                     510


Source: U.S. Department of Defense.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Soviet military forces in the Pacific

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Harriman Was Prescient About Vietnam

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 258 words


To the Editor:

Your admirable obituary of W. Averell Harriman (front page, July 27) needs one
correction. You say that after President Kennedy's assassination, Mr. Harriman
stayed on with President Johnson, ''supporting his controversial determination
to press on with the Vietnam War.'' In both the Kennedy and Johnson
Administrations, Mr. Harriman opposed all proposals to bomb North Vietnam or to
send ground troops to South Vietnam, and he never altered this opposition. But
he also decided not to take a public stand against involvement.

And he had good reasons. I left the Johnson Administration and my post as
Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs in March 1964 because of
changes Johnson was making in policy toward Vietnam that were bringing us nearer
to actual escalation. As my papers in the Kennedy Library document, Mr. Harriman
then told me that, had he been 20 years younger, he would also have resigned. He
went on to predict that Johnson would escalate the war, that the escalation
would fail, that the United States would have to negotiate and that President
Johnson would have to choose him, Averell Harriman, to be the negotiator because
of his record of negotiating with the Russians.

It was a remarkable set of predictions, all of which came true. Since he was
convinced that negotiations were inevitable and that he had an important
contribution to make in them, he did not want to take a public stand that would
make such a contribution impossible.

ROGER HILSMAN
   Lyme, Conn., July 27, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARITHMETIC OF THE NICARAGUAN RESISTANCE;
6 Problems With The Contras

BYLINE: By George McGovern; George McGovern was the Democratic Presidential
candidate in 1972.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 25, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 691 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Since leaving the United States Senate in 1981, I have not once tried to
influence the judgment of my former colleagues. But I urge them now to
re-examine their support for the ''contra'' war against the people and the
Government of Nicaragua.

I recognize the tendency of senators to give the President the benefit of the
doubt on foreign policy questions. But in this instance especially I would urge
the Senate to heed the instincts of the American majority, which coincide with
world opinion. Consider these facts: 1. Virtually no other government anywhere
in the world supports the Reagan Administration's policy of backing the contras
militarily. 2. The World Court has ruled that the United States is in violation
of international law on several counts in Nicaragua. It is true that the
Administration did not accept the rulings of the World Court in that case, but
most of the rest of the world did. 3. How do senators explain to their
constituents or to themselves or to history that our Government officially
recognizes and maintains an embassy relationship with the Sandinista Government
we are ''covertly'' trying to destroy? If the Sandinistas are as bad as the
Reagan people claim, why do we recognize them at all? Why pay for an Ambassador
and staff to conduct official business with a Government that we are paying
other agents to sabotage? 4. Mr. Reagan refers to the contras as ''freedom
fighters.'' But don't the senators know that most of the contras were recruited
by the C.I.A. from the former ranks of the hated Somoza National Guard? These
are for the most part the same despised characters that the people of Nicaragua
were revolting against when they joined the Sandinista revolution.

The contras neither know freedom nor have any record of practicing it. They are
largely a bunch of bullies similar to the death squads that we are inadvertently
associated with in El Salvador. They are not advancing freedom; they are killing
innocent people, blowing up homes and running drugs. Have the senators really
taken a hard look at these bums we are asked to bankroll under the banner of
opposing Communism? 5. Mr. Reagan would have us believe that by backing the
contras we are combating Soviet and Cuban Communism. But are we not doing just
the reverse? It was the tyranny and misrule of Somoza and his henchmen that
created the conditions that gave Communism its opportunity. People who are well
governed and fairly treated don't turn to Communism nor do they require
mercenaries to carry on their struggle to advance freedom. Cannot the Senate see
that Mr. Reagan is discrediting America, and playing into the hands of its
enemies, by allying himself with the most hated killers in Nicaragua?

The Sandinistas are not perfect, but they are a vast improvement over Somoza and
the contras. Nothing that we or the Russians do is going to decide the fate of
Nicaragua. Nicaraguans and Latin American traditions will determine the fate of
Nicaragua for good or ill. But if the Administration and Congress are determined
to increase our huge deficit by sending American tax dollars to Nicaragua, they
should send them to the Sandinista Government that we officially recognize, not
to the contra outlaws trying to destroy that Government. 6. Finally, I ask
senators to consider that every public opinion poll indicates that a majority of
the American people do not want their Government to become militarily involved
with the contras in Nicaragua. Apparently many of the same people who voted for
Mr. Reagan disagree with his war by proxy in Nicaragua. At least one poll
revealed that a majority of Americans do not know which side we are on.

For 10 years as a Senator, and also as a nominee for the Presidency, I anguished
over our disastrous involvement in Vietnam. Only history and Providence will
know finally who was right or wrong on that tragic issue. But in my long
Congressional service there is one aspect that gives me the greatest pride and
the most lasting satisfaction: I followed my conscience and my best judgment on
Vietnam. That is what I plead with my former colleagues to do with reference to
Nicaragua.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 12, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE REVIVE ANCIENT MEDICAL ARTS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 7, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1044 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


The Vietnamese, short of medicines, medical equipment and the money to buy them,
are reviving and encouraging the use of the country's ancient healing arts.

''We have 4,000 years of history and more than 1,000 years of written works of
traditional medical practice,'' said Dr. Tran Thuy, the deputy director of
Hanoi's Institute of Traditional Medicine.

''Acupuncture, massage, physical exercise and the use of plants and minerals are
all part of this,'' he added. ''With these, about 60 illnesses can be treated
successfully, many in local clinics.'' Dr. Thuy is an ear specialist with a
modern medical training who moved into traditional medicine out of a life-long
interest Intellectual Vietnamese have made native medicine into a science, but
traditional medicine is not limited to government public health services.

One of the most famous and popular men in Hanoi these days is a 75-year-old
Buddhist private practitioner of traditional medicine who goes by the
professional name of Cuu The, ''the one who saves lives.''

Cuu The holds office hours in a small shop in downtown Hanoi with posters on the
walls and a sidewalk sandwich board to advertise his specialties: liver
ailments, rheumatism, asthma and a host of sexual dysfunctions. His fee is
measured in pennies, but his clientele is cosmopolitan.

Cuu The, a chain smoker who is almost toothless, chortles his way through a
story about a Russian who came to him for a cure for infertility. ''He was back
this morning to thank me,'' Cuu The said with a satisfied grin, looking at notes
of the case he was recording in one of many school exercise books.

The old practitioner, one of 18 members of the city's Traditional Medical Care
Organization, most of them private doctors, says that at the root of his success
is his Sino-Vietnamese Buddhist faith. ''If we were all Buddhists we would have
peace in the world,'' he says. To that, he adds yoga breathing techniques from
South Asia. ''Good for headaches,'' he said. ''The air pushes out the poisons.''

''The Buddha taught that on the globe there are rivers, and in the body there
are also rivers,'' Cuu The explained. ''When there are no blocks in the earth's
rivers, the water flows continuously. When there are no blocks in the body,
there is no disease.''

Cuu The also recommends relaxing massages, ''reasonable'' exercise and proper
diet, based on ancient Sinetic definitions of ''hot'' and ''cold'' foods (not
related to temperature) for traditionally understood ''imbalances'' in the body.
Dried foods, he explained, strengthen the body's ''positive'' aspects (the cause
of headaches); water and wet foods, the ''negative.''

''A person will have good health when his body is balanced,'' he said. He also
tells patients to take a lot of vitamin C in the form of lemonade. Told he
sounded like a California health-food advocate, he laughed.

''Vitamin C is an old idea here -followed by papaya to keep the river flowing,''
he said. ''Thirty years ago I predicted foreigners would one day come to Vietnam
to study our medicine.''

Cuu The dips frequently into herbal or other natural medicines, drawing on both
Chinese and Vietnamese prescriptions. ''But the basis is Vietnamese,'' he adds,
echoing the official view that Vietnam has nothing much to learn from China.
''Vietnamese medicine is better than Chinese in both theory and practice,'' he
said.

Cuu The said 95 percent of his prescription remedies were based on plant
products easily found in the countryside.

''Chinese medicine has about 1,000 natural materials,'' he said. ''We have 800.
I know all of these. Thirty of them cure difficult diseases.''

The Institute of Traditional Medicine also uses local vegetable, animal and
mineral products. Eucalyptus, mint, ginger and aromatic coleus are among the
most widely used plants to treat common illnesses, according to Dr. Thuy.

Dr. Thuy, whose institute conducts research and trains practitioners, said 23
common ailments were now treated entirely at the local level by combinations of
herbal remedies, massage, physical exercise and simple acupuncture. More complex
''electro-acupuncture'' treatment cases are referred to the four-year-old
Central Hospital of Acupuncture, which adjoins the institute in Hanoi.

Foreign medical experts who visit Vietnam as well as Vietnamese doctors say that
the country's most serious problems, especially among children, are intestinal
diseases caused by universally contaminated water and mosquito-borne illnesses,
coupled with malnutrition that leads to easy infection.

Dr. Thuy said 77.6 percent of common diarrhea cases and 86.35 percent of amoebic
dysentery attacks were now treated with traditional medicine. Respiratory
ailments, allergies, fevers, back pain and joint and muscle pains are also among
what Dr. Thuy listed as diseases and symptoms that are first treated without
chemical or surgical cures.

''For economic reasons, our chemical industry has not developed yet,'' he said.
''By fully using trees, the earth and other resources we can save foreign
exchange. And there are no chemical side effects on patients.''

At the Central Hospital of Acupuncture, where nearly 70 patients were sharing 50
beds and about 300 to 400 people crowded the corridors each day as out-patients,
Dr. Mai Tue, the director of specialty departments, showed a visitor people
being treated for encephalitis, earache, back pain, dizziness, loss of appetite,
vision and hearing problems and paralysis.

The hospital also uses acupuncture as an analgesic in surgery for appendicitis,
colosectomies and hernias, among other procedures, Dr. Tue said. Two research
projects are now under way in cooperation with the Soviet Union, on optic nerve
repair and the treatment of paralysis. The hospital says it has had much success
in both areas.

The hospital makes extensive use of a low-cost electro-acupuncture system its
staff devised themselves, Dr. Tue said. This involves attaching needles to a
six-volt power source that provides automatic vibration. Needles were earlier
manipulated by hand.

''We can treat every disease or illness treated by modern medicine,'' Dr. Tue
said. ''With our economy facing so many difficulties, this is the most suitable
way to deal with our health problems.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 13, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AID FOR CONTRAS SURVIVES KEY VOTE IN SENATE

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 779 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 12


The Reagan Administration's proposal to send $100 million to the rebels seeking
to overthrow the Nicaraguan Government survived a key Senate vote tonight.

The Senate voted, 54 to 46, to kill an amendment that would have eliminated the
aid. The vote, which came after two days of debate on the Administration's
policy in Nicaragua, was the crucial test of Senate sentiment and made eventual
passage of the aid package a virtual certainty.

The measure has already been approved by the House of Representatives.

Senate opponents of the aid planned to offer a series of amendments to place
various restrictions on use of the money. The Senate's Republican leadership
will try on Wednesday to cut off further debate.

Senator Switches Sides

The first of the restrictive amendments, to bar the use of American forces in
ground combat in Nicaragua without a declaration of war by Congress, was
defeated by a vote of 60 to 40. It was sponsored by Senator Edward M. Kennedy,
Democrat of Massachusetts.

Supporters of the Administration's policy picked up one vote in the five months
since the Senate last voted on the question. The Senate approved a $100 million
aid package in March by a vote of 53 to 47. That proposal died in the House of
Representatives, necessitating a new round of voting that began with House
approval of a slightly altered package, by a vote of 221 to 209, in June.

The Senator who switched sides today was Daniel J. Evans, Republican of
Washington, who in March voted against aiding the contras, as the rebels are
known. Eleven Democrats voted with the Administration today and 10 Republicans
voted against the aid package.

The amendment to eliminate the $100 million was sponsored by Senator Jim Sasser,
a Tennessee Democrat.

''We are at a watershed in American foreign policy,'' Mr. Sasser said on the
Senate floor shortly before the vote. ''People understand that we're not simply
talking about $100 million for the funding of a military operation in a distant
land. We are talking about the first step toward war, one in which the young
people of this country will be directly involved.

''If we fund the contras, the last precious chance to avoid war may be lost
forever.''

Dole Opposes Amendment

The Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, urged defeat of the amendment. The contras
have been ''bleeding'' since the first Senate vote in March, the Kansas
Republican said, adding, ''If we're for freedom wherever it may be in the world,
we have to do more than talk about it.''

The Administration's package would send $70 million in military aid and $30
million in nonmilitary aid to the rebels in three installments, with delivery of
heavy weapons to be delayed until the third installment next February. It would
also channel $300 million in previously appropriated money to help the economies
of four United States allies in Central America - Costa Rica, Honduras, El
Salvador and Guatemala.

Although the two days of discussion so far have covered ground familiar from
years of Senate debates on Nicaragua, there is a sense this time that the stakes
are higher. Senators knew that their vote would constitute the final word, at
least for this year. And with control of the Senate to be decided in elections
less than three months away, senators appeared to be taking particular care to
explain - on live television for the first time in any debate on Central
American policy - the nuances of their positions.

Senators opposed to the aid cited polls showing public opposition to the
Administration's policy. Many also referred to longstanding criticisms of the
rebel leadership, particularly to a recent study by the General Accounting
Office that concluded that much of the $27 million that Congress appropriated
for the contras last year could not be accounted for.

Policy 'Does Not Make Sense'

''People do not support the President because the policy does not make sense,''
said Senator Daniel K. Inouye, Democrat of Hawaii. ''They do not believe a
country of 233 million people, and untold power, is threatened by a backward
nation of three million people. They do not believe the contras will renounce
the past and become champions of democracy.''

''Nicaraguans who have left their homes and families to fight with the
resistance have conducted their own kind of poll,'' said Senator Mack Mattingly,
Republican of Georgia, who supports the aid package.

Among the opponents, references to Vietnam were common. Senator Mark O. Hatfield
of Oregon, one of the most outspoken Republican opponents of aiding the rebels,
said: ''Here we are again, old men creating a monster for young men to destroy.
What a waste of life.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 13, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FOWLER TAKES STRONG LEAD IN SENATE RACE IN GEORGIA

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 912 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Wednesday, Aug. 13


Representative Wyche Fowler Jr. built a commanding lead early today over the
former White House aide Hamilton Jordan and was close to winning outright the
Democratic primary for the United States Senate.

With 87 percent of the state's 2,317 precincts reporting, unofficials returns
showed that Mr. Fowler had gained 51 percent of the votes cast in the primay to
pick the party's nominee to face Republican Senator Mack Mattingly in November.

That is more than the 50 percent margin that Representative Fowler must have if
he is to avoid a runoff Sept. 2 with Mr. Jordan.

Bond Leads Congressional Field

Meanwhile, in the race for the Congressional seat being vacated by Mr. Fowler,
State Senator Julian Bond, the civil rights activist, was also close to winning
without a runoff. In a crowded field of seven candidates, with 94 percent of the
district's 245 precincts reporting, Mr. Bond had about 49 percent of the votes
cast.

His closest rival and longtime friend, John Lewis, the former Atlanta City
Councilman who traveled the South with Mr. Bond during the civil rights movement
of the 1960's, had 34 percent of the vote.

In the Senate race, Mr. Jordan had about 31 percent of the vote, and one of two
other candidates on the ballot, State Representative John Russell, a nephew of
former Senator Richard B. Russell, had about 15 percent.

In the general election in November Senator Mattingly, an Indiana native who
upset a longtime Democratic incumbent, Herman E. Talmadge, in 1980, can count on
the support of President Reagan, who carried the state in the 1984 Presidential
election with 60 percent of the vote.

'A Race to the Right'

Both Mr. Fowler and Mr. Jordan sought to portray themselves in the Democratic
primary campaign as political conservatives capable of defeating Senator
Mattingly.

''From the opening gun it was a race to the right,'' said Claibourne Darden, a
public opinion pollster in Atlanta.

Mr. Jordan, the 41-year-old former White House chief of staff in the Carter
Administration, tried throughout much of the campaign to depict Mr. Fowler, who
has represented a mostly black Congressional district in Atlanta since 1977, as
a big-city liberal who was out of touch with the rest of Georgia. Mr. Jordan
used the song, ''Georgia On My Mind,'' as his campaign slogan.

Mr. Fowler, 45, spent much of the campaign on the defensive, fending off
criticism of his votes in Congress opposing the MX missile and financial aid to
the Nicaraguan rebels, or contras.

Even so, Mr. Fowler proved a popular campaigner in rural Georgia, and picked up
editorial endorsements of newspapers in Macon, Augusta and Albany, which is Mr.
Jordan's hometown.

Six Seeking Fowler's Seat

Mr. Fowler's resignation from his Congressional seat to run for the Senate drew
a group of six well-known local black candidates into the race for the
Democratic nomination.

In addition to Mr. Bond and Mr. Lewis, they were Charles Johnson, a lawyer; Jan
Douglass, Atlanta's former human rights commissioner; Mildred Glover, a former
state legislator, and Alveda King Beal, a niece of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr., the slain civil rights leader.

Because many of the candidates were friends who had worked closely together in
the civil rights movement, the campaign strained friendships and old political
alliances.

Mr. Johnson, for example, was sharply critical of Mr. Bond, and at one point
accused him of advocating the shooting of white police officers by blacks in the
1960's. Mr. Bond denied the accusation, and Mr. Johnson later retracted it.

Focus on Bond-Lewis Race

Much of the attention in the campaign focused on the race between Mr. Bond and
Mr. Lewis, both of whom are 46. They helped found the Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee and traveled across the region organizing protest marches
and speaking at civil rights rallies.

Mr. Bond, the son of a college president, has achieved a national reputation as
a Georgia state legislator. He was elected to the Georgia House of
Representatives in 1965, although the body at first refused to seat him because
of his outspoken opposition to American involvement in the Vietnam War. In 1974
he was elected to the State Senate, where he has served since.

Mr. Lewis, one of 10 children born to an Alabama sharecropper, served the last
five years as a member of the Atlanta City Council. He was beaten and arrested
many times in civil rights protests in the 1960's, and was at the head of a line
of voting rights marchers who were beaten by Alabama state troopers and
sheriff's deputies while trying to cross the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma,
Ala., in 1965.

Mr. Lewis ran for Congress in 1977 but was defeated by Mr. Fowler, who was then
a member of the Atlanta City Council. The two men were in a runoff to fill the
seat that was being vacated by Andrew Young, who had resigned to serve as
President Carter's chief delegate to the United Nations.

COLORADO RACE IS CLOSE

DENVER, Aug. 12 (AP) - Two veteran legislators and a businessman were almost
tied today in the Republican primary for the gubernatorial nomination, hoping to
succeed Gov. Richard D. Lamm, a Democrat.  With 25 percent of the precincts
reporting, the businessman, Steve Schuck, State Senator Ted Strickland and State
Representative Bob Kirscht were separated by about 700 votes. Each had about 33
percent of the vote.The winner will face Democratic State Treasurer Roy Romer in
the general election.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Hamilton Jordan and his family (UPI); photo of Rep. Wyche
Fowler Jr. (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 13, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SCOTT PUTS ON HIS PATTON STARS AGAIN

BYLINE: By STEPHEN FARBER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1069 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Aug. 12


''After 35 years in the business, people still identify me more with Patton than
any other character,'' George C. Scott said recently. ''Even today, truck
drivers and garbagemen and cabdrivers will call out to me on the street, 'Hey,
General, how are you doing?' ''

Perhaps that explains why Mr. Scott has returned to play Gen. George S. Patton -
a characterization that won him an Academy Award in the 1970 feature film
''Patton'' - in ''The Last Days of Patton,'' a film based on Ladislas Farago's
book about the general's downfall and death. But this film is being done for
television instead of for the wide screen; it will be broadcast on CBS on Sept.
14.

Mr. Scott's career has changed direction over the last several years. He has not
made a feature film since ''Firestarter'' in 1983. And although he still appears
from time to time in the theater (most recently in ''The Boys in Autumn,'' which
had a short run on Broadway last spring), his most regular employment in recent
years has been on television. He has starred in such television films and
mini-series as ''Oliver Twist,'' ''A Christmas Carol,'' and ''Mussolini: The
Untold Story.''

''All I get is junk offered me in film,'' the 58-year-old actor said. ''There
aren't good scripts around for a man my age. Films are oriented toward 16- to
25-year-olds. So television has been very helpful to me in the last few years.''


'An Incredible Character'

Mr. Scott took an option on Mr. Farago's book in 1981. The actor originally
hoped to see it done as a feature film, but there were no interested buyers.
Finally, last year, he sold the project to CBS. Returning to his most famous
character was, Mr. Scott said, ''like falling off a log.''

''There's very little written about Patton that I haven't read,'' he continued.
''As a matter of fact, I was rereading his memoirs this morning, just for the
hell of it. He was an incredible character.''

Whereas ''Patton'' was an epic film concentrating mainly on the general's
wartime victories, ''The Last Days of Patton,'' written by William Luce (''The
Belle of Amherst'') and directed by Delbert Mann (''Marty''), covers just the
last 40 days of his life. During that period he was appointed military governor
of Bavaria, then was dismissed from the post by Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower amid a
controversy over former Nazis on his administrative staff. Shortly afterward,
General Patton was involved in an automobile accident that left him paralyzed
from the neck down; he died 12 days later. Mr. Scott described the new film as a
much more intimate story than ''Patton,'' with a good deal of attention to the
general's relationship with his wife, played by Eva Marie Saint.

Commenting on Patton's dismissal, Mr. Scott said, ''I don't think Patton was a
great administrator like MacArthur. He despised politics essentially. On the
other hand, he read the Russians pretty well, way ahead of everybody else. The
cold war ensued after his death. He could have been a seer, but no one agreed
with him at the time.''

CBS executives feel confident ''The Last Days of Patton'' will find a
sympathetic audience today, perhaps more so than the feature film did 16 years
ago. ''There was great tribulation at Fox when we did the picture,'' Mr. Scott
recalled, ''because they honestly didn't know how it was going to be received.
We were right in the middle of the turmoil of Vietnam, and the mood in the
country was totally antimilitary. But Patton seemed to be able to jump both
sides of the fence. People who were doves loved him, and people who were hawks
loved him. The picture was enormously successful. Maybe it's because of his
magnetism. There's no question in my mind that he was an exceptional man. Of
course, he was a little mad, but what great man isn't a little mad? He had a
very arbitrary way of thinking - one way, his way.''

A New 'Rue Morgue' for CBS

Mr. Scott's next project, which he begins filming at the end of the month, is
another television film for CBS - a new version of Edgar Allan Poe's ''Murders
in the Rue Morgue.'' According to Mr. Scott, ''I play that venerable exinspector
who solves the crime and says, 'The monkey did it.' ''

In addition, he is actively looking for a television series in which he can
star. ''I would like to do a series for a few years and make enough money to get
the hell out and go fishing for the rest of my life,'' Mr. Scott said. ''As I
said once before, I have no desire to die on the stage at the age of 75. I'd
just as soon die in bed.''

Portraying the injured and dying Patton prompted Mr. Scott to reflect on his own
mortality. ''Just to see such an active, volatile, dynamic man dying like that,
completely paralyzed, is very poignant and sad,'' Mr. Scott said.

'I Believe in Suicide'

''You see, I believe in suicide,'' Mr. Scott continued. ''In classical times,
suicide was the honorable way to go. The Judeo-Christian ethic doesn't believe
in that, but I'm an athiest. I can name to you 50 actors who have taken their
own lives in the last 30 years. I'm not saying that's a good thing or a bad
thing, but it's not necessarily anathema to morality. Why hang on until 85 and
be incapacitated, deaf and blind and have to be taken care of by somebody that
you don't even know? It will happen to all of us. Either you die in a car crash,
or you live to be too bloody old. Patton would never have committed suicide
because he was a deeply religious man. But I wish he'd been shot. It would have
been so much better for him than to die the way he did. A nice bullet between
the eyes - he would have accepted that so beautifully.''

In recent years a number of Mr. Scott's close friends have died, and death has
also robbed him of the opportunity to work with some of the actors whom he most
admired. ''I always wanted to work with Signoret, and I missed her,'' Mr. Scott
said ruefully. ''She went and died. I always wanted to work with Henry Fonda,
and he died. I did manage to work with Brando, and it was a great experience.
He's still as talented as ever, except that he doesn't give a damn about acting
anymore.''

At times Mr. Scott has expressed some of the same disillusionment with his
craft. He has announced his retirement more than once. ''I tried many times to
pack it in,'' he confirmed. Then what has kept him going? ''Mulishness, I
suppose,'' Mr. Scott replied. ''Ascribe it to perversity. I'm too mean to
quit.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George C. Scott (Bob Greene)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 13, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Lloyd Burlingham Dies at 75; Was Foreign Service Officer

SECTION: Section D; Page 20, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 171 words


Lloyd Burlingham, a former Foreign Service officer with the United States
Information Agency, died of cancer Sunday at his home in Perry, N.Y. He was 75
years old.

Mr. Burlingham joined the U.S.I.A. in 1957 and retired in 1970. He was director
of public information for the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization in Bangkok from
1961 to 1965 and also worked in Buenos Aires and Saigon.

He was a research associate with the Human Relations Area Files based at
American University in Washington from 1955 to 1956 and, in that capacity,
contributed to books on Cambodia, Laos and Iran.

Mr. Burlingham was born in Manila and graduate from the University of Rochester
in 1952. As a graduate student, he studied at Columbia University's Russian
Institute.

He is survived by his wife, the former Gilly Glenn; a sister, Lois Dean of
Pompano Beach, Fla.; a brother, Dr. Carlos Burlingham of Morristown, N.J.; three
daughters, Ann, Gillian and Kathryn, all of Perry, and two sons, Atherton of
Annapolis, Md., and Kenneth of El Paso.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 14, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Castro, 60, Gets Medals

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 60 words

DATELINE: HAVANA, Aug. 13


Fidel Castro, the Cuban leader, has received several medals from Communist
nations on the occasion of his 60th birthday, which he celebrated today, the
official newspaper Granma has reported. The Soviet Union presented him his third
Order of Lenin, and he was also awarded medals by Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia,
Hungary, Cambodia, Mongolia, Poland and Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI FREES U.S. 'ADVENTURER' MISSING FOR A YEAR

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1054 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, August 14


The White House announced today that Vietnam had released a United States Army
veteran who set sail from the Philippines 16 months ago in an attempt to bring
out a Vietnamese woman.

The Vietnam War veteran, Robert Schwab 3d of Atlanta, arrived tonight in
Bangkok, Thailand, where he will undergo medical tests, Larry Speakes, the White
House spokesman, said. It was unclear when Mr. Schwab, who is 44 years old, will
return to the United States.

''I'm overjoyed,'' Mr. Schwab's father, Robert Schwab Jr., said in Atlanta. The
senior Mr. Schwab received a phone call from his son at 3 A.M. today ''Before
that,'' he said, ''we thought he was dead.''

Mr. Schwab's stepfather, Robert Davis, who is vacationing in Blue Hill, Me.,
said the veteran was ''an intellect, an idealist, a sportsman, an adventurer and
an author.'' He said Mr. Schwab was a 1963 graduate of Williams College who was
''deeply involved in Vietnam and Thailand'' through the 1970's and early 1980's.


Family Gets Diary

He sailed for Vietnam from the Philippines in April 1985, according to his
father and aunt, Nann Pendergast, both of Atlanta. His purpose, they said, was
to bring out a Vietnamese woman named Mai and complete research on a book about
Vietnam.

Mrs. Pendergast said in an interview that the family knew nothing about the trip
for more than two months, when they received a 60-page diary from a Philippine
friend of the younger Mr. Schwab in July 1985.

''He had told us he was going hiking in the Philippine jungle and wouldn't be
near a phone for a while,'' Mrs. Pendergast said. ''But he left the diary with a
friend and told him to send it to us if he wasn't back in two months.''

The diary described Mr. Schwab's meticulous preparation for a 1,000-mile journey
in a sailboat across the China Sea. And it told of his fears.

''The true hero would be a little scared and a lot excited,'' Mr. Schwab Jr.
wrote in the diary, according to Mrs. Pendergast. ''I am the reverse.''

The diary also told of his desire to persuade the Vietnamese authorities to
allow a Vietnamese woman he had met years before emigrate to the United States,
Mrs. Pendergast said.

An Adventurer, Aunt Says

He had apparently met the woman while he was in the United States Army Signal
Corps in Vietnam in the late 1960's, she said. ''We think he had stayed with her
family while he was over there,'' she said. ''We have her picture. She's
beautiful. She was not his girlfriend, in fact she was much younger than he was.
But they had kept up a correspondence over the years.''

Mr. Schwab was a freelance writer and ''very much an adventurer,'' said his
aunt. He was working on a book about Vietnam when he left, she said. ''He said
he wanted to write the last chapter. Really I think he thought about all of this
in terms of his getting material.''

There was no word today from White House officials on the fate of the Vietnamese
woman. Mr. Speakes said details about her were ''a private matter.''

Search Efforts 'Useless'

United States officials had been notified by Mr. Schwab's family in June 1985
that he was missing, Mr. Speakes said. ''Normal search and rescue efforts were
fruitless, as were inquiries to governments in the region by the Department of
State,'' he said.

The White House announcement said that ''given the President's strong interest
in all missing Americans,'' Richard Childress, director of Asian affairs for the
National Security Council, was ordered to pursue the case with Vietnamese
officials in Hanoi and New York. Mr. Childress did so for nearly a year, Mr.
Speakes said.

Another White House spokesman, Dan Howard, said: ''Nobody else thought he was
alive. The general assumption was that he was at the bottom of the South China
Sea, and we kept following up and kept following up. Got the man back.''

Mr. Howard said Mr. Schwab ''came out alone'' from Ho Chi Minh City without the
woman. He was accompanied by Mr. Childress. There were no details about where
Mr. Schwab had been detained or how the Vietnamese had treated him.

According to Ann Mills Griffith, the executive director of the National League
of M.I.A.-P.O.W. Families, Mr. Schwab worked for the organization in the late
1970's. She described him as ''intelligent'' and ''idealistic.''

Mr. Schwab served two tours of duty in Vietnam in the 1960's, she said, and
remained in Vietnam from 1967 until 1975, when the Saigon Government collapsed.
During this time as a civilian, he worked for several relief agencies, Mrs.
Griffiths said.

According to Mrs. Pendergast, the family had no idea for more than a year if Mr.
Schwab had even survived his boat trip.

''His trip is the same trip that the boat people take, only going the other
way,'' she said. ''It's very dangerous.''

Then came the 3 A.M. phone call from the American Embassy in Thailand, although
the family had been told by United States officials about a month ago that he
might be alive.

''We just can hardly wait to see him,'' Mrs. Pendergast said.

VIETNAM REPORTS CONFESSION

BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 14 (Special to The New York Times) - According to the
Vietnamese Government radio, Mr. Schwab confessed to violating Vietnam's
criminal code and was released only after vowing never to repeat the crime.
Until today, Vietnam had never publicly acknowledged that he was in custody.

A team of American military officers from the Joint Casualty Resolution Center
in Hawaii is in Hanoi for technical talks with the Vietnamese on further
searches for remains of missing Americans. It is not clear whether the release
was timed to coincide with their visit.

Mr. Childress said at a news conference in Bangkok last month that Hanoi had
promised encouraging news at the August technical session.

According to Alan Dawson, United Press International's bureau chief in Saigon in
1975, Mr. Schwab became a hero of the rushed evacuation that occurred as the
city was falling to the North Vietnamese. ''He and some friends helped get out
thousands of people when the Ambassador was still refusing permission to
evacuate,'' U.P.I. quoted Mr. Dawson as saying. Mr. Schwab had a 17-foot plywood
sailing dory built, which he stocked with jugs of water, a plastic sextant and
three small radio transmitters, according to friends. They said they had last
heard from him on April 18.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Robert Schwab 3d (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
Another U.S. Policy War for 'Democracy'

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 737 words


By just two votes, the Senate cut off a filibuster against sending $100 million
to the anti-Government ''contras'' in Nicaragua. Senator Biden of Delaware drew
the obvious conclusion: there's ''genuine, unquestioned division in this
country'' about President Reagan's goal of overthrowing the Sandinista regime.

Of course there is. If any proof were needed beyond the filibuster vote, and the
mere 53 to 47 margin by which the Senate approved the $100 million, it's
provided by the narrow victory Mr. Reagan had to work to win in the House, and
by surveys of popular U.S. opinion. Despite all the President's persuasion, a
New York Times/CBS News Poll found 62 percent of respondents opposed to aid to
the contras.

Nevertheless, barring some slip 'twixt cup and lip, the money will be sent and
the United States will find itself sliding further toward another ''policy war''
- one that does not represent the concerted will of the public, or even of some
large majority, but only the disputed policy of a President.

Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, chairman of the Foreign Relations
Committee, was exhibiting the usual American failure of historical memory when
he roundly declared: ''Again and again, those who have opposed the contras have
said Nicaragua is another Vietnam. I say nonsense to that. That is a way of
trying to drag up emotions and history in a false way.''

It's the Senator who ought to study his history. There are, of course,
differences between the situation in Vietnam in the 1960's and that in Nicaragua
today; but the one similarity that counts for most is that Vietnam was a policy
war, too - one that had its seeds in what for years appeared to be mere
''support,'' requiring little United States effort and few if any lives, for an
''anti-Communist ally.''

But strong support for ''stopping Communism'' in Southeast Asia and for
''punishing the aggressor'' did not survive the shooting war into which
Eisenhower-Kennedy-Johnson policy led a reluctant nation. The public turned
slowly but steadily against a war the rising costs of which in lives,
destruction, money and domestic political unrest neither President Johnson nor
President Nixon ever found means to justify.

So in the end, that war couldn't be sustained. And the lesson ignored by Senator
Lugar and other supporters of aid to the contras is that Mr. Reagan's policy
toward Nicaragua runs the high risk of slipping the nation into another shooting
war that few of those supporters want and most think they are voting to avoid.
The public would not long support such a war -which surely would be a staple of
evening television - any more than it supported the policy war in Vietnam.

Continuing and increasing aid to the contras poses two real and present dangers
of a slide into war: 1. As the aid money restores contra capacity to fight, the
Sandinistas will reinforce their efforts too. So the war on Nicaragua's borders
will escalate, and the possibilities will increase of some real or staged
incident - say, an alleged Sandinista incursion into Honduras or Costa Rica -
that might cause Mr. Reagan to send troops to ''support an anti-Communist
ally.'' He's already said he would not permit Nicaragua's air force to obtain
jet fighter planes from the Soviet Union or Cuba. 2. If the $100 million and the
additional funds the United States may send in the future prove insufficient to
produce a contra victory, as even the U.S. military believes probable, Mr.
Reagan may find that he can reach his cherished goal of overthrowing the
Sandinistas only by sending in U.S. forces. Members of Congress apparently have
forgotten, but that's what Mr. Johnson did to ''punish the aggressor'' when even
great amounts of aid to South Vietnam proved unable to do the job.

But Senator Lugar insists that the ''thrust'' of Mr. Reagan's policy is ''not to
go to war. It is to try to bring about democracy'' in Nicaragua. Aside from the
fact that that also was the ''thrust'' in Vietnam, and a lethal thrust it
proved, the U.S. has no mission to bring democracy to Nicaragua - or to Chile or
to South Korea or to South Africa, or to anywhere else.

It's one thing to encourage democracy in all those places, as the U.S. belatedly
did in the Philippines. Forcibly imposing on other people the will of the U.S. -
particularly if it's just Ronald Reagan's policy - is quite another thing, and
one no President or senator can justify.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 871 words


International

Pakistani officers jailed the oppostion leader, Benazir Bhutto, as street
protesters stepped up a campaign against the military Government of President
Mohammad Zia ul-Haq. At least four people died in clashes with the police in
Lahore, and several hundred were reported wounded there and in other cities.
[Page A1, Col. 6.]

A car bomb blast killed 20 people and wounded 100 on a crowded street in the
mainly Christian sector of Beirut. Women and children were trapped in upper
stories of shattered apartment buildings. About 100 people, nearly all
civilians, have died in recent explosions in the capital. [A3:4-6.]

Mexican police tortured a U.S. agent of the Drug Enforcement Administration,
Federal officials said. They said the agent, Victor Cortez, an Arizonan working
in Guadalajara, had been abducted, detained overnight, interrogated and tortured
before being freed. A senior American official said Mr. Cortez had been
''tortured, severely beaten and worse.'' [A1:3-4.]

Senators moved to confrontation with the White House as they prepared to adopt
legislation that would impose stringent economic sanctions against South Africa.
[A1:2.]

The Soviet nuclear power chief at the time of the Chernobyl reactor disaster in
April has been expelled from the Communist Party, Pravda announced. The
official, Gennadi A. Veretennikov, who ran all of the Soviet Union's nuclear
stations, was one of six high Government officials who lost their party cards or
received reprimands over the fire and release of radioactivity at the plant that
has killed about 30 people. [A2:3-5.]

Vietnam has released a U.S. veteran who set sail from the Philippines 16 months
ago in an attempt to bring out a Vietnamese woman, the White House announced. It
said the Vietnam War veteran, 44-year-old Robert Schwab 3d of Atlanta, had
arrived in Bangkok, Thailand, to undergo medical tests. The White House said
that details about the Vietnamese woman were ''a private matter.'' [A3:1-4.]

National

NASA will build a new shuttle to replace the Challenger under an order that
President Reagan will issue tomorrow, according to Administration officials. The
officials said the cost, estimated at up to $3 billion, would be met through a
complicated plan calling for changes in the American space program. [A1:1.]

A Senate panel urged confirmation of two judicial nominees of President Reagan.
The vote in favor of Associate Justice William H. Rehnquist to be Chief Justice
was 13 to 5, with all the negative votes cast by Democrats. The panel voted
unanimously in favor of confirming Antonin Scalia, now a Federal appeals court
judge, to succeed Justice Rehnquist as an Associate Justice. [A1:5.]

The E.P.A. set a safety standard for radioactive radon gas in residences and
estimated that up to eight million homes around the country may exceed the
standard. Federal officials said people in such residences should not allow
anyone to smoke indoors. Prolonged exposure to the colorless, odorless gas that
comes from radioactive decay of uranium can cause lung cancer. [A8:1.]

Major forest fires are plaguing the Northwest. An uncontrolled blaze in Idaho
was one of hundreds that were started Sunday night by a dry lightning storm that
swept through the high country of Oregon, Washington, Idaho and Montana.
Throughout the Northwest, officials said, more than 350,000 acres of range and
forest land have been burned. [A8:2-5.]

Computers at service academies are ushering in a technological revolution.
Personal computers are being issued to all freshmen at the Army, Navy and Air
Force Academies. As the computers are phased in for freshmen over the next four
years, all students will have to use them for studying, to make appointments
with teachers and probably to communicate with one another. [A1:1-3.]

Metropolitan

Doubleday & Co. seems to be for sale, at least in part, according to publishing
industry sources. Wall Street informants said financial information about its
operations is being circulated to a small, powerful group of presumably
propective buyers. Doubleday, one of the nation's largest book publishers, also
owns the New York Mets. [A1:5-6.]

Designers of a shoreline bridge in Greenwich, Conn., were not responsible for
the collapse of a 100-foot span of the structure in 1983, a jury ruled after
deliberating for 3 hours and 35 minutes. The collapse killed three people and
injured three in 70-foot plunges into the water below. The designers said the
accident was caused by poor maintenance and careless inspections by state
employees. [B2:6.]

New school buses with seat belts will be mandatory in New York State, starting
next July 1, under a bill that Governor Cuomo announced he had signed. The new
law makes the state the first to impose such a requirement. The statute does not
require that the belts be used by students, leaving that decision to local
school boards. [B1:3-6.]

Drug treatment centers are packed with record numbers of addicted residents
seeking treatment and care in New York State. A Daytop Village residence in Far
Rockaway, Queens, has doubled its patients - to 60 from 30 - in the last year.
[A1:4.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PERU FACES CREDIT BAR BY THE I.M.F.

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 607 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, Aug. 14


Peru has opened itself to being declared ineligible for further credits from the
International Monetary Fund by paying only a small share of its outstanding debt
to the organization.

The Government said Wednesday night that a drop in export earnings this year
made it possible to pay only $35 million of a total of around $192 million that
was due by Friday.

The executive board of the I.M.F. is scheduled to meet in Washington Friday
morning and is widely expected to declare Peru ineligible for future loans, a
status already assigned to Guyana, Liberia, the Sudan and Vietnam.

Government officials have sought minimize the importance of such a move, noting
that previously approved loans of around $1 billion, from the World Bank and the
Inter-American Development Bank, should continue to be disbursed.

Talks Set for September

They have also announced plans to initiate long-postponed talks with foreign
commercial banks in the third week in September, at which point Peru will
reportedly present a proposal to restructure long-term debt.

But foreign diplomats and bankers said that a declaration of ineligibility by
the I.M.F. would mark one more step in Peru's gradual isolation from the
international monetary system.

A year ago, upon taking office, President Alan Garcia announced that for 12
months his Government would dedicate no more than 10 percent of its export
earnings to servicing the public sector's foreign debt of $13 billion.

In the last two weeks, President Garcia has reaffirmed the 10 percent ceiling
and added a two-year suspension on all payments on the private sector's $1.5
billion foreign debt and all profit remittances by foreign corporations working
here.

Priority to 'Friendly Countries'

He also said that, in the future, Peru would give priority to servicing its
bilateral debts with ''friendly countries.'' These are known to include the
United States, which on Wednesday signed a $25 million loan to supply grain to
the country.

The thrust of Peru's economic policy in the last year has been to improve real
wages and stimulate the country's long-depressed industrial sector while
controlling inflation and stabilizing the exchange rate.

In the view of many local and foreign economists, the Government has achieved
some notable successes, reducing inflation to around 70 percent a year, from 250
percent, and reviving economic growth.

These accomplishments were largely possible because Peru paid only about $350
million of a total of around $2 billion that was due abroad during the first
year of the Garcia administration.

Hurt by Export Prices

While Peru's foreign-exchange reserves rose by more than 50 percent, to $1.5
billion, by the end of 1985, they have since fallen to $1.2 billion because of
the sharp drop in the world prices of oil, copper and other Peruvian exports.

In April, when Peru was due to pay $75 million to the I.M.F., the Government
persuaded the fund to accept a partial payment of $35 million on condition that
all arrears would be cleared by Aug. 15.

Fund officials have argued that Peru's reserves permit full payment of its
outstanding debt, but on Tuesday the Government sent only another payment of $35
million, arguing that it was making ''a significant additional effort.''

The president of the central bank, Leonel Figueroa, said in a cable to the
I.M.F.'s managing director, Jacques de Larosiere: ''Under present circumstances,
in order to maintain the economic improvements obtained by the Peruvian people,
it would be extremely prejudicial to disburse immediately almost $200 million to
cover our arrears with your institution.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
COMPUTERS' MORRIS SET FOR BUSINESSLAND ROLE

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 377 words


Anthony T. Morris, who in six years cultivated a $40 million-a-year business,
agreed Wednesday to sell his three computer centers to the industry's giant,
Businessland Inc. The centers - two in New York and one in Westport, Conn. - are
called Morris Decisions Systems Inc. They will become Businessland outlets.

Mr. Morris will be vice president of sales and marketing for his company's new
owners.

Morris has the largest market share of independent suppliers in metropolitan New
York, including the largest installed network base. Mr. Morris said he had
installed more than 2,000 work stations and more than 300 networks.

''I came to the conclusion that we had to clamp onto someone with lower costs,''
Mr. Morris said, referring to the economies of scale in selling computers. In
the computer retailing business, he said, a company with $40 million in
revenues, like his, is not big enough to be a real competitor. Industry sources
suggested that Mr. Morris was facing a difficult situation with little choice
but to sell.

Mr. Morris said that he and Businessland's chief executive officer, David
Norman, share similar business philosophies.

For Businessland, which operates 90 stores in 30 states, Morris seems an ideal
acquisition. It will give Businessland contacts with corporate clients in the
lucrative New York market and will also give its consulting operations a lift.
Analysts say Businessland is trying to develop a better consulting force.

Businessland's purchase of Morris marks a further consolidation in the computer
retailing field. Hundreds of computer stores have gone out of business or have
been sold in recent years, leaving Businessland, Computerland and the Bell
regional holding companies as major participants.

In the deal, which is expected to become final Sept. 3, Mr. Morris will receive
several hundred thousand shares of Businessland common stock, which closed
yesterday at 9 1/2.

Mr. Morris, now 39, graduated from the University of Pennslyvania in 1968. He
went to Vietnam and later served as an intelligence officer for the Navy in
London. In 1975 he received an M.B.A. degree from Stanford University. He worked
briefly for Citibank before joining Merrill Lynch & Company in New York, where
he worked four years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 16, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HOW AMERICAN'S HANOI ESCAPADE WENT AWRY

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 580 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 15


A 44-year-old American who calls himself a ''scholar-adventurer'' said at a news
conference here today that he deliberately sailed a small boat into Vietnamese
waters 16 months ago hoping to be noticed, so he could beg the authorities for
help in releasing a Vietnamese woman he wanted to marry.

The American, Robert Schwab 3d, who has also made several illegal forays into
Laos to search for missing American servicemen since 1975, said his most recent
escapade was intended to capture the imagination of Hanoi.

''I had to do something dramatic to impress the Vietnamese,'' he said. He said
he had also intended to attract worldwide news coverage.

He acknowledged that three of his Laotian adventures had been paid for by ABC
News.

Mr. Schwab said that he had planned ''an observed innocent arrival in broad
daylight'' in Vietnam, but that his plans had been thwarted when he was detained
by Vietnamese fishing vessels before reaching shore.

He was arrested on suspicion of espionage and jailed in central Vietnam, later
being held in solitary confinement in the south for more than a year.

The Reagan Administration, which announced Mr. Schwab's release, has been
involved in the case at a high level since June 1985.

Mr. Schwab was handed over Thursday in Ho Chi Minh City to Richard K. Childress,
Asian affairs director of the National Security Council, who brought him to
Bangkok in a United States Air Force plane. Mr. Childress had been negotiating
for Mr. Schwab's release since July 1985.

Mr. Schwab said that although he was physically well treated during his
imprisonment, he was subjected to ''terrific mental pressure'' and could elicit
no information from his captors.

''They are like a black hole in space,'' he said. ''It sucks everything in and
nothing comes out.''

He was never allowed to see the woman he said he went to get - whom he
pseudononymously referred to as ''Mai'' - or to discuss her case.

Mr. Schwab, who is from Atlanta, has spent most of the last 20 years in
Southeast Asia, starting with a year of military duty in Vietnam in the 1960's.
That was followed by various private-agency and quasi-governmental jobs.

Mr. Schwab said today that he met ''Mai,'' who is now about 31, at a coffee shop
in Kontum, in the Vietnamese highlands, in 1972 or 1973. He did not suggest
marriage until the South was collapsing militarily in 1975, he said. He ruled
out taking her out with him, however, when she cried uncontrollably at the
thought of leaving her family.

Mr. Schwab said he did not think again about seeing her until a refugee in
Thailand told him five years ago that she had had a nervous collapse.

Mr. Schwab said he had a boat built in the Philippines for his trip to Vietnam.
Before leaving, he said he prepared a publicity campaign and wrote a letter to
the United States Government to be mailed after his departure.

He said he was confident when reaching Vietnam that his plans for publicity had
been carried out, and he only gradually realized that they had not. Mr.
Childress said no letter ever reached the American Government. The publicity
never materialized.

FATHER SAYS $10,000 WAS PAID

ATLANTA, Aug. 15 (AP) - Mr. Schwab's father confirmed today reports from
diplomatic sources that a $10,000 fine was paid to Vietnamese officials in order
to win the release of his son. Robert Schwab Jr. told The Atlanta Journal that
the fine was paid by the younger Schwab's mother, Bunny Davis, and stepfather,
Robert Davis.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 16, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Bipartisanship Cannot Legitimize Contra Aid

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 377 words


To the Editor:

In his letter of July 23, Representative Samuel S. Stratton takes exception to a
July 6 Op-Ed piece by Arthur Schlesinger, stating that the recent House of
Representatives vote on contra aid is an example of bipartisanship in foreign
policy. That may be the case, but it does not mean that the policy in question
is either correct or workable.

The recent votes on contra aid seem to have been made in a historical vacuum,
disregarding that the United States supported the Somoza dictatorship for many
years, and disregarding that Nicaragua was occupied by U.S. Marines in the
1920's. Now that the Nicaraguan people have overthrown the Somoza dictatorship
(Anastasio Somoza Debayle did not leave quietly, like Ferdinand E. Marcos), we
are hardly in a position to dictate to them which sort of government they may
have.

I remember Mr. Stratton as an enthusiastic supporter of the last war we were
involved in, the Vietnam War, where we were told that Vietnam ''was vital to
U.S. interests.'' All those countries where we did intervene are now indeed
Communist countries -even poor little Cambodia, which struggled so hard under
Prince Sihanouk to remain neutral. All the plans of policy makers in Washington,
from strategic hamlets to search and destroy, and free-fire zones, failed to
''win the hearts and minds of the people.'' Fresh from this fiasco, our
Government is pursuing a similar policy in Central America, only this time it is
using a mercenary army. Representative Stratton states that ''the American
people reject another Cuba in the Caribbean.'' However, not a single poll taken
in this country has found that a majority of the American people support the
military overthrow of the Sandinista Government.

The question of contra aid should not be argued on the basis of whether this is
a partisan or bipartisan policy. One should debate instead whether this is an
honorable policy of which we can all be proud, for if the contras kill anyone,
they are doing so at our behest. Another matter to debate is whether we really
are bringing democracy to Nicaragua or merely driving that country closer to the
Russians. Our policy has indeed become a self-fulfilling prophecy.

JOHN BICKFORD
   Ossining, N.Y., July 23, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 16, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MYSTERY SHROUDS EFFORT TO DEPORT JAPANESE INSTRUCTOR LIVING ON L.I.

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD D. MAY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1177 words


Last month, Choichiro Yatani, a Japanese citizen who for the last nine years has
lived quietly in the United States as a student and a teacher, returned from an
academic conference in the Netherlands.

Upon his arrival at Kennedy International Airport on July 7 he was arrested
because, an immigrations official said, the United States Government believes
Mr. Yatani is ''a terrorist or engaged in other subversive activites.''

Since his arrest, the 39-year-old Mr. Yatani has been imprisoned in a Manhattan
detention center with no possibility of release on bail, pending the possibility
of deportation as early as Tuesday.

Charges Called 'Absolutely Absurd'

''This has just been a nightmare,'' he said. ''I don't understand why this is
happening.'' The charges against him, he added, ''are absurd, absolutely
absurd.''

Dr. John H. Marburger 3d, president of the State University of New York at Stony
Brook, where Mr. Yatani is an instructor and a Ph.D. candidate in social
psychology, said yesterday that ''the situation is Kafkaesque.'' He added, ''We
are at a total loss to understand why immigration and the State Department are
sending this valuable person out of the country.''

Requests to the Government for information, he said, have been answered with
''formal and uninformative'' replies. ''It's been impossible for us to learn why
they have acted as they have.''

Ruth van Heuven, a State Department spokesman, said yesterday that Mr. Yatani's
visa was revoked for a number of reasons, chief among them that he has belonged
to ''a Communist Party or an organization affiliated with a Communist Party.''

Asked to provide the name of the organization, the dates of membership or
evidence substantiating that charge, she replied: ''I'm not free to comment.''

In an interview, Mr. Yatani denied that he had ever been a member of the
Communist Party or any radical organization.

Immigration lawyers said the case illustrates an ironic twist in the laws and
procedures concerning aliens and their rights in the United States.

As immigration officials concede, had Mr. Yatani entered the country illegally,
without a visa, and been arrested on criminal charges - for example, selling
cocaine - he would enjoy a battery of rights to which he is not now entitled,
despite being a longtime resident of the United States with a clean record, a
home, a job and two children who are American citizens.

But because Mr. Yatani was arrested while attempting to legally enter the United
States, Federal officials consider that he is not yet back in this country and
therefore is not entitled to the same constitutional guarantees, including bail.

''The logic of current policy encourages people to lie to gain admission to the
U.S. and to improperly circumvent inspection procedures,'' said Arthur Helton of
the New York-based Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, a nonprofit organization
that agreed yesterday to represent Mr. Yatani.

Mr. Helton said that the Government policy of imprisoning people like Mr. Yatani
without the possibility of release on bail or bond ''is a device meant to
discourage their pursuing their case for admission.''

In telephone interviews with Mr. Yatani at the Federal detention center on
Varick Street, where he may receive but not place calls, he said he did not know
why the United States Government views him as a danger.

He said he had never been involved in terrorist or subversive activities of any
kind nor belonged to the Communist Party or other radical organizations.

Under the provisions of the McCarran-Walter Act of 1952, aliens may be excluded
from the United States on such grounds.

An Arrest in 1968

The only infraction in his past, he said, was his arrest in Tokyo in 1968 at the
age of 21 along with about 70 other students who were taking part in a
demonstration against the Vietnam War.

''According to an English translation of his record of convictions, he was
convicted of 'violations of the road traffic control law,' '' one of Mr.
Yatani's attorneys, Alan Stopek, said. ''He was put on probation for one year
and under Japanese law at the end of the probationary period the conviction
expires.''

Mr. Yatani first came to the United States in 1977, arriving in Seattle.
Immigration officials there detained him for three days.

''I never understood what that was about,'' he said. ''No one explains. But in
the end I was released and I went to Utah State to study. I thought whatever
problem there was had been cleared up.''

Moved to L.I. 4 Years Ago

Scott Blackman, the assistant director for deportation at the Immigration and
Nationalization Service, said in answer to a question Thursday that ''it would
appear he has been here legally and properly.'' Asked the same question
yesterday, Mr. Blackman said, ''It is not entirely clear whether he has been
here legally or not.''

About four years ago, Mr. Yatani, his wife and their two children moved to Stony
Brook, L.I., where he has been studying social psychology and teaching
psychology and Japanese.

''He's only about a year away from finishing his Ph.D.,'' said Dana Bramel,
director of studies in social psychology and Mr. Yatani's adviser. His friends
are taking care of his family while he is in detention.

Mr. Yatani's thesis is to be on Japanese business management techniques and the
American character, Professor Bramel said.

Granted a Visa

At times, Mr. Yatani said, he has expressed his opinions on such issues as the
arms race and nuclear disarmament. The paper he delivered in the Netherlands, on
a trip sponsored and partly paid for by Stony Brook, was ''an analysis of the
nuclear disarmament movement,'' he said.

The United States Embassy in Amsterdam granted him a visa to return to the
United States.

According to Mr. Blackman, Mr. Yatani was arrested when immigration officers
found his name in the ''lookout system,'' essentially a list of people ''who may
be excludable from the U.S.''

A recent study by the General Accounting Office found that the lookout system
does not keep a record at entry points of all illegal aliens who have criminal
records or who have been deported previously. Answering that charge, an
Immigration Service spokesman, Charles Troy, said that the agency's policy was
to record only deportees convicted of the most serious crimes.

Mr. Blackman declined to reveal what charges against Mr. Yatani were contained
on the list or the sources from which those charges were derived.

Before his immigration hearings could be completed, Mr. Yatani's visa was
revoked by the State Department, leaving the Immigration Service with ''no
recourse but to deport him,'' according to a spokesman, Duke Austin.

Mr. Yatani's lawyers said yesterday that they planned to file papers Monday
aimed at reopening his case and staying his deportation.

Mr. Yatani said he hoped that further investigation would reveal that the affair
had been an error of some kind. ''It's unbelievable,'' he said. ''Nine years of
work is being destroyed in just a few days for no reason at all.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Choichiro Yatani, his wife Nanako and children Wii and Sohra
(NYT/Dith Pran and Tony Jerome)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 16, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

I.M.F. Bars Peru From New Loans

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 38, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 537 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 15


Peru was declared ineligible today for new loans by the International Monetary
Fund in a move likely to distance the country further from sources of both
public and private finance. The sanction was expected.

The action was taken by the board of the 150-member international lending agency
at a daylong meeting here, following Peru's refusal to pay fully its I.M.F.
arrears.

The year-old, democratically elected Peruvian Government has maintained as the
cornerstone of its international economic policy that it will allot no more than
10 percent of export earnings to debt repayments.

Peru has paid only $35 million toward the $193.4 million of arrears that were
due to be cleared up by today. The Government said that a decline in export
earnings made it impossible to pay more.

Reserves Have Dropped

Peru's foreign exchange reserves, more than $1.5 billion last year, have fallen
to $1.2 billion because of the sharp drop in prices of oil, copper and other
exports. I.M.F. officials have argued that Peru's reserves permit full payment.

A declaration of ineligibility is the stiffest sanction that the I.M.F. can
apply to a member. Four other countries are currently ineligible - Guyana,
Liberia, the Sudan and Vietnam. Cambodia has been incommunicado with the I.M.F.
and is in effect ineligible for loans, although a formal declaration has never
been made.

All but Cambodia have made payments to reduce their arrears, but none have been
reinstated.

Peru had not been planning to borrow new money from the I.M.F. and Government
officials have sought to minimize the importance of the sanction. Today's
declaration bars it from future credits and is likely to color the attitude of
both the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank in assigning any new
loans to that country. Commercial banks also take their lead from the I.M.F.

Pool Is Diminished

Peru's refusal to pay its arrears, the I.M.F. argues, diminishes the pool of
money and hurts other borrowers. The arrears have fallen due on loans last made
to Peru in 1982, 1983 and 1984 that totaled $700 million.

The action against Peru, which owes foreign creditors about $13 billion, came as
progress was noted in the complex negotiations to arrange new money for Mexico,
which now has more than $100 billion of debt outstanding.

A Reagan Administration official reported that Government and commercial bank
lenders had now reached ''agreement in principle'' on a six-month, $1.6 billion
''bridge loan'' to Mexico. The use of the term ''agreement in principle''
indicated that not all the details have been settled.

One-third of that money is being provided by the United States Treasury's
Exchange Stabilization Fund, one-third by the governments of other
industrial-creditor countries and one-third by about 40 commercial banks.

The money will supplement Mexico's depleted central bank reserves until
arrangements are completed for a $12 billion rescue package announced last
month. From these proceeds the bridge loan will be repaid.

As part of the rescue package the I.M.F. would lend Mexico $1.7 billion over 18
months and private commercial banks would pump in an additional $6 billion. The
World Bank would lend $2 billion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Crash Sites Examined by Americans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 9, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 142 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 16


American experts trying to account for Americans reported missing in the Vietnam
War investigated sites in Hanoi last week containing wreckage of B-52 bombers,
the leader of the United States team said on his return here today.

The official, Lieut. Col. Joe Harvey, commander of the United States Joint
Casualty Resolution Center in Honolulu, said the Vietnamese provided new
information on missing Americans and a report of their continuing investigations
during three days of talks in Hanoi. He declined to elaborate.

Colonel Harvey refused to say whether Vietnam would soon repatriate remains of
some of the nearly 1,800 American troops and civilians listed as missing from
the war.

He said the United States team handed over new information on cases of missing
Americans and on reports that Americans have been seen in Vietnam since the war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN ASSAILS HOUSE DEMOCRATS ON MILITARY CUTS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 30, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 866 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 16


President Reagan today attacked the Democratic-controlled House of
Representatives as waging ''a reckless assault on the national defense of the
United States.''

In an unusually blunt and sternly worded speech that assailed House Democrats
for recent military cutbacks and proposals on arms control, Mr. Reagan said that
the measures, if enacted, would represent a potential danger to the national
security of the United States.

''Soviet arms negotiators must be mystified today that U.S. legislators would
give away in Washington what they must have been unable to win in Geneva,'' Mr.
Reagan said. ''Soviet military planners must be astonished at the blows the
House delivered this week to America's national defense.''

Mr. Reagan made his comments in his weekly radio speech, taped earlier in the
Oval Office, and broadcast while the President was flying to California to start
a three-week vacation at his ranch near Santa Barbara.

'He's Angry, Very Angry'

Aides conceded that Mr. Reagan's speech was marked by strong language, which
they said was not unprecedented. A White House official said, ''He's angry, very
angry.''

''I think the President is genuinely angry and concerned about what the House is
doing to the defense budget and he wanted to lay the wood on them,'' said
Patrick J. Buchanan, the White House director of communications. ''It does
appear to me to be a pretty mindless assault on the defense budget. It's an
indiscriminate attack on the defense budget.''

What plainly angered Mr. Reagan, as he pointed out today, was a series of recent
House votes that culminated Friday with the chamber's passage of a measure
establishing and extending military programs costing $287 billion for the fiscal
year 1987, starting Oct. 1. That level is about the same as the current Pentagon
budget. Mr. Reagan had sought $320 billion, and the Senate's version of the bill
calls for about $295 billion.

On the House floor, amendments were added to reduce the budget for the
space-oriented defense against missiles, to extend for a year the ban on space
tests of antisatellite weapons, require continued adherence to the unratified
1979 strategic arms treaty and delay production of a new generation of chemical
weapons for a year.

Promise of a Veto

Mr. Reagan singled out these and other measures in his speech, saying he would
veto the bill if it arrived on his desk ''in anything like the present form.''

House passage of the measure sends the bill to a House-Senate conference
committee next month. Legislators will seek to reconcile the differences in the
two bills. All but 23 Republicans in the House voted against the bill.

''Make no mistake,'' Mr. Reagan said today, ''the House defense bill is a
reckless assault upon the national defense of the United States. It threatens
our hopes for arms control and moves us back toward an era in policies which the
American people rejected in the last two national elections.''

He said that ''national security will be the issue in 1986'' if the House bill
remains unchanged.

Mr. Reagan addressed with vehemence the issue of House reductions in the
antimissile plan, which he calls his Strategic Defense Initiative. The House
voted 239 to 176 on Tuesday to allow $3.1 billion for the program. This was just
above last year's allocation to the program. The Administration had sought $5.3
billion. The Senate voted $3.9 billion for the plan.

''The House voted to severely slash our request for the Strategic Defense
Initiative,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''But S.D.I. is not the only - or not only, I
should say, the great hope of this country for finding a way out of the prison
of mutual terror, it is an idea that helped bring the Soviets back to the
negotiating table in Geneva.

''To gravely underfund S.D.I. is to place in jeopardy all our hopes for arms
reduction,'' he said. ''It is to leave America indefinitely naked to missile
attack, whether by accident or design. These radical cuts in S.D.I. would permit
the Soviet Union, which has been working on strategic defense for decades, to
make strides at the expense of the United States.''

Mr. Reagan also deplored the House vote Tuesday that sought to force him to
abide by the limits of the unratified arms treaty of 1979.

Democratic Party Responds

In a Democratic response to the speech, Representative Tony Coelho of
California, chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, said:

''The House Democrats also received a mandate in the last election, and it did
not include rubber-stamping President Reagan's wasteful, dangerous military
budgets. The American people want the arms control and procurement reform
included in our bill, not the nuclear testing or chemical weapons requested by
Mr. Reagan.

''The fact is our bill provides as much money for defense, in real dollars, as
the Pentagon spent during the height of the Vietnam War. It's a very strong,
pro-defense piece of legislation. But the President's right: national security
will be the issue in 1986, and Democrats believe national security begins at
home. This is exactly what we want: Republicans campaigning for 'Star Wars' as
Democrats defend the American heartland.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of President Reagan boarding Air Force One for flight to
California (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SAYS SOVIET IS CARRYING OUT MAJOR NAVAL EXERCISES IN PACIFIC

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 506 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 16


The Soviet Union's Pacific Fleet has been engaged in the last week in one of the
largest exercises it has conducted in recent years, United States Navy officials
said.

''After observing the buildup of the Soviet Pacific Fleet over the past few
years, now the largest of their four fleets, we were expecting them to go to
work to build their proficiency,'' said Adm. James A. Lyons Jr., commander of
the United States Pacific Fleet, in a statement made public by the Pentagon on
Thursday. United States ships and aircraft are monitoring the Soviet maneuvers.

The Soviet Pacific Fleet has grown from about 200 ships in 1960 to perhaps 400
ships and 130 submarines today, the Secretary of the Navy, John F. Lehman Jr.,
said recently.

In all, 14 to 18 surface ships are engaged in the maneuvers, which continued
today, a Navy official said. It is believed that about 16 submarines have also
been involved in the exercises, along with land-based aircraft.

The aircraft carrier Minsk, one of the largest ships in the Soviet Navy, joined
the exercises. It is able to carry steep-takeoff Forger jet aircraft as well as
helicopters.

Growing in Size and Complexity

The exercises began Aug. 8 and have been growing in size and complexity since
then, a Navy official said.

At first, the war games seemed to involve mainly ships operating in the Sea of
Okhotsk, between the Kamchatka Peninsula and the Siberian mainland. Navy
officials said the Soviet Union began the maneuvers by taking actions that in
wartime would secure the sea, a zone where Russian ballistic missile submarines
operate.

By Monday, though, a ''new phase'' of the exercise began as the nuclear-powered
Frunze, a recent addition to the Pacific Fleet, left Vladivostok, a Navy officer
said.

''The surface action group she sails with is not a defense-of-the-homeland
force,'' a Navy officer said. ''That's a sea-power projection force.'' The ship
is armed with cruise missiles, among other weapons.

Several ships passed through La Perouse Strait north of Japan, then sailed
through the Kurile Island chain and into the North Pacific.

Activity at Cam Ranh Bay

Naval intelligence has detected signs of activity that suggest that the
maneuvers may extend as far south as Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam, where the Soviet
Navy is using an expanded base built by the United States during the Vietnam
War.

The equivalent base for American operations in the Pacific is acrosss the South
China Sea, at Subic Bay in the Philippines.

Australia, the United States and other allied nations recently completed their
own exercises, the latest in an annual series known as Rimpac that involves many
Pacific nations. In one notable episode this summer, the United States Navy
successfully ''hid'' the aircraft carrier Ranger at sea, preventing its
detection by forces playing the role of adversary for a full two weeks, a Navy
officer said.

He said the carrier traveled with its radios and radars turned off and used
other means of deception to keep its whereabouts unknown.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV NETWORK NEWS FINDS THE RULES HAVE CHANGED;
Technology and the Bottom Line Create Profound Challenges

BYLINE: BY BURTON BENJAMIN; Burton Benjamin, a senior fellow at the Gannett
Center for Media Studies at Columbia University, is a former vice president and
director of news for CBS.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1542 words


Is there any longer a need for network newscasts? Are the networks soon to
become a kind of electronic Associated Press, simply feeding stories to
affiliates who will then repackage them in their own newscasts?

The news divisions of the three networks are facing the most profound challenges
in their history. They are being forced to ponder basics: What kind of news
should we be putting on the air? Just what is our role in the new mix of local
television newscasts, cable newscasts and the other technological advances?
Their answers will shape what viewers will be seeing.  Today, network television
news is in a state of enormous flux. The news directors of some larger local
stations are saying: Just give us the money and we can do without the network
news. Some of the dreams that many of us in the business used to have - such as
an hour newscast - are dead. The hour documentary is comatose. The instant
special is rarely seen, except in times of great crisis. The new corporate
owners of the networks have invoked a kind of austerity that has hit the news
divisions especially hard.

Indeed, the very mandate for network newscasts is changing, not because the
network news executives necessarily want a change but for two compelling
reasons. The first is the bottom line. Nothing throws off more profit to a
network's affiliated stations than local newscasts. What began three decades ago
as a primitive 10-or 15-minute affair -mainly to satisfy the Federal
Communications Commission at license renewal time - has become an hour in most
markets and in some as much as two or even two-and-a-half hours of locally
produced newscasts, a wellspring of revenue for these stations.

At the same time as local news shows have become dramatically more profitable to
those stations, the overall economic picture for the networks has been less than
cheerful. In the first quarter of 1986, ABC, after having conceded that it
anticipated a slim loss, posted only a small operating profit. Last month,
Thomas H. Wyman, CBS's chairman, said of his network's immediate future, ''We
believe there will be little or no growth.''

The second is technology, principally satellite delivery, which has cut the
umbilical cord of land lines and, at the same time, the vital link that made
network newscasts so important to local stations. Although satellites have been
around since the late 1960's, the cost of using them has dropped sharply,
opening up the field to some new entrepreneurs and ending the near-monopoly the
networks once enjoyed.

Some affiliates will not mourn the decrease in network news dominance. They
still remember the controversial coverage the networks devoted to the
civil-rights struggle, to the Vietnam War and to Richard Nixon. Many of them did
not like the heat they had to take.

Both the bottom line and the new technologies are already influencing the kind
of news that viewers are seeing. Being competitive with the networks on coverage
of an airliner crash is easy for an interconnected local station. Moving a story
that a powerful administration in Washington does not like may not be so easy.
There have been some, but not too many, profiles in courage written about
local-station owners.

The new technology has opened the door to newcomers who are challenging the old
order in television news. Stanley S. Hubbard, owner of KSTP-TV, the ABC
affiliate in St. Paul, has established a satellite news-gathering service to
compete with the networks. Mr. Hubbard's system is called Conus, an acronym for
Continental U.S. It is a consortium of 40 network-affiliated and independent
local stations. The key to the system is a fleet of mobile vans - which may be
purchased by stations from Mr. Hubbard's company - with uplinks to two
satellites. The average cost of a van is $300,000. Each van usually has a crew
of three: two to shoot the story, one to handle the truck and the satellite
gear. The crew can set up at the scene of an event in less than 10 minutes and
pump live reports by satellite back to the Conus master control in Minneapolis,
which feeds them to subscribing stations.

On stories like the crash of Delta Flight 191 in Dallas in 1985, floods in
northern California, an oil rig accident in Mississippi, Conus - through local
coverage - was ahead of the game. Recently, it joined the Associated Press in TV
Direct, a joint venture to produce a television newsfeed service out of
Washington, D.C.

Charles H. Dutcher 3d, vice president and general manager of Conus, says it
costs subscribers only $15 a minute to use his company's satellite services. An
average transmission might cost $75. ''It's cheaper to get a satellite picture
from Salt Lake City to San Francisco than to Federal Express the tape,'' points
out Jeff Greenfield, media critic for ABC News. In hilly San Francisco, where
line-of-sight microwave transmission can be difficult, local stations have been
known to go 22,000 miles up to a satellite and 22,000 miles back down to move a
story 20 blocks.

Mr. Hubbard in Minneapolis is not the only one pushing the new technology. There
is Ted Turner's CNN, Westinghouse's Newsfeed and The Chicago Tribune's
Independent News Network, among others.

As Adam Clayton Powell 3d, a former colleague of mine at CBS News, said at a
Gannett Center for Media Studies conference in May: ''Everyone is doing live
shots. To get them 10 years ago meant about 17 technicians and borrowing a truck
from the television network of the kind they used to cover football games and
setting up microwave towers - all expensive and time consuming. Now you can do
it with three and sometimes even two persons.''

The networks are acutely aware of these moves into what traditionally has been
their turf. All three are now offering a partial subsidy to their affiliates to
purchase mobile vans equipped to feed signals to satellites. Regional
syndication feeds, which permit affiliates to share stories, have been sharply
stepped up.

Ten years ago, when I was producing the Cronkite News, we would hold back key
stories - especially when we had an exclusive - from the CBS News syndication
feed. Our reasoning was that if we fed the story to the network's more than 200
affiliates, it would be old hat by the time we showed it on our broadcast. In
those days, we had appreciably more muscle than network news divisions do today.

When Roone Arledge became president of ABC News in the 1970's, he began feeding
everything down the line to his network's affiliates. That ended the embargo we
had instituted on the Cronkite News.

All of this is a brave new world, one that is technologically elegant, but what
kind of journalism does it bring? There is a great temptation to do something
because the technology permits you to do it. If a station owner spends $300,000
for a Conus truck, he doesn't want it sitting in the garage. So, he will find a
way to use it, whether or not the result is journalism.

Technology has also drastically changed the life of today's foreign
correspondents. The late Charles Collingwood, one of the best of them, used to
speak about the halcyon days in London when he would cover a story, make sure
the undeveloped, unedited film got on a prop plane to New York by 5 P.M., and
then would repair to Claridge's for a drink. Today, with satellite delivery, the
correspondent does not finish when he completes his reporting. The tape is
edited in London. Feed time to New York is 11 P.M. The correspondent usually
must be there for revisions and updating.

I am not at all certain that creativity in television news is keeping up with
the technology. Do we do all of these dazzling things - flood the screen with
whirling images, go live, cover non-events thousands of miles away - just so we
can say You Are There? Is television news in danger of emulating MTV?

All three networks are groping for answers to these questions. None has yet
found one. On routine news nights, when there is no Challenger disaster, no
Mexican earthquake, no TWA hijacking, you can see the new look of network news.
Longer stories, sometimes three stories from different angles on a single
subject. More ''enterprisers,'' such as reports on undercover drug agents or the
detection of breast cancer. More features like ''Person of the Week.'' More use
of ''two-ways,'' either with correspondents in the field or newsmakers.

A former colleague said to me recently: ''Some nights they look like a magazine
show. Other nights they seem to be doing 'Nightline' or 'MacNeil/Lehrer.' They
just haven't figured it out yet.''

It isn't for lack of trying or for lack of skill. The networks' three anchormen
are all highly experienced journalists who distinguished themselves as reporters
before they sat down in their highly paid seats. The problem is that their
mandate is in jeopardy.

With all of its faults, and it has many, network news over the years has made
some notable contributions to American journalism. It has helped set the
national agenda. It has taken on presidents, senators, business and labor
leaders and other powerful members of the establishment. The fact that today
there are pictures flying through the air from a multitude of sources does not
guarantee that this sort of journalism will continue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of specially-equipped van and the master control room at Conus
headquarters in Minneapolis (NYT/Paul Hosefros; Mitch Kezar) (page 25)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN BRIEF;
Another Try in El Salvador

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 154 words


In six years of civil war in El Salvador, more than 50,000 people have been
killed, almost as many as the number of Americans killed in Vietnam. Last week,
the Government and the leftist guerrillas agreed to meet again in an effort to
get peace talks moving.

Negotiations broke off in 1984 in bitterness and recrimination that led to more
fighting.

President Jose Napoleon Duarte said the meeting would take place Wednesday in
Mexico City to plan for detailed negotiations in El Salvador, probably next
month.

It was not widely expected that the two sides would quickly reach major
agreements. But there was speculation that the guerrillas might ask for several
political gestures such as the release of labor unionists arrested in recent
months, investgations into aerial bombardments of civilians, reduced food prices
and the return to their villages of refugees who went to Government camps to
avoid the fighting.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEADLINERS;
Paging Rambo

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 125 words


Robert Schwab 3d, a 44-year-old Vietnam veteran, said he sneaked back to
Southeast Asia in a small boat last year to bring out a woman he left behind in
1975, a feat that would have represented ''something no American ever had in
Vietnam - victory.'' Released last week from a Vietnamese prison where he spent
the last 16 months, Mr. Schwab said the adventure ''really was a failure.'' The
former soldier said he had been taken into custody off the coast of Vietnam and
accused of violating territorial waters. He said prison conditions were not
unduly harsh and his treatment by guards ranged from ''correct to cordial.'' He
said he never did make contact with the ''extraordinary girl'' who inspired his
trip and whom he had hoped to marry.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Robert Schwab 3d

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The World According to Congress

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 554 words


Consider the issues that occupied Congress last week just before members rushed
off on vacation:

* The Senate voted to impose stringent economic measures against South Africa,
including a ban on new investments, and approved $100 million in aid for the
Nicaraguan rebels.

* The House voted to extend a moratorium on testing antisatellite weapons and to
delay production of binary chemical weapons.

* The House voted to require adherence to the 1979 Strategic Arms Limitation
Treaty, and to chop President Reagan's pet Star Wars budget by more than $2
billion.

What do all these issues have in common? The answer, obvious, is also startling
in light of Congress's historic role: Every one concerns foreign policy and
national security. A generation ago, Congress deferred to the diplomats. Now
Congress has become its own State Department, and Pentagon, with implications
for American government that this Congress will do much to explore.

To observers from de Tocqueville to Walter Lippmann, legislatures and mass
opinion are unsuited for a serious role in foreign affairs. Congress, thick with
committees, personalities and agendas, is clumsy at the task. As Senator J.
William Fulbright observed, it is dominated by ''a distressing tendency to
adhere to the dictates of public opinion, or at least to its vocal and organized
segments.''

To others, it is just that tendency that compels Congressional participation in
foreign policy. Averell Harriman told a Senate committee: ''No foreign policy
will stick unless the American people are behind it. And unless Congress
understands it the American people aren't going to understand it.'' The idea
that Congress could not long permit a foreign policy without public support has
its clearest expression over Vietnam, generating one assertion of Congressional
control after another - over warmaking, arms sales, human rights, covert action
overseas.

By the time President Reagan came to office, Congress had become more
cooperative. The public has shown differences with his handling of Nicaragua,
South Africa and arms control. But as long as he maintained popularity on other
issues and did not flout public opinion on these, Congress has been inclined to
give him room. Until now. As the President's posture on, for instance, South
Africa, offends ever more of the public, Congress seems ever readier to act.

That's partly so for partisan reasons. A Democratic House naturally contends
with a Republican President and Senate. But on issues like South Africa, even
the Republican Senate disputes with the Republican President.

The result is a great deal of action, though perhaps more action than change.
Congress has taken a genuine lead on South Africa, but it has given President
Reagan his head on Nicaragua, despite the continued lack of public support. The
many military issues are mostly affected around the edges; even with the cuts,
Congress is allowing Star Wars to proceed at a robust rate.

What last week does demonstrate, however, is that dissatisfaction with Reagan
foreign policy is rising in Congress because it seems to be rising in the
public. The first requirement of any foreign policy, Henry Kissinger has
observed, is domestic support. If the President's policies can't hold that
support, the modern Congress is ready to push its own.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW AND NOTEWORTHY

BYLINE: By Patricia T. O'Conner

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 995 words


THE POWERS THAT BE, by David Halberstam. (Dell, $5.95.) David Halberstam
examines the recent history of four important news-gathering organizations - The
Los Angeles Times, The Washington Post, Time Inc. and CBS - in what Richard
Rovere, writing in these pages in 1979, called an ''important and admirable
book.'' It is, he said, ''a prodigy of research and tendentious but sharply
focused narrative and analysis.'' For a different perspective on the press,
Quill/Morrow has reissued THE OTHER SIDE OF THE STORY ($7.95), in which Jody
Powell, former press secretary to President Carter, takes aim at the White House
press corps. ''It is a lively performance, full of spleen and not a little
gall,'' Lester Bernstein said in The Book Review in 1984. LOVE ALWAYS, by Ann
Beattie. (Vintage, $5.95.) A main character in Ann Beattie's third novel is
Nicole Nelson, a 14-year-old soap opera star who comes to spend the summer in
Vermont with her Aunt Lucy. ''Miss Beattie is one of the most graceful writers
we have,'' Alice Hoffman said here last year; ''at times her prose is nothing
short of exquisite. It is such sheer pleasure to read the dialogue in 'Love
Always,' we almost don't care what the characters say to one another. But when
we really do listen, the absence of desire is more than unsettling - it's
chilling.'' THE LIFE OF HENRY BRULARD, by Stendhal. Translated by Jean Stewart
and B. C. J. G. Knight. (University of Chicago, $12.95.) Stendhal (Marie-Henri
Beyle) wrote this autobiography, calling himself Henry Brulard, in 1835-36, but
it lay forgotten until 1890, when it was found in an attic. ''The present
translation, the first to appear in English, is an uncommonly sound and
scholarly piece of work,'' one reviewer said in 1958. ''Here, although in
fragmentary form, is the material of a brilliant self-portrait.'' HOUSEHOLD
SAINTS, by Francine Prose. (G. K. Hall, $5.95.) New York's Little Italy in the
1950's is the setting for this novel about a married couple, the Santangelos,
and their daughter, who models her life after St. Theresa. The work ''deserves
the widest possible audience,'' Randolph Hogan said in The Book Review in 1981.
''Francine Prose is a splendid writer.'' ALONE, by Richard E. Byrd. (Tarcher/St.
Martin's, $8.95.) Adm. Richard E. Byrd's account of his second expedition to
Antarctica, when he manned an advance base alone for several months in 1934, is
''a deeply personal story,'' R. L. Duffus wrote here in 1938. He found it ''full
of interest and suspense, containing some fine descriptions, and worthy to sit
on a shelf of polar books with other records of hardships bravely endured.'' TIN
WEDDING, by Margaret Leech. (Shoreline/Norton, $7.95.) On her 10th wedding
anniversary, the fashionable Manhattanite Lucia Fanning realizes that the
marriage she had always thought flawless is a sham, and that her husband is
unfaithful. In 1926 our reviewer called this novel ''a clever, at times a
masterful, study of subtle psychological innuendos in which the author gives
evidence of a kinship to de Maupassant in her ability to single out unimportant
detail and to endow it with penetrating significance.'' SANDBAR SINISTER, by
Phoebe Atwood Taylor. (Foul Play Press/Countryman, $5.95.) Two corpses -shot and
bludgeoned, respectively - turn up in the little Cape Cod village of East
Pochet, and it's up to Asey Mayo to crack the case. ''As is usual with the Asey
Mayo stories,'' Isaac Anderson said here in 1934, ''this one is as amusing as it
is baffling, and as baffling as it is amusing.'' CALLAS: Portrait of a Prima
Donna, by George Jellinek. (Dover, $7.95.) This biography of Maria Callas, first
published in 1960, now includes a new preface and an epilogue covering the
period until her death in 1977. The author has assembled his data ''in thorough
reportorial fashion,'' Roland Gelatt said in these pages. He found the book
strong on detail yet ''weak in insight,'' noting that ''sober marshaling of
objective fact cannot wholly explain what makes Maria tick.'' A FINE OF TWO
HUNDRED FRANCS, by Elsa Triolet. (Virago/Penguin, $6.95.) The Russian-born Elsa
Triolet (1896-1970) was an important figure in the French Resistance during
World War II and was decorated by the French Government for her heroism. She was
awarded the Prix Goncourt - the first woman so honored - for these three stories
of the Resistance, all of which were originally published illegally by
underground presses. Nona Balakian wrote in these pages in 1947 that the author
''presents an extraordinarily convincing panorama of occupied France with its
fears and corruptions, its anxieties and humiliations.'' TRUE LOVE, by Herbert
Gold. (Grove, $3.95.) A middle-aged lawyer's mistress leaves him, but not before
placing a personal advertisement to supply him with replacements. In 1982 our
reviewer, Peter Andrews, said the novelist Herbert Gold ''is forever uncovering
the latest totems and odd social byways of the Pacific shore and writing about
them with grace and humor. . . . No one captures the seriocomic aspects of
variant sex in the Sun Belt better than Mr. Gold.'' ONCE A WARRIOR KING: Memoirs
of an Officer in Vietnam, by David Donovan. (Ballantine, $3.95.) David Donovan
(a pseudonym), who was a first lieutenant in the Army during the Vietnam War,
offers a memoir of his experiences as a military adviser to local militia. In
1985 our reviewer, Kevin Buckley, said the work ''casts light far beyond the
small corner of the Mekong Delta the author so meticulously describes.'' EATING
PEOPLE IS WRONG, by Malcolm Bradbury. (Academy Chicago, $4.95.) The baffled hero
of Malcolm Bradbury's comic novel is Stuart Treece, a professor of English at a
provincial British university and a failed romantic whose tidy liberal life is
buffeted by the chaotic and amoral 1950's. In these pages in 1960, Roger Pippet
called this a ''brilliant'' work that, ''at its best, fuses sensitivity and
irony and becomes a significant social satire.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ann Beattie

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BIGGER AND WORSE

BYLINE: By John H. Makin; John H. Makin is director of fiscal policy studies at
the American Enterprise Institute. His forthcoming book is ''U.S. Fiscal Policy:
Its Effects at Home and Abroad.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1682 words


HOW REAL IS THE FEDERAL DEFICIT? By Robert Eisner. 240 pp. New York: The Free
Press. $17.95.

 THE DEFICITS How Big? How Long? How Dangerous? By Daniel Bell and Lester
Thurow. 142 pp. New York: New York University Press. $15.

ON Nov. 5, 1980, the day after Ronald Reagan was elected President and just four
years after America's 200th birthday, the national debt - the sum total of all
its past deficits - stood at about $900 billion. Had a dispirited Jimmy Carter
predicted that under his successor the national debt would more than double to
about $2 trillion ($2,000 billion) in just five years, he would have been
accused of everything from sour grapes to downright silliness.

There are two surprises in the bald fact that America's deficits are headed for
a total of more than $2 trillion in 1986. One is political, the other economic.
The political surprise is, of course, that our largest peacetime guns-and-butter
spending spree has come under the leadership of a conservative President. The
economic surprise - or more accurately, the surprise for economists - is that
huge deficits have not thus far wrought some economic calamity.

Robert Eisner, a professor of economics at Northwestern University, believes
that many of the deficit paradoxes of the postwar period can be explained by
remeasuring deficits. He argues that if the Federal Government kept its books
like a corporation and maintained a capital account, adjusting the value of its
assets and liabilities for inflation, actual deficits would be very different
from those reported in the newspapers. Based on Mr. Eisner's measurements, some
of the much-decried deficits of the 1970's were actually surpluses, since high
rates of inflation were eradicating the real value of the debts on the books of
the Federal Government.

He states clearly in ''How Real Is the Federal Deficit?'' that his aim is to
rescue Keynesian fiscal policy, which uses changes in Government spending and
taxes to stabilize the economy, from the bad reputation it's gotten from
monetarists and rational expectations theorists. In the 1960's monetarists
argued that only the money supply matters, and that fiscal policy is a sideshow
as far as the path of the economy is concerned. In the 1970's the rational
expectations school argued that systematic policy, whether it be monetary or
fiscal, mattered not at all to the course of the economy. The rational
expectations school proposed a kind of Catch-22 for policy makers: If Government
officials reacted predictably to offset the business cycle, everyone would come
to anticipate their behavior, and so it would have no additional impact. The
outcome is not unlike the effect that the braking of a subway train has on an
upright rider who remains unperturbed, knowing how to brace for it.

Mr. Eisner's reaction against the rational expectations school that came to
prominence in the 1970's is typical of economists of the generation who received
their training shortly after World War II. According to rational expectations
theory, the tight monetary policy announced in 1981-2 ought not to have slowed
the economy, and easy fiscal policy after 1981 ought not to have led to faster
growth dur-ing 1983-4. Yet both situations have occurred, and rational
expectationists may have to concede that traditional monetary and fiscal
policies may still ''matter.'' All the subway passengers are not fully prepared
when the brakes go on.

Mr. Eisner's claim that fiscal policy changes, when properly measured, have more
of an impact on the economy than monetary policy is buttressed by extensive
empirical tests. While his results do not contradict this hypothesis,
professional economists can and will dispute their conclusiveness. My primary
reservation with regard to the new view of deficits comes from its possibly
destabilizing effect on prices. Mr. Eisner observes that under his measure there
were no budget deficits between 1977 and the end of 1980. This lack is due
partly to a combination of moderate measured deficits and a rapid acceleration
of inflation, with accompanying higher interest rates. Should fiscal policy have
been made more stimulative during that period - and if it had been, would not
more inflation have further blunted the stimulative effect under Mr. Eisner's
measure? Would further stimulation of fiscal policy be called for? In other
words, inflation-adjusted deficit measures carry the possibility of
destabilizing prices by calling for a more stimulative posture during peri-BLURB
HERE ods of high inflation and a less stimulative posture during periods of
deflation.

While Mr. Eisner's discussion offers many worthwhile lessons and conclusions -
for example, he stresses the importance of distinguishing between Government
spending on bridges and roads and Government spending on pure consumption -he
may go too far when he suggests that deficit reducers are out ''to destroy the
nation's wealth.'' The fact is that even by the author's measure, the deficit
became a serious problem after 1982 - and that during a period of highly
expansionary fiscal policy by either Mr. Eisner's or conventional measures, the
real growth of the United States economy thus far in the 1980's has averaged 2
percent, as opposed to more than 3 percent in the 1970's and more than 4 percent
in the 1960's.

Daniel Bell and Lester Thurow address the deficit issue in a pair of lectures
that were presented in December 1984. Mr. Bell, a professor of social sciences
at Harvard University, skirts the deficit issue as such, preferring to ponder
''larger and more-troublesome questions about how policy is made and the
alignments in politics today.'' As a noneconomist addressing an issue in
economics and Continued on next page politics, Mr. Bell feels compelled to argue
that economics as a science has broken down: ''The most important fact about the
last two decades is that these stable economic relations have become unhinged.''
This view appears to have been based largely on Milton Friedman's
well-publicized failure to predict slower inflation at the end of 1984. The
specific examples of unhinging that Mr. Bell cites are really descriptions of
bad policy measures, not weakness of economic theory. ''Lyndon Johnson's lying
about the intended escalation of the U.S. involvement in Vietnam, with its
consequent distortion of the budget estimates and the ensuing inflation,'' and
''David Stockman's weaseling to the Senate Budget Committee in April, 1981,''
are hardly examples of the failures of economic science. Mr. Bell goes on to
argue that a triumph of ideology over reason is responsible for a failure to
deal with the deficit problem. Ironically, Mr. Bell shares with such
conservative ideologues as Paul Craig Roberts, whom he chastises, a strong
contempt for economic science. The reader approaching Mr. Bell's essay hoping to
learn whether the deficit is a serious problem and what might be done about it
will come away disappointed.

Lester Thurow's balanced essay in ''The Deficits'' is a model of the application
of economic analysis to the issue of the deficit. Mr. Thurow, who teaches
economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, begins with a solid
discussion of problems that might follow from large deficits. He documents a
slowing of capital formation, cites the increased risk of inflationary
pressures, and notes that trade problems and inflexibility in fighting future
recessions are all well-known problems arising from large deficits. MR. THUROW
also addresses many of the arguments stating that the Federal deficit is not a
problem, including those put forward by rational expectations theorists that
deficits merely raise expectations of future taxes and are therefore
accommodated by increased saving. He documents in a straightforward manner the
reasons why large deficits ought to be reduced and sensibly deals with the two
ways to reduce deficits - either by raising taxes or by cutting spending.

Mr. Thurow's discussion on the options for increasing taxes, which includes a
disposal of the myth that it is costless to raise the corporate income tax, is
excellent. He explains convincingly that corporate taxes are paid by consumers,
shareholders and workers. He also presents a well-reasoned case for the
consumption tax. The supposedly liberal Thurow is a real hard-nose on tax
policy, suggesting a value-added tax on top of a progressive consumption tax,
with a gasoline tax to boot. His liberal credentials are re-established when he
proposes a progressive schedule of tax rates that rises to well over 100 percent
for affluent taxpayers, and even higher for expenditures on gasoline by the
well-to-do. Apparently the rich do not need incentives to work harder.

Mr. Thurow's analysis on the expenditure side is enlightening. While one may
disagree with his prescriptions, his discussions of defense spending, social
security, unemployment and health-care programs are excellent. One wishes that
the budgeteers in Congress, caught up in the endless swirl of political
discussions of the deficit, would read and heed his constructive essay.

The politics and economics of the deficit will likely be the subject of many
books, ranging from David Stockman's ''kiss-and-tell'' malapropisms about House
Speaker Thomas (Tip) O'Neill's ''massive corpulence and scarlet, varicose nose''
to Robert Eisner's treatise on the proper measurement of fiscal deficits and
their effects on the economy in the presence of monetary policy. Whether the
Gramm-Rudman-Hollings legislation mandating the elimination of the Federal
budget deficit by 1991 will put that issue behind us as a serious economic
problem remains to be seen. What is already clear is that economists have had to
rethink many of their preconceptions about the effects of deficits, especially
in light of the increasing importance of international trade to the American
economy. Fiscal policy has moved to the front burner just half a century after
John Maynard Keynes, who had been a monetary economist all his life, first put
discretionary fiscal policy on the map.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Robert Eisner (Jim Ziv)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By Will Blythe

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 278 words


THE LONG WALK. By George La Fountaine. (Putnam, $17.95.) Although badly wounded
by infelicitous prose, melodrama, implausibilities so large they're almost
daring and characters who burst into polemic as if it were song, this Vietnam
War novel still manages to pull itself along on sheer narrative bravado. It
chronicles the return from Vietnam of a man called William Hill, an American
P.O.W., and his rescuer, Stanley Baker, a Navajo medic. Driven insane by 10
years as a captive of the Vietcong, Hill comes back to the States in 1973 but is
still unable to believe he's home. He is committed to psychiatric wards, from
which he constantly tries to escape. Baker attempts to help his fellow veteran
by investigating Hill's bleak past for the psychological key to his predicament.
The book hinges on some unlikely revelations. Not only does the protagonist
believe he's still imprisoned by the Vietcong, he also suspects they've
contrived to deceive him by constructing an elaborate counterfeit of California,
a movie set complete with psychobabbling doctors and the Santa Monica Pier.
Novels have succeeded with such astounding scenarios, but this one teeters on
the verge of lunacy until Baker spirits his charge to a Navajo reservation in
Arizona. There the former P.O.W. is delivered into the care of Baker's father, a
stoic sheepherder who must tread where doctors fear to go. In this section, the
novel's finest, George La Fountaine gives us a protagonist who begins to exhibit
the barest glimmerings of character. The plot still races nervously along, but
the prose improves, turning almost as clear as the atmosphere, full of
Southwestern light and heat.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 18, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

3 Foreign Ministers in Hanoi

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 55 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 17


The Foreign Ministers of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia opened their 13th semiannual
meeting in Hanoi today, the official Voice of Vietnam radio said. Attending were
Foreign Ministers Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam, Phoun Sipaseuth of Laos and Hun
Sen of the Vietnamese-installed Government in Cambodia, according to the
broadcast.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 18, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: PENTAGON;
GUARDIANS OF THE SCREEN IMAGE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1059 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 17


When producers of the movie ''Top Gun'' came to the Navy with a proposed script
two years ago, the opening dogfight between American and Russian aviators flying
high-powered jet fighters was to have been fought over land.

''No way,'' said Robert Manning, who takes an initial look at such projects for
the Navy Department. ''That would have made it over Cuba. We said it had to be
over international waters - and we insisted that the Navy pilots would not fire
until they had been fired on.''

The producers agreed to that, along with dozens of other changes the Navy
insisted on, and so the Navy agreed to support the film. That meant giving
Paramount access to an aircraft carrier, to the Navy Air Station at Miramar,
Calif., and to technical help. In return, the producer agreed to pay for costs
outside normal Navy operations.

With movies and television films about World War II, Korea, Vietnam and other
military operations apparently back in vogue, Pentagon support for such
productions has become serious business. The military services say they get into
films only after long and sometimes cumbersome scrutiny that includes approval
from the Pentagon's Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs.

Looking Over Pentagon Shoulder

Beyond that, Congress's General Accounting Office occasionally looks over the
Pentagon's shoulder. In a new audit, the G.A.O. said the Pentagon should clarify
its policies, standardize billing and make sure all extra costs were covered.

In ''Top Gun,'' for instance, the auditors found the Navy had failed to ''charge
the producer for using five Navy cameras to film scenes from Navy F-14
aircraft.'' The Navy also did not charge for two months of help from a public
affairs officer.

The Pentagon generally agreed with the findings, particularly on the need to
standardize charges and to obtain better written agreements with film producers.

The Pentagon and the services have several criteria for passing on scripts.
First, say officials of each service, the film must benefit the service. In
commenting on the G.A.O. report, Robert B. Sims, the Assistant Secretary for
Public Affairs, said: ''In most cases, it is in the best interest of the
Government to support a motion picture or television production that portrays
the military services in a positive and accurate light, thereby avoiding the
distorted images that might be conveyed if a film were made without D.O.D.
assistance.''

'A Little Off the Wall'

The script must be authentic. The Army helped Francis Ford Coppola make
''Gardens of Stone,'' which includes a military funeral in Arlington National
Cemetery, by showing him uniforms the Honor Guard wore in the Vietnam era and
what barracks looked like then. On the other hand, the Air Force refused to
support ''Iron Eagle,'' about a teen-ager flying a high-powered F-16 fighter.
''It was a little off the wall,'' said an Air Force officer.

The picture must be in good taste; too much violence, sex or profanity is out.
''As soon as we start offending the mothers and fathers in Iowa and Indiana,''
Mr. Manning said, ''we are counterproductive.'' Because the movie ''An Officer
and a Gentleman'' had all three, the Navy refused to cooperate.

Each service insists on controlling the script from beginning to end. A public
affairs officer will step in to stop filming if it deviates from the agreed
script. The services also screen the finished film before it is released.

With ''Top Gun,'' filming of a catapult launching of an F-14 Tomcat fighter on a
routine flight for the Navy required no reimbursement by the producer. But an
F-14 flight made just for the film cost $7,600 an hour, and the flight of an A-6
attack bomber $8,600. Of the $1.1 million Paramount paid the Navy for ''Top
Gun,'' $886,000 was for flight time of five types of aircraft.

Filming on a Sunday

The filming must not interfere with operations. Fries Entertainment is producing
a film entitled ''LBJ,'' about President Johnson, and wanted access to Andrews
Air Force Base to recreate his arrival there after the assassination of
President Kennedy. The Air Force agreed but said the filming would have to be on
a Sunday.

The General Accounting Office, in asserting that agreements with producers
should be written tightly, cited two specific problems in the making of ''Top
Gun.''

''A Navy radio valued at $18,700 was lost in the ocean by Navy personnel helping
the producer film a sea rescue scene,'' the draft report said. ''The producer
refused to pay for the lost radio because the loss was not his fault.''

In contrast, after the five cameras the Navy had installed in an F-14 to film
flying scenes were removed the aircraft was not operational because the cameras
had fouled the electrical system. ''The producer has agreed to reimburse the
Navy for the cost of repairs,'' the G.A.O. report said.

The Pentagon noted that ''such agreements need to be general rather than highly
specific in their content'' because television and film producers are constantly
revising scripts and re-shooting scenes, and are at the mercy of the weather.

An Aid to Recruiting

Despite the problems, Navy officers said, ''Top Gun'' has increased public
awareness of the Navy and has helped recruiting. Some officers say they wished
the Navy had approved ''An Officer and a Gentleman'' because ultimately it was a
realistic portrayal of pre-flight training.

With those films behind them, the Navy has plunged into helping Paramount film
Tom Clancy's best-selling novel about submarines, ''The Hunt for Red October.''
Senior officers recently accompanied the producer, Mace Neufeld, and the
scriptwriter, Donald Stewart, on a two-day cruise aboard the nuclear-powered
submarine Hyman G. Rickover.

They also boarded the ballistic missile submarine Alaska for a look, toured the
aircraft carrier Kennedy and visited the submarine base in New London, Conn., to
see the first nuclear-powered submarine, Nautilus. ''That was to get their
homework done,'' Mr. Manning said.

When the script has been finished, the Navy will review it. But the Navy is
almost certain to approve it because the top brass is pushing for the movie that
shows the American Navy tracking down a defecting Russian submariner.

Indeed, a few salty wags in the Navy Department have already found a nickname
for the new film: ''Bottom Gun.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 18, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

PRESS NOTES;
U.S. WILL HELP TRAIN AFGHAN REFUGEES AS JOURNALISTS

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 954 words


Boston University has been awarded a $180,000 grant to train Afghan refugees as
journalists and King Features Syndicate will receive $310,000 to create an
Afghan news service, the United States Information Agency has announced.

Senator Gordon J. Humphrey, a New Hampshire Republican, originated the idea,
which was approved by Congress in 1985. ''The Soviets,'' Mr. Humphrey says now,
''were succeeding in withholding news to the world of that war.'' He adds that
he thinks Afghan journalists can tell the story best but that there are almost
no trained ones among the Afghan refugees now in Pakistan.

The U.S.I.A., which was designated by Congress as the agency in charge, had
never been actively involved in setting up training programs for journalists,
although it frequently sponsors visits to this country by foreign journalists
and administers other educational programs such as the awarding of Fulbright
Fellowships. It is an independent agency that takes policy guidance from the
State Department.

According to Lesley M. Vossen, a spokesman for the U.S.I.A., representatives of
the university and King Features are in Pakistan negotiating with its Government
for permission to conduct the programs there, which the agency would prefer.

Early this year, when the grant applications were being drafted, the journalism
faculty at Boston University was bitterly divided over whether the training
should take place in Pakistan, as was called for in the agency's guidelines.
Bernard S. Redmont, dean of the College of Communications, and much of the
journalism faculty said that the journalism training should take place on the
Boston campus. Their position was based on logistical and administrative
difficulties in Pakistan and on concern that the program might be considered
more a propaganda effort than a journalistic one if it was conducted abroad.

The agency argued that it would be too expensive to bring the prospective Afghan
journalists to Boston and that culture shock would disrupt their studies. The
proposal from the university was submitted by the provost because Dean Redmont
refused to endorse a Pakistan-based training program. Last month Dean Redmont
resigned his administrative post. According to people close to the situation,
who asked not to be identified, the resignation was a result of administrative
friction with the university's president, John R. Silber, in the Pakistan
debate.

Detroit Merger

In a move that has heartened those opposed to a joint operating arrangement
between the two newspapers in Detroit, the antitrust division of the United
States Justice Department has recommended a public hearing against the wishes of
the newspapers' owners, Knight-Ridder Newspapers Inc. and the Gannett Company.

After 30 days to allow responses, Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d will decide
whether to hold a hearing.

On May 9, The Detroit Free Press, which is owned by Knight-Ridder, and The
Detroit News, which is owned by Gannett, filed an application for approval of a
joint operating agreement under the Newspaper Preservation Act of 1971. The act
allows competing newspapers to merge advertising, production and circulation
facilities if one of them is ''in probable danger of financial failure.'' Such a
merger, which does not include joining of news staffs, cannot occur without
approval by the Justice Department.

In his report, Douglas H. Ginsburg, Assistant Attorney General in charge of the
antitrust division, ''concluded that the applicants have not yet sustained their
burden of proof of showing that The Detroit Free Press is a 'failing newspaper.'
''

The Free Press and The News have a daily circulation of about 650,000 each,
which makes them among the 10 largest newspapers in the country. Opponents of
the joint operating arrangement, including some newspaper unions, local
politicians, retail advertisers, competitors and private individuals, have
argued that financial losses at The Free Press were created because it was
aggressively trying to dominate the market, not because the paper was doomed.
Knight-Ridder and Gannett, two of the nation's largest newspaper chains, have
argued that significant operating losses and other evidence prove that The Free
Press is a failing newspaper.

If a hearing is held, the approval process could be extended for years,
according to Hillel Levin, executive editor of Metropolitan Detroit Magazine,
who says he and his fellow opponents will ''definitely'' sue if the arrangement
is approved.

But William J. Keating, chief executive officer of the company that will
supervise the joint operating agreement if it is approved, says he believes
approval ''is inevitable.''

The New Yorker

A two-part article by Renata Adler in The New Yorker in June was stingingly
critical of the CBS News documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception,'' that prompted an unsuccessful libel action against CBS by Gen.
William C. Westmoreland. The article was also highly critical of Time Inc.,
based on Ms. Adler's analysis of the unsuccessful libel action against Time by
Ariel Sharon, Israel's former Defense Minister.

On July 24, CBS News sent William Shawn, editor in chief of The New Yorker, a
49-page letter describing ''misrepresentations'' and ''errors'' that CBS News
says Ms. Adler's article contained. The next day, Time Inc. issued a statement
criticizing the article as ''one-sided,'' and a spokesman said Time was
considering what other response to make.

Ms. Adler, who drew the two-part article from her book ''Reckless Disregard,''
which is scheduled for publication this fall, then said that the article was
accurate and spoke for itself. A spokesman for The New Yorker said the magazine
had no comment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 19, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of a transmission error, a report in Press Notes yesterday about
articles by Renata Adler in The New Yorker on two libel cases omitted a comment
from The New Yorker. In response to criticism of the articles by a defendant in
one of the libel cases, CBS News, a spokesman for the magazine said Friday:
''The editors here have studied the CBS News memorandum carefully. As far as
they can see, Ms. Adler's facts are solid and her opinions are supported by her
facts.''

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 19, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EDITORS' NOTE

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 208 words


A United Nations dispatch on July 10 about classified documents found by Iranian
students in the United States Embassy in Teheran in 1979 said the seizure of the
papers was ''believed by some intelligence experts to represent the most
extensive intelligence loss since the emergency evacuation in Saigon in 1975.''

The extent of any intelligence loss in Vietnam after the American withdrawal is
in dispute, and the dispatch should have acknowledged this.

Dean Brown, a member of the task force that organized the evacuation of the
Saigon embassy, has asserted that the material that fell into enemy hands
included computer tapes containing the names of all Vietnamese who had worked
for the United States. The loss, he said, put thousands of lives in danger.
Other experts have also said that there was a significant intelligence loss in
Vietnam but that they cannot give a full accounting of what was lost.

On the other hand, some intelligence experts believe that the loss of classified
material in Saigon was minor, and others say there was no loss at all. Wolf
Lehmann, who was deputy chief of mission in Saigon, says that all classified
materials were either destroyed or removed before the last American diplomats
left the capital.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editor's Note

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 19, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 80 words


Because of a transmission error, a report in Press Notes yesterday about
articles by Renata Adler in The New Yorker on two libel cases omitted a comment
from The New Yorker. In response to criticism of the articles by a defendant in
one of the libel cases, CBS News, a spokesman for the magazine said Friday:
''The editors here have studied the CBS News memorandum carefully. As far as
they can see, Ms. Adler's facts are solid and her opinions are supported by her
facts.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 20, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

IMMIGRATION SERVICE DELAYS DEPORTATION OF JAPANESE STUDENT

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD D. MAY

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 342 words


Immigration officials yesterday granted Choichiro Yatani, the Japanese graduate
student accused by the State Department of subversive activities, a few more
days in which to attempt to seek a hearing to disprove the charges against him.

He was due to be deported yesterday but Scott Blackman, the assistant district
director for deportation for the United States Immigration and Naturalization
Service, granted an extension until Friday. ''This gives him further time to
pursue his case,'' Mr. Blackman said.

Mr. Yatani, 39 years old and a resident of Port Jefferson, L.I., was arrested by
immigration officials July 7 upon his return to the United States from the
Netherlands, where he was attending an academic conference. Since his arrest,
Mr. Yatani, who is married and has two children, has been held without bail at
the Immigration Service's detention center on Varick Street in downtown
Manhattan.

Evidence Is 'Classified'

Government officials have said that Mr. Yatani was or is ''a terrorist or
engaged in other subversive activities.'' James Callahan, a spokesman for the
State Department, said yesterday that the evidence against Mr. Yatani was
''classified'' and therefore could not be disclosed.

Mr. Yatani denies that he is now or has ever been a member of the Communist
Party or other radical organizations. He said he was arrested once, in Japan in
1968, for taking part in a protest against the Vietnam War.

Mr. Yatani, who has lived in the United States for nine years, is completing a
Ph.D program in social psychology at the State University of New York at Stony
Brook, where he also teaches both psychology and Japanese.

Theodore Ruthizer, one of several attorneys who late last week volunteered to
represent Mr. Yatani, said that immigration officials ''appear to be looking for
a way to solve this.'' He added, ''The State Department has not shown a similar
attitude.''

Mr. Ruthizer argued that, under the law, any individual is entitled to
''understand the evidence against him and to reply to that evidence.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 20, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HARRY L. HARTY Jr.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 109 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, Fla., Aug. 19


Vice Adm. Harry L. Harty Jr. of the Navy, retired, who served as the United
States military adviser at the United Nations, died Friday. He was 69 years old.

In his 39 years of service, Admiral Harty won two Distinguished Service medals
and two Legion of Merit awards. He served as assistant vice chief of naval
operations for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and was later an adviser
to George Bush, then chief United States delegate to the United Nations.

Admiral Harty, who was a veteran of World War II, the Korean War and the Vietnam
War, retired in 1974. He is survived by his wife, Joan, four daughters, 10
grandchildren and a sister.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 20, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

James Benning Films To Open Whitney Series

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 159 words


A retrospective of films by James Benning, including a premiere, will open the
New American Film Makers Series on Oct. 7 at the Whitney Museum of American Art,
Madison Avenue and 75th Street. The series, which runs through March, is the
17th sponsored by the museum.

On the opening day of the series, two screenings are planned, at 2 and 6:30 P.M.
The first will feature ''Time and a Half,'' ''Art Hist. 101,'' ''Honeyland
Road,'' ''Michigan Avenue'' and ''8 1/2 x 11.''

At 6:30, the films are ''i94,'' ''The United States of America,'' ''9/1/ 75,''
and ''Chicago Loop.'' Mr. Benning's new film, ''Landscape Suicide,'' will be
shown on Oct. 28.

Also featured in the monthlong program will be two films about Africa by Trinh
T. Minh-ha, a film maker born in Vietnam. The full schedule has not yet been
announced.

Admission to the festival is included in museum admission of $4 ($2 for the
elderly and free for students). Information: 570-0537.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 21, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. ABANDONS ATTEMPT TO DEPORT L.I. DOCTORAL CANDIDATE TO JAPAN

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD D. MAY

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 952 words


The Federal Government abandoned its efforts yesterday to deport a Japanese
doctoral candidate whom the State Department had accused of being a Communist.

''He will be able to stay here as a student,'' said an Immigration and
Naturalization Service official, Scott Blackman.

Shortly after the announcement, the student, Choichiro Yatani, was released from
the lower Manhattan detention center where he had been held since he tried to
re-enter the country on July 7.

Mr. Yatani, a doctoral candidate in social psychology at the State University of
New York at Stony Brook on Long Island, said he had ''no words to express how I
feel -I'm just so happy and so relieved.'' Later, he added: ''It was a
nightmare. Some people in the United States Government believe I'm a Communist
or a terrible person. But I am not.''

The State Department had objected to Mr. Yatani's re-entry to the United States
saying it had evidence that he had engaged in subversive activities and belonged
to a Communist or Communist-affiliated party.

Yesterday officials there would not say why they had withdrawn their objections.
But one Government official said that because of wide publicity over the case,
high State Department officials had concluded that ''this isn't really worth
keeping the guy in jail over.''

Arthur Helton, a director of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, which late
last week volunteered to represent Mr. Yatani, said that yesterday afternoon the
office of the United States Attorney in Manhattan offered to release Mr. Yatani
and to admit him to the country.

The State Department, he said, also informed the immigration service that it was
waiving earlier objections to his admission.

In return for the waiver, Mr. Yatani and his lawyers agreed to drop a lawsuit
filed against the State Department yesterday charging that the agency had acted
improperly and illegally in revoking Mr. Yatani's visa and seeking to exclude
him from the United States without a hearing.

Mr. Yatani said, however, that ''I would like the American Government to admit
their mistake - I suppose they don't want to lose face.''

He has repeatedly denied that he ever belonged to a radical organization or that
he was involved in subversive activities. He said he was arrested once, in Japan
in 1968, along with other students protesting the war in Vietnam.

James Callahan, a State Department spokesman, said he could not comment on the
charges against Mr. Yatani or the sources from which they had been obtained. He
confirmed, however, that ''we are waiving his ineligibilities'' and added that
''as far as State is concerned, we see no problem with him finishing his studies
in the U.S.''

A U.S. Resident for 9 Years

Mr. Yatani has lived in the United States for the last nine years. He teaches
psychology and Japanese at Stony Brook, where he is also in the final year of a
Ph.D. program.

''His release is a wise and thoughtful gesture,'' said John H. Marburger 3d the
president of Stony Brook. ''His record during nearly a decade of residence in
this country has earned him the right to complete his education.''

Mr. Blackman, the immigration agency's assistant district director for
deportation, said Mr. Yatani's residence in the United States over the past nine
years had ''apparently been legal and proper.''

Mr. Yatani was detained by immigration officials when he returned to this
country from an academic conference in the Netherlands. Although he had a visa
issued by the United States Embassy in Amsterdam, his name showed up on
immigration service and State Department ''lookout lists.''

'All Just a Big Mistake'

''The first thing I will do when I get home is hug my wife,'' Mr. Yatani said.
''Then I want to explain to my son that I wasn't really in jail, that I was only
in detention, and that it was all just a big mistake.''

Mr. Yatani has two children, aged 7 and 4, both born in this country. His wife,
Nanako, is Japanese.

''It's so exciting,'' she said. ''I was depressed for a while and didn't think
it would work out, but now I believe in the American people.''

Mr. Yatani said he had asked his wife to phone his parents and his in-laws in
Japan. They have been upset over the publicity his case has received in that
country, he said.

''The Japanese newspapers gave the impression that I was being kicked out for
something I did wrong here,'' Mr. Yatani said, ''and that I would be
investigated when I returned to Japan.''

Disappointment With Japan

Mr. Yatani said he was also disappointed that ''the Japanese Government didn't
do anything for me.''

''They said this is a problem of the American Government and that they would not
intervene.''

A spokesman for the Japanese Consulate in New York said yesterday that in the
last few days his Government had provided information regarding Mr. Yatani's
background to the State Department. The spokesman, Itaru Umezu, director of the
Japan Information Center, refused to disclose whether that information had
confirmed or contradicted the charges against Mr. Yatani.

''There is a working rule between the governments,'' Mr. Umezu said. ''The State
Department doesn't want us commenting.''

One of Mr. Yatani's lawyers, Theodore Ruthizer, said that the Yatani case
''points up a serious civil liberties issue: A man is tainted with the charge of
being a Communist and is not provided with any of the facts on which that charge
is made or an opportunity to rebut them.''

Even if Mr. Yatani were or had been a Communist, Mr. Ruthizer added, the
Government would still be responsible, under the McGovern Amendment of 1977, to
show why his admission to the United States would be ''prejudicial'' to American
interests.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Choichiro Yatani (NYT/Jack Manning)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 21, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAIL CARRIER KILLS 14 IN POST OFFICE, THEN HIMSELF

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1624 words

DATELINE: EDMOND, Okla., Aug. 20


A mail carrier in trouble with his supervisors opened fire in a crowded post
office here early this morning, killing 14 workers and injuring 7 others before
killing himself with a bullet in the head.

The police said the carrier, Patrick Henry Sherrill, of Oklahoma City, burst
into the rambling, one-story post office here about 6:45 A.M., pulled at least
three pistols from a mail pouch and, without a word, started shooting at his
fellow employees.

''He was in the center of the room with two .45's, blazing away,'' said Larry J.
Vercelli, a postal union supervisor who talked with some of the employees after
they had fled when the shooting began.

One Shot in Parking Lot

The police said one worker was shot in the parking lot behind the five-year-old
brick post office. The police said they believed Mr. Sherrill shot the worker
before entering the building and then tried to lock the back doors before
unleashing his barrage on approximately 100 workers sorting mail and preparing
for the day's deliveries.

Police SWAT teams found Mr. Sherrill and 14 fellow employees shot to death when
they entered the post office about 8:30 A.M. after trying in vain to talk to the
gunman. Seven others were treated at nearby hospitals for bullet wounds; two of
the wounded were listed in critical condition. They were being treated at Edmond
Memorial Hospital here and at Mercy Health Center in Oklahoma City.

It was the nation's worst shooting since July 18, 1984, when 21 people,
including the gunman, died at a McDonald's restaurant in San Ysidro, Calif.

In Washington, Postmaster General Preston R. Tisch ordered flags flown at half
staff at all post offices. A spokesman for Mr. Tisch was calling the families of
all the victims to express his sorrow and offer assistance.

Ernest Bingham, an 18-year postal veteran who said he helped train Mr. Sherrill,
said that when the shooting began, no one knew what was happening. But when he
looked up toward the supervisor's desk, he saw two bodies lying on the floor.

''That's when I leaped over the counter and out the front door,'' he said. ''All
I could think was getting out of there. There were several that didn't.''

The police said they received word of the shooting shortly after 7 o'clock, and
were at the scene within minutes. Police officers said they heard two more shots
from inside the building when they arrived at the post office.

'There Was a Lot of Blood'

The police said they tried to reach the gunman by telephone and through
megaphones and other speakers until about 8:30 A.M., when SWAT teams entered the
building. They said no shots were fired after they entered.

''There was a lot of blood, a lot of bodies,'' said Police Lieut. Mike Woolridge
of the Edmond Police Department. ''With 14 people, you're going to have a lot of
blood.''

The police said Mr. Sherrill, a 44-year-old part-time letter carrier who had
worked at the post office for about a year and a half, had apparently received
unfavorable performance ratings and was afraid of losing his job. He telephoned
union officials twice on Tuesday, demanding that he be transferred to Oklahoma
City, union officials said.

Postal officials here said Mr. Sherrill was reprimanded by a supervisor for poor
performance that day.

Pressure to Increase Productivity

Local union officials said there had been increasing friction between mail
carriers and management in recent months as a result of a Postal Service
realignment. They said there was extraordinary pressure, even harassment, to
increase productivity.

While expressing shock over the shootings, the officials said they believed the
increasing pressure on workers contributed to today's tragedy. Mr. Sherrill had
been sharply reprimanded and threatened with dismissal the previous day, they
said.

''A few of us were talking about it a few weeks ago and someone said that one of
these day someone is going to go off the nut and shoot somebody,'' said Bob
Bearden, the local union's recording secretary. ''This is not an isolated
incident. There have been other confrontations. Most people can let off steam
and then walk away. This time it was taken to the ultimate.'' No local postal
authorities could be reached immediately for comment. Vincent R. Sombrotto,
president of the National Association of Letter Carriers, said in Washington
that his union had received an unusually high number of complaints about
management in the Oklahoma City area, including the Edmond facility.

Those complaints involved allegations of verbal abuse, including threats of
discipline and dismissal, according to Mr. Sombrotto. He said he got the reports
from local union officials.

Remarks Termed 'Disgraceful'

Bob Becker, director of news and public affairs for the United States Postal
Service in Washington, said he would not comment on labor-management relations
in post offices in Oklahoma or elsewhere, but added that Mr. Sombrotto's remarks
''border on the disgraceful.''

''We have been in contact with Mr. Sombrotto all day long,'' Mr. Becker said.
''It's obvious he doesn't have all the facts. I think that statements like that
in a time of terrible tragedy are irresponsible at best.''

The police said Mr. Sherrill was a weapons expert in the Marine Corps. The
Veterans Administration in Washington said Mr. Sherrill served from Jan. 15,
1964, to Dec. 30, 1966. Mr. Sherrill claimed in his application for a job in the
Postal Service that he had served in Vietnam, according to postal officials
here, but V.A. records show that he was stationed in the United States
throughout his Marine Corps service.

The police said Mr. Sherrill carried two .45-caliber automatic pistols and a
.22-caliber pistol into the post office and reloaded at least once during the
shooting spree.

Some Survivors Played Dead

At least two of the survivors played dead during the incident. One, Tracy
Sanchez, lay in a pile of bodies until the police arrived.

Another, Michael Bigler, said he lay on the floor as Mr. Sherrill stalked a
hallway in the building. He said he was acquainted with Mr. Sherill but did not
know him well.

''I tried to be kind to him,'' he said at a hospital news conference here. ''But
he just responded to everything in a weird way.''

The shooting began a day of anguish and pain in this town of 43,000 people 12
miles north of Oklahoma City.

''This town is small enough that if you didn't know someone killed, chances are
you knew someone in their families,'' said Mayor pro tem Randel Shadid, a
38-year-old lawyer. ''You always think something like this can't happen in a
town like this, but of course it can. There are a lot of nuts everywhere these
days.''

Grandson of Rockne a Victim

Among those killed was Mike Rockne, 33, a grandson of Knute Rockne, the football
coach at the University of Notre Dame who revolutionized the game from 1918 to
1930. Knute Rockne died in a plane crash in 1931.

For the families and friends of the victims, the shooting was the start of an
ordeal that left many of them waiting for hours to find out if their relatives
or friends had survived.

John and Joyce Gragert of Douglas, Okla., said they heard about the shooting
through a radio report after they finished breakfast about 7:45 A.M. They got in
their car and drove an hour to Edmond to learn the fate of their 30-year-old
daughter, Jonna Hamilton, who was working in the post office.

When they arrived at the City Council chambers where relatives had gathered,
they were told their daughter had been killed.

''Everyone was in shock,'' Mrs. Gragert said. ''Some were crying. Some were in
disbelief. Some of them were just hopeful that, you know, it wasn't theirs.''

'A Terrible, Terrible Scene'

She said she knew before she reached Edmond that her daughter was dead. ''We're
Christians, and I just felt the Lord tell me she was one of them,'' Mrs. Gragert
said. The Rev. Richard Huggins of the Emmanuel Southern Baptist Church in
Edmond, was among those who attended to the victims' families.

One family began rejoicing when their relative's name failed to show up on the
list of the dead, he said. A few minutes later it turned out that there had been
a misspelling, and their relative had been one of those killed.

''It was a terrible, terrible scene,'' the minister said.

Postal officials said they did not have complete biographical information on Mr.
Sherrill, but they said he was born on Nov. 13, 1941. After serving in the
Marine Corps, he worked as a civilian employee at Tinker Air Force Base in
Oklahoma City and with the Federal Aviation Administration. He worked as a
letter sorter at the post office for 89 days in 1982, and then returned as a
letter carrier on April 27, 1985.

THE DEAD AND INJURED

OKLAHOMA CITY, Aug. 20 (AP) -Here is a list of the dead and injured in the
shootings today at the Edmond Post Office, as released by the police. Patrick H.
Sherrill, 44 years old, of Oklahoma City, killed himself after the shootings.

The dead: Patricia Chambers, 41, of Wellston. Judy Denney, 39, of Edmond. Rick
Esser, 38, of Bethany. Patricia Gabbard, 47, of Oklahoma City. Bill Miller, 30,
of Piedmont. Kenneth Morey, 49, of Guthrie. Jonna Gragert Hamilton, 30, of
Moore. Patty Husband, 49, of Oklahoma City. Betty Jarred, 34, of Oklahoma City.
Lee Phillips, 42, of Choctaw. Jerry Pyle, 51, of Edmond. Mike Rockne, 33, of
Edmond. Tom Shader, 31, of Bethany. Patti Welch, 27, of Oklahoma City.  The
injured: William Nimmo, 40, of Edmond, critical condition. Judith Walker, 4, of
Edmond, critical condition. Gene Bray, 54, of Edmond, serious condition. Steven
Vick, 24, of Oklahoma City, fair condition. Eva Joyce Ingram, 45, fair
condition. Michael Bigler, 36, treated and released.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of victims of shooting being removed from post office (UPI);
photo of a post office employee weeping after shootings (AP); map of Oklahoma
highlighting Edmond (page B6); photo of Patrick H. Sherrill (AP) (page B6);
photo of body of shooting victim in post office parking lot (AP) (page B6)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 21, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CAPITOL AIDE CHARGED IN ANTITANK GUN BLAST

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1208 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 20


An Oregon Congressman's aide who also did consulting work for the Pentagon was
arrested Tuesday in an accidental explosion of an antitank cannon in a
Washington suburb, the lawmaker's office announced today.

The aide, Robert G. Dilger, a retired Air Force colonel, was taken into custody
after the weapon shot a nine-inch shell into a gasoline pump, setting off an
explosion that injured four people at a gasoline station in Arlington, Va.

Greg Walden, a spokesman for the Congressman, Representative Denny Smith, a
Republican, said Mr. Dilger had been working part time on Mr. Smith's office
staff for about a year. Mr. Dilger was freed on bail Tuesday night.

Mr. Walden said Mr. Dilger was a ''weapons analyst'' who had known Mr. Smith
since they both served in the Air Force in the 1960's. ''He has done some
contract work for the Pentagon,'' Mr. Walden said of Mr. Dilger. ''I don't know
if he's currently under contract or not.''

Weapon Called Homemade

A Pentagon spokesman, Lieut. Comdr. Ross Kudlick, said tonight that the Defense
Department had no immediate knowledge of any Pentagon contract with Mr. Dilger.
Nor, he said, did it appear that Mr. Dilger was a consultant to any military
contractor.

Police officials in Arlington said Mr. Dilger was demonstrating the weapon to a
Texas man when it accidentally fell and discharged a shell through Mr. Dilger's
flatbed truck. The police said the cannon, which they described as homemade, was
six to eight feet long.

Three people were seriously injured in the blast, which could be heard for
several blocks and sent metal debris flying in all directions. One of the
injured was listed in stable condition at a Virginia hospital with what the
police described as dozens of shrapnel wounds in both legs.

A friend of Mr. Dilger said tonight that the former colonel had developed the
weapon to sell to the Government. #18 Live Shells Found Tom Bell, a spokesman
for the Arlington police, said officers had found 18 live shells in the truck
and two others that had been used. ''Those two looked like they had been
training rounds,'' he said.

Law-enforcement officials said they would try to determine how and where Mr.
Dilger might have purchased such powerful ammunition.

As an Air Force colonel, Mr. Dilger once oversaw a military contract for fighter
planes that carried antitank shells, law-enforcement officials said today.

An Air Force official said today that before Colonel Dilger's retirement in
1980, he helped direct the military's contract for the A-10 Thunderbolt attack
aircraft, which was designed to carry a 30-millimeter, or 9-inch, armor-piercing
gun in its nose.

In a telephone interview from Oregon, Mr. Walden said it was possible Mr. Dilger
had been developing the cannon under a Pentagon contract.

''He is in the field of testing and development on his own,'' he said. ''This
may be a weapon that he has been working on. He has advised the Congressman on a
number of weapons.'' Mr. Walden said Representative Smith was on vacation and
could not be reached today.

Representative Smith, who flew combat missions in Vietnam, was deeply interested
in military affairs and weapons procurement, Mr. Walden said. ''We rely on a
number of different people who are experts in this very technical field,'' the
aide said.

Congressional Parking Permit

The Arlington police said Mr. Dilger, 54 years old, was arrested after he fled
the gasoline station in the damaged flatbed truck, which bore a Congressional
parking decal.

The police would not describe the parking permit, but one Administration
official said he believed the decal allowed entrance to a parking lot for the
Rayburn House Office Building.

Mr. Walden said he did not know why Mr. Dilger might have tried to flee. ''I'm
sure he was very scared,'' he said. ''Something like that happens and your mind
runs in a million directions. It's a very tragic event.'' He said investigators
from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms had not tried to interview Mr. Smith.

After the explosion, the police said, Mr. Dilger jumped into the truck and sped
off, leaving behind the Texan, Joseph R. Donahue, whom the Arlington police was
a former Army helicopter pilot.

The police said they arrested Mr. Donahue near the gasoline station, and Mr.
Dilger was caught in the truck about three miles away.

Mr. Dilger and Mr. Donahue were charged with manufacturing, transporting and
firing an explosive device. A magistrate in Arlington freed the two men Tuesday
night after they posted bail, $5,000 for Mr. Dilger and $1,000 for Mr. Donahue,
the police said.

Both the F.B.I. and the firearms bureau are trying to determine whether Mr.
Dilger and Mr. Donahue broke any Federal law.

Built Weapon Himself

Charles Myers, a friend of the former colonel's who runs a local military
research and lobbying group, Aero Council, said tonight that Mr. Dilger built
the antitank weapon in hopes of selling it to the Government for use by
pro-American groups outside the United States.

Mr. Dilger, who lived in Xenia, Ohio, traveled to Washington several times in
recent months to meet with officials from Government agencies, Mr. Myers said.
Mr. Myers, a former Navy pilot, said he did not know the agencies that might
have granted interviews to Mr. Dilger.

''Maybe the C.I.A.,'' he said. ''Maybe the Army.'' At the meetings, he said, Mr.
Dilger tried to market the cannon as an inexpensive, lightweight antitank
weapon.

Mr. Myers said he introduced Mr. Dilger to Mr. Donahue, whom he knew through
Aero Council, about two months ago.

Mr. Bell, the Arlington police spokesman, denied reports that Mr. Dilger was
trying to sell the gun to Mr. Donahue. Another law-enforcement officer, who
spoke on condition that he not be identified, said it appeared Mr. Dilger was
not planning to use the weapon in the United States.

'Brave and Honorable'

''We don't think they were planning to rob a bank or to use this in a
politically motivated incident here,'' the official said. He would not comment
when asked whether the weapon might have been intended for use elsewhere.

Mr. Walden said the Congressman and Mr. Dilger had served in the Air Force in
Vietnam, although in different units.

''I've known Colonel Dilger since we flew together in the Air Force,'' Mr. Smith
said in a prepared statement released from a district office in Oregon. ''He is
a brave and honorable American war hero who served this country with
distinction. All of us who know Bob are deeply concerned about what has
happened.''

Mr. Dilger's 18-year-old son, Eric, said in a telephone interview from his home
in Xenia that his father ran a local stereo and electronics store and did
financial consulting work for several large corporations, including Honeywell
and Mattel.

The young man said he did not know why his father had the weapon. His father, he
said, was apparently in the Washington area to attend a financial seminar
sponsored by a friend from the Air Force.

Eric Dilger said he did not know Mr. Donahue and had no idea why the two men
were together at the gasoline station on Tuesday.

Calls to a Virginia lawyer who reportedly represents Mr. Dilger were not
returned today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of gasoline pumps damaged by antitank gun in Virginia (AP) (page
A14)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 21, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Money for the Grunt

BYLINE: By Drew Middleton; Drew Middleton retired as military affairs
correspondent of The New York Times in 1984.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 716 words


Congress has been whittling away at the Strategic Defense Initiative and other
less esoteric but expensive items in the Administration's defense budget.
Significant reductions in S.D.I., popularly known as ''Star Wars,'' have been
approved by committees in both the House and Senate, but a bit more than $3
billion remains in the program.

This massive expenditure on a system that's still in the research stage, coupled
with the growing costs of aircraft carriers and their escorts, nuclear-armed and
-powered submarines, and other expensive military items, raises an important
question about the future: Where does the infantryman, the marine, the sailor
-the lowest and most important common denominator in war - emerge in all this
spending?

Perhaps the military situation in France and Britain provides a hint. In both
countries defense budgets include large sums for the modernization of strategic
and tactical nuclear forces. The expenditure involved is so great that British
and French conventional forces anticipate (accurately, I believe) sharp
reductions in the comparatively modest amounts they will need to deploy new
tanks, combat aircraft and anti-submarine vessels in the next five years.

It suits many to assume that in time there will be a major war between East and
West involving strategic nuclear weapons. Before buying that theory, however,
would it not be wise to look at the record? That record shows that, although a
prodigious amount of money and resources has been spent on nuclear weapons since
1945, the fighting has been done by conventional forces. Afghanistan, Vietnam
and Korea - the three major wars in which the superpowers have been engaged -
have been fought without nuclear weapons.

The central figure in all those wars is the one most forgotten by statesmen when
they put a billion dollars on this program or a billion and a half on that. In
this country we called him the doughboy, then the G.I. and, finally, the grunt.
The gob epitomized the Navy enlisted man. Whatever we called him, he was the
central figure in all our wars and is likely to remain so.

Without him you cannot hold captured ground or, in most cases, take that ground.
Without him you cannot run a ship or service an aircraft or land on a hostile
beach. Dashing pilots and bold tankers grab the headlines, but it is the
infantryman and his counterparts in the other services that fight and win the
wars.

As the reorganization of the military proceeds, more attention must be paid to
these forces and more money spent on their weapons. Progress toward that
reorganization has now reached a decisive stage. The House of Representatives
recently approved by a vote of 406 to 4 a reorganization of the Defense
Department's war-fighting commands.

This was a significant step. It means that the individual commander in chief in,
say, the Pacific or Europe has full command over the separate Navy, Air Force
and Army forces in that area and can select their respective commanders.

When the reorganization is completed, it is likely to produce resentment in the
individual services, chiefly in the Navy. Since World War II, that service has
operated, often with great distinction, almost as a separate defense force. With
its own aircraft, tanks and infantry furnished by the Marine Corps, surface
combatants and transports plus submarines armed with nuclear weapons, the Navy
had some justification for considering itself first among equals.

Now it is being said that, in the event of war, the commander of the Sixth Fleet
in the Mediterranean will probably not be under the command of the chief of
naval operations in Washington, but whoever is in command of American forces in
Europe. He, most probably, will be an Army general. Similarly, the Army forces
in the Pacific will almost inevitably be under the command of a Navy admiral.
This is bound to promote a great deal of jockeying to insure that each service
enjoys the prestige of holding at least one of the war-fighting commands.

This will not be good for the morale of the officer corps or for the planning of
national defense. But in any event, let us hope that in their arguments about
who commands, and where, the men with the stars on their caps do not forget the
men who eventually will do the fighting and the dying.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 21, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SANDINISTAS ASSAIL REAGAN'S THREAT

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 385 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Aug. 20


A Government spokesman said today that a remark by President Reagan that the
Nicaraguan rebels might have to ''take over'' unless Managua made political
concessions confirmed once again the real United States objective in Nicaragua.

''The Reagan policy is not only a threat to Nicaragua and Latin America,'' said
the spokesman, Carlos Fernando Chamorro Barrios, ''but also for the people of
the United States, who are being led toward a repetition of the Vietnam War in
Central America.''

''President Reagan is explicitly threatening the Government and people of
Nicaragua,'' he said.

Mr. Chamorro was responding to statements Mr. Reagan made in an Aug. 14
interview with the Mexican newspaper Excelsior, which was made public on
Tuesday.

In a telephone interview, Mr. Chamorro said the statements ''confirm that the
definitive goal of the American President is to defeat the Sandinista
Government.''

He warned that this would ultimately require the use of United States troops, a
step the Reagan Administration has said it is not contemplating.

Another Government spokesman, Angela Saballos, an official of the Foreign
Ministry, said Mr. Reagan's statements ''confirm what we have been saying for
years.''

''The United States has used a series of subterfuges to justify supporting
anti-Sandinista forces,'' Ms. Saballos said. ''The true goal has always been the
same, wiping us out.''

Mr. Reagan's statements did not draw formal reaction from Sandinista leaders.
The official newspaper Barricada, of which Mr. Chamorro is editor, reported them
without comment.

In the interview, Mr. Reagan said that if the Sandinistas did not reach an
accord with rebels, ''the only alternative'' would be for the rebels ''to have
their way and take over.'' The statement was the President's bluntest and most
explicit on the situation.

The Sandinistas have repeatedly vowed they will never negotiate with the rebels,
who have received millions of dollars in aid from the United States and are
likely to begin receiving $100 million more shortly.

NO POLICY CHANGE, U.S. SAYS

WASHINGTON, Aug. 20 (AP) - The State Department said today that United States
policy toward Nicaragua had not changed despite a remark by President Reagan
that appeared to go beyond previous Administration statements on the issue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 21, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

YOUNG PHILANTHROPISTS GIVE TO NONTRADITIONAL CAUSES

BYLINE: By KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1463 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


ANNIE HOFFMAN is far from being a silver-spoon, dilettante do-gooder. She works
hard - both at her pottery business and at giving away her money.

At her pottery wheel, Ms. Hoffman sees a link between the clay she is kneading
and her inherited wealth. ''Like working the clay, giving away my money freed me
from being bottled up inside and let the fizz out,'' she said.

Ms. Hoffman, who is 31 years old, contributes about $10,000 a year to the
Haymarket People's Fund, a regional foundation here that supports neighborhood
groups throughout New England.

She has also run some 10 Haymarket workshops for other wealthy people, most of
them in their 20's, who want advice about taking control of their inheritances.
The meetings, which discuss financial management and relationships with lawyers,
family and companions, among other topics, have attracted hundreds of young
participants.

''The phenomenon of young people with progressive political sympathies acquiring
money through the lottery of birth is becoming increasingly common,'' said
George Pillsbury, who helped found the fund in 1974, using his inheritance from
the family's baking fortune.

Fourteen community-based foundations have formed across the United States,
modeled on Haymarket and on Vanguard, which was started in San Francisco in
1971. Haymarket has become nationally known as a supporter of community groups,
defending the rights of low-income tenants, single parents and others who may be
disadvantaged. A group in Concord, N.H., Parents for Justice, seeks to improve
the status of welfare mothers.

Other such foundations include

North Star in New York, Crossroads in Chicago and, more recently, Live Oak in
Austin, Tex.

All were established with the assistance of young donors who advocate ''change,
not charity'' (a slogan adopted by many of the groups) and give money to groups
organizing poor people and to people discriminated against because of color,
sexual preference, physical and mental disabilities, religion or politics.
Although they tend to avoid political labels, many are outspoken critics of the
Reagan Administration's policy in Latin America and are active in the
antinuclear movement.

Ms. Hoffman said her experiences being wealthy made her sensitive to the
concerns of others. ''Some people feel horrible about having money,'' she said.
''They feel something is not right and question, 'What can I do?' Maybe I won't
see results in my lifetime, but giving away money allows me to be part of the
change.''

When she was 21, Ms. Hoffman received an inheritance left by her grandfather but
ignored it for years, letting dividends accumulate. She did this, she said,
because she could not accept the idea of having money. Then she discovered
Haymarket. Ms. Hoffman said she learned about social inequity firsthand when she
met another Boston artist, Carole Fer, at a pottery-glazing class. The two later
became partners, making and selling ceramics.

''We couldn't be more different,'' she said. ''I am as Waspy as one can get. I
went to private school and was so privileged and protected I was virtually
encased.

''Carole came from a Jewish family that survived the Holocaust, and she worked
as a waitress at night to the point of physical exhaustion. We talked a lot
about class issues, and I learned what survival meant for her and for me.''

Two years ago the artists purchased a corner store and opened ''Clayground''
with help from Ms. Hoffman's mother, Ruth, who later became a Haymarket
contributor.

Another substantial donor to Haymarket, 24-year-old Eddie Frazer, grew up in
Winnetka, Ill., and, although from a Protestant family, was drawn by her study
of Judaism to live at a kibbutz in Israel. She said she was impressed by the way
kibbutz members used their leisure time to fulfill themselves with music and
other cultural interests. In this country, she said, pressures to compete and
succeed are all-consuming and ''nothing is ever enough.'' She returned to the
United States and, for the first time, wanted ''to take hold and work with the
trust funds'' left by her father.

Miss Frazer discovered Haymarket while doing research on unconventional giving.
Last year, her philanthrophy amounted to $22,000.

Miss Frazer, who has taught English to Haitians in the Boston area, has also
advised college students about inheriting wealth, emphasizing that they need not
feel alone or secretive. ''I wish someone had talked that way to me when I was a
student,'' she said. ''I felt so isolated.''

Recently, Miss Frazer has begun searching for others willing to give away not
only income from their inheritances but also the principal.

David Pillsbury Becker, a curator at the Boston Fine Arts Museum, gravitated
toward Haymarket after receiving a letter in 1976 from his family's attorney
mentioning that Mr. Becker's second cousin, George, was ''giving away money in
Harvard Square.''

''It sounded wonderful,'' he said. Mr. Becker walked to Harvard Square, found
the Haymarket office two flights above a Chinese restaurant and introduced
himself to Mr. Pillsbury, saying, ''I like what you are doing.''

Haymarket attracted Mr. Becker partly because its grant-giving decisions are
made by a board composed of local activists. He gives away 60 percent of the
income from an inheritance left by his mother and father, who was a banker. For
10 years, he has supported Haymarket and environmental, arts and
homosexual-rights groups. ''I grew up isolated by birth because of the money and
later because I was gay,'' Mr. Becker said. ''I lived in a double closet as a
member of two minorities, one at the top of society and one near the bottom.''

As a college junior, with a $50,000 annual income, Mr. Becker habitually wore
denim jeans with holes. ''Yes, I felt guilty at the time about being rich, but
guilt is not very productive. Now I say, 'I'm gay and rich, and here I am. Can
we work together?' ''

Parents have tended to be supportive of their children's philanthropy. Mr.
Pillsbury's parents, political conservatives and generous, traditional donors,
took an advertisement in a Haymarket anniversary booklet picturing their son at
age 1. The advertisement said, ''You have touched the lives of so many including
your family'' with ''deepest pride and love.''

Mr. Pillsbury's sister Kathy, a graduate of Yale's School of Management, works
with Infact, a Boston group publicizing corporate ties to the nuclear arms
buildup, and assists at Haymarket. His sister Sarah, a film producer, maintains
an interest in Liberty Hill, a similar foundation she helped establish in Los
Angeles.

Mr. Pillsbury's mother, Sally, had first suggested he contact Obie Benz, who was
using his inheritance from his family's Sunbeam Bread fortune to create a
foundation on the West Coast called Vanguard. Recalling those early days, Mr.
Benz says Vanguard was the culmination of his years of community involvement and
political activism against the Vietnam War while a student at Middlebury College
in Vermont in the late 1960's.

At college, he organized an antidrug ''hot line,'' set up child care for
employees of the college, helped farmers with harvests and served on the State
Education Board. When he came into his inheritance, he was determined to support
groups ''too small, too radical or experimental'' to attract money.

Vanguard financed one of the country's first shelters for battered women and a
crisis center for rape victims. Mr. Benz also helped write a handbook about
alternative giving called ''Robin Hood Was Right.''

After years of full-time work to establish Haymarket and Vanguard, as well as
the Funding Exchange, an umbrella organization for the alternative
philanthropies, both Mr. Pillsbury and Mr. Benz have moved on to new
undertakings. Their foundations have prospered: Vanguard, started with $60,000
pulled together by Mr. Benz and a few friends, gave away $860,000 last year.
Haymarket's first funding board gave away $40,000; last year it distributed
about $400,000.

Mr. Pillsbury is now a development officer at Jobs with Peace, a group
advocating that military spending be lowered and some of these funds diverted to
housing, health, mass transit and public education.

Mr. Benz, now a film maker living in Manhattan, was nominated for an Academy
Award for ''Americas in Transition,'' a 1981 documentary attacking American
policy in Central America. Because he sees films as the most effective way to
influence large numbers of people, Mr. Benz is trying to put together $20
million to finance 10 low-budget films, some of them about social justice and
others in a lighter vein. All would be made in New York by young artists and
technicians with a stake in building an industry in that city, he said, adding,
''All it takes is money.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Annie Hoffman (NYT) (page C12)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

The Editorial Notebook;
The Tank Buster

BYLINE: By Nicholas Wade

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 403 words


The Army's antitank weapons leave much to be desired. Some force the infantryman
to stand for long seconds exposed to the tank's machine-gunners; others lack the
punch to penetrate Soviet tank armor. The Army's best hope is an unusual Air
Force plane that fires slugs of extremely dense depleted uranium. The two ends
of this story came into strange and fiery coincidence this week at a gas station
in Arlington, Va.

A retired Air Force colonel named Robert Dilger was arrested after a home-made
cannon in his flatbed truck accidentally discharged. The shell ripped through
the truck, demolished a gas pump and injured four. The appearances are not
improved by the fact that Colonel Dilger fled, but he seems to have been trying
in his own way to interest Washington in an antitank gun that works.

It's no surprise he was trying. Colonel Dilger led many missions over North
Vietnam without losing a pilot. Once he fired his missiles at a MIG and, when
all missed, is said to have rammed the plane with his own, forcing it to crash.
Later, he oversaw development of the uranium ammunition fired by the A-10
Thunderbolt.

Military reformers cite his performance as the way all military weapons should
be developed. The Pentagon's analysts preferred to have a missile, arguing that
a gun could never penetrate Soviet tanks. Accountants said the shell could not
be produced for less than $20 a round. Colonel Dilger threw out the Air Force's
rule book and told contractors to go ahead and make the ammunition any way they
pleased as long as it could penetrate 2 1/2-inch armor.

The result is two slightly different shells that cost less than $15 a round, are
made under contracts that are competed for each year and have an 80 percent kill
rate.

Despite the success, Colonel Dilger was passed over for promotion. He quit the
service in disgust but retained his interest in tank-busting weapons. Five
programs have been started and stopped since 1970, when the Army concluded that
its antitank weapons were of marginal use; still nothing works.

Colonel Dilger spent his own time and money to develop a lightweight antitank
gun. He hoped it would help Afghan guerrillas fight Soviet armor. If it worked
there, maybe the Army would be interested. The accident at the Arlington gas
station is a devastating setback, both for him and for his hopes of giving
American soldiers an effective defense against Soviet tanks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EFFORT TO DEPORT SCHOLAR BRINGS CALLS FOR CHANGE

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD D. MAY

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 913 words


When Federal authorities released Choichiro Yatani Wednesday, saying they would
no longer seek to deport him as a Communist, that apparently ended the matter
for the 40-year-old doctoral candidate and teacher.

But many civil libertarians, legal experts and politicians say the case
illustrates the need for reform of the laws and procedures that determine who is
barred from entering this country, the grounds on which entry is denied and the
rights of those accused to defend themselves.

Mr. Yatani, who denies ever having been a Communist, is by no means the first
person to be labeled by the Government as an ''undesirable'' based on beliefs,
background or associations. State Department and Immigration and Naturalization
Service ''lookout lists'' include some two million names.

In recent years, a number of well-known figures - from the left-wing Colombian
writer Gabriel Garcia Marquez to the right-wing Salvadoran leader Roberto
D'Aubuisson - have been refused visas to the United States. Also on the lists
are people suspected of crimes, homosexuality, mental illness or carrying
venereal disease.

'Normal Family Man Victimized'

But the Yatani case ''illustrates how even a normal family man can be victimized
by the laws as they now stand,'' said Arthur Helton, a director of the Lawyers
Committee for Human Rights. ''This sort of thing may be happening to a lot of
people.''

Representative Barney Frank, a Massachusetts Democrat who is author of a bill
aimed at changing current immigration law, said: ''It's the one area in which we
are clearly in violation of the Helsinki Accords on freedom of travel for those
with different ideological beliefs. It makes America look bad.''

An Immigration and Naturalization Service official, Scott Blackman, countered
that he viewed the Yatani case as ''an isolated circumstance.'' And a spokesman
for the State Department - which revoked Mr. Yatani's visa based on charges that
he belonged to the Communist or communist-affiliated party, then Wednesday
agreed to waive objections to his admission -said yesterday that he, too, saw
this case as ''pretty much of an anomaly.''

''In 1985, we issued 250,000 visas with waivers, so it certainly is not an
unusual thing.'' said the spokesman, James Callahan.

Civil libertarians say the key issue is whether an individual's beliefs and
associations should be grounds for barring him from the United States, as the
McCarren-Walter Act of 1952 allows.

Evidence Not Disclosed

In Mr. Yatani's case, he steadfastly denies that he is or ever was a Communist,
radical or subversive.

The State Department has refused to disclose the evidence or sources on which
its charges are based. A Japanese law-enforcement official in Tokyo, however,
said that in the 1960's Mr. Yatani was campus leader of a left-wing extremist
group called the Socialist Student League.

''I was not a leader or even a member of this organization,'' Mr. Yatani said
from his Port Jefferson, L.I., home yesterday.

''I was the president of the student body,'' at Doshisha University in Kyoto, he
said. ''I was elected to that position and it was a democratic organization. I
belonged to no other groups.''

In 1968, as Japanese records show and Mr. Yatani admits, he was arrested along
with other students after a demonstration in nearby Osaka against the war in
Vietnam. Mr. Yatani was placed on probation for a year on charges of interfering
with Government officials and a minor weapons violation, though the nature of
the violation is not clear.

No Records of Activities

The Japanese law-enforcement official said there are no records indicating that
Mr. Yatani was involved in any political activities after his 1968 arrest.
Evidently, however, the arrest and the allegation that Mr. Yatani belonged to
the Socialist Student League resulted in his inclusion on the lookout lists.

Mr. Frank said that once an individual's name is on the lookout lists, getting
it removed is almost impossible.

''The only sure way to get off that I know of is to become Prime Minister of
Canada,'' he said. He was referring to Pierre Elliott Trudeau, the former
Canadian head of state for 16 years, until 1984. who he said ''was on the list
before he was elected.''

Mr. Frank said that, under his bill, ''You would have to show that an individual
actually did something wrong or intended to before you could put him on the
list.''

When Mr. Yatani first came to the United States in 1977, he was detained for
three days, then granted a waiver allowing him to enter the country. The waiver
was allowed by the McGovern Amendment of 1977, which, according to Mr. Helton,
provides that no one should be barred from the United States ''on ideological
grounds alone.''

Lack of Hearings Faulted

Civil rights activists say they are also concerned with the Government's failure
to provide people such as Mr. Yatani with a hearing or other forum in which to
contest or rebut charges.

They note that had Mr. Yatani entered this country as an illegal alien, rather
than obtaining a valid visa and presenting himself for inspection at a port of
entry, he would have been entitled to hearings and appeals in front of
Immigration and Federal court judges.

''A person from a friendly country should have access to information regarding
the charges against him,'' said John H. Marburger 3d, president of the State
University of New York at Stony Brook, the institution where Mr. Yatani studies
and teaches.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Choichiro Yatani with his wife and son (NYT/Tony Jerome)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 23, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE SCREEN: 'CHAINSAW 2,' A SEQUEL

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 635 words


To leap into the teeth of the matter, whatever claim ''The Texas Chainsaw
Massacre'' may have had to be a cut above the general run of slicers and dicers,
its sequel, ''The Texas Chainsaw Massacre, Part 2,'' which opens today at the UA
Twin and other theaters, is not first-grade chopped steak.

The odd looking but playful little family of Cook, Chop-Top and Leatherface, who
uses his chainsaw on everything, even ice cubes, is at it again, doing a
Southwestern version of ''Sweeney Todd.'' They operate ''The Last Roundup
Rolling Grill,'' whose specialties owe a lot to the high-quality ingredients the
boys obtain. ''I got a real good eye for prime meat,'' brags Cook. In search of
them comes Lieutenant ''Lefty'' Enright (Dennis Hopper), a former Texas Ranger
who lost some of his kin to the band in the 1974 movie and appears to have found
God in the interim.

A female disk jockey named Stretch (Caroline Williams) gets caught up in the
doings and spends most of her time running and screaming, as women in these
movies are inclined to do. After some reasonably gory preliminaries, the action
is concentrated in an elaborately lighted cavern decorated with skeletons and
stuff, real grandiose Guignol, where Cook makes his award-winning chili.

The recipe of Tobe Hooper, who directed both movies, is to toss in pinches of
humor while the saws roar and the blood and guts flow. With the help of Tom
Savini, the special makeup-effects man, Leatherface (Bill Johnson) does a
takeoff on Charles Laughton as Quasimodo, advancing on Stretch with his chainsaw
before him. ''All right,'' says Stretch, ''let's talk about it.'' As Stretch's
co-worker, a harmless galoot named L.G., is having his skull bludgeoned, his
hands and feet wave comically. Leatherface, called Bubba by his relatives, hums
as he skins L.G. When what's left of L.G. tries to help Stretch out of one of
her many tight spots, he says, ''I guess I'm falling apart on you, Honey.'' Cook
is constantly making asides about the difficulties of a small businessman in
this society, what with high taxes and everything. He comforts Stretch, who is
about to be served up to the family's 130-year-old grandpa, ''You're the first
girl Bubba's brought home for dinner.'' The jokes and the skin-and-bones script
were put together by L.M. Kit Carson. Such are the ingredients of cult movies.

Mr. Hooper's direction is a little sloppy. You can see that the hammer that is
supposed to knock Stretch out never touches her. And his timing is off. Scenes
go on too long; Leatherface keeps waving his chainsaw in the air to little
effect, and Chop-Top doesn't have much to do except scratch his head for lice,
hop around and yell crazy stuff about Vietnam and napalm. It takes forever for
Lefty Enright to make his appearance for his climactic chainsaw buzz-up with
Leatherface. But no matter how adeptly ''Chainsaw 2'' was put together, it would
remain just another exploitation flick for fans who get a tingle from watching
blades slash into flesh and innards peep out.

Maybe I'm being finicky. No doubt you have to develop a taste for this sort of
dish, like for tripe.

THE CAST: THE TEXAS CHAINSAW MASSACRE PART 2, directed by Tobe Hooper; written
by L.M. Kit Carson; photographed by Richard Kooris; edited by Alain Jakubowicz;
music by Mr. Hooper and Jerry Lambert; produced by Menahem Golan and Yoram
Globus; released by the Cannon Group Inc.

At the UA Twin, Broadway at 49th Street;

Manhattan Twin, Third Avenue at 59th Street; Quad Cinema, 34 West 13th Street;
86th Street Twin, at Lexington Avenue.

Running time: 95 minutes. This film has no rating. Lieutenant Enright...Dennis
Hopper; Vanita (Stretch) Brock...Caroline Williams; Leatherface...Bill Johnson;
Cook...Jim Siedow; Chop-Top...Bill Moseley; L.G. McPeters...Lou Perry.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Dennis Hopper in 'The Texas Chainsaw Massacre, Part 2''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 23, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Books of The Times;
Jim Crow in Uniform

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 748 words


STRENGTH FOR THE FIGHT: A History of Black Americans in the Military. By Bernard
C. Nalty. 424 pages. The Free Press/Macmillan. $22.50.

This is a success story. A success achieved largely by blacks aided by
farsighted whites, men like John J. McCloy, Gen. James H. Doolittle, Adm. Elmo
R. Zumwalt, Gen. Matthew B. Ridgway. The story also mirrors the long, often
agonizing struggle of the black in the military, which is part of our society,
to achieve equality, which basically means a readiness to fight and die for the
Republic on the same terms as white warriors.

Black participation in the military, as Mr. Nalty emphasizes in this
even-handed, well-documented book, did not begin with the volunteer army or even
the Vietnam War. There were blacks in Washington's ragged armies and aboard the
warships and privateers that bedeviled the British in the War of 1812. They got
little credit. But they were there.

The blacks' struggle to win a role in the military moved by fits and starts,
mirroring their struggle to win equality in American life. The Civil War
produced black units on the Union side and the wars on the plains saw four black
regiments, two of infantry and two of cavalry, fighting Indians.

The cavalry regiments figured conspicuously in the campaign in Cuba in the war
with Spain.

Yet throughout this period and later, black soldiers suffered from the Jim Crow
laws and customs that prevailed in many states. They were barred, as were black
civilians, from restaurants and hotels. As late as World War I, a black general
confided to a white friend that he could eat at only one restaurant in white
Washington.

Black soldiers suffered, too, from ingrained white attitudes. Their mentality
and education insured, it was said, that they could not serve in technical arms
of the military, such as the artillery. But put them to work building roads and
cooking meals and they were all right.

The Navy was the most serious offender. Although some blacks served valorously
in the Civil War and the Spanish War, the Navy resisted their enlistment except
as servants or in shore establishments. The Marines took their line from the
Navy.

World War I changed little. Black units of the Army, some serving with the
French, did well. But there was an antipathy among general and flag officers at
the time toward blacks as soldiers or sailors, and that antipathy lingered for
50 years. World War II, the greatest conflict in which the United States has
ever been involved, marked the start of the change.

The cold, sharp brain of John J. McCloy, then Assistant Secretary of the War,
discerned, in Mr. Nalty's words: ''The Army had to make use of America's black
citizens . . . a potential military asset. The opportunity to serve overseas, he
was convinced, would create a sense of purpose among blacks, raising the morale
of servicemen and civilians.''

Doolittle, then a lieutenant general, went further. He suggested the abolition
of segregation in the Air Force, saying the solution ''is to forget they are
colored.''

War, the great arbiter, forced the Army to use combat troops to fill the gaps
torn in American ranks by the German offensive in the Ardennes in December 1944.
Black units, still segregated, were thrown in to help stop the Germans. They
fought well. Some broke. But so did some white units.

The forces were segregated in Korea, desegregated in Vietnam. In Korea, one
black unit behaved badly. In Vietnam, black troops, now desegregated, fought
well and took a high percentage of casualties. In both wars, there were
black-white incidents behind the lines.

War in Vietnam was accompanied by major movements by blacks in the United States
toward greater equality. Those who led these movements, as Mr. Nalty points out,
could claim that men of their race were daily making the supreme sacrifice for a
system that thus far had denied them a fair share.

Desegregation of the military was followed by the institution of all-volunteer
services in which blacks play a significant role. Yearly, as I can attest from
frequent contacts, that role has become more accepted by white commanders, and,
significantly, the number of black officers has risen.

The proportion of first-time black enlistments in the services is now at about
19 percent, with the Army having the highest percentage, about 26 percent.

Written with precision and in a quiet tone, ''Strength for the Fight'' is the
best book thus far on a delicate, difficult and divisive problem.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bernard C. Nalty

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 23, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SCHOLAR WILL TRY TO CLEAR NAME FROM VISA LIST

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD D. MAY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 803 words


No longer facing the threat of deportation, the Japanese scholar Choichiro
Yatani says he now intends to fight to clear his name of the State Department
charge that he was a Communist.

He and the civil libertarians who have volunteered to assist him say that, by
pressing the case, they will raise serious questions about the legality and
philosophy behind the ''lookout lists,'' the computer indexes of individuals the
Government considers undesirable and ineligible to enter the United States.

''The list is a black hole,'' said Theodore Ruthizer, one of Mr. Yatani's
lawyers. ''Once you fall in, you can't get out.''

Mr. Yatani, a 40-year-old doctoral candidate in social psychology at the State
University at Stony Brook on Long Island, was released Wednesday after more than
six weeks in detention. Yesterday, he was formally given his student visa, which
included a State Department waiver of objections to his presence on American
soil.

Charges Not Withdrawn

But the Government has not withdrawn its charges and Mr. Yatani's name remains
on the lookout lists of both the State Department and the Immigration and
Naturalization Service. So should he leave the country once his visa expires, he
could be denied re-entry again.

''Very little is known about the lists because the Government has been very
secretive about them,'' said Steven R. Shapiro, a staff attorney for the New
York Civil Liberties Union.

''This may be a good opportunity to learn more,'' said Lucille Loiselle, special
assistant to Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan. Mr. Moynihan, a New York Democrat,
agreed yesterday to assist Mr. Yatani's lawyers in their efforts to have his
name deleted from the lists.

According to a State Department spokesman, James Callahan, the Automated Visa
Lookout System, as that agency's list is officially known, contains information
on about two million individuals excluded for reasons that fall within 33
different categories.

Politics Said Rarely Cited

The vast majority of those on the list, Mr. Callahan said, are ''suspected of
applying as tourists while actually seeking to enter the United States as
immigrants.'' Others on the list include convicted criminals, terrorists and
those with infectious diseases.

''Probably no more than 50,000 names are listed because of membership in
subversive organizations, terrorist activities, espionage or a history of
Nazism,'' Mr. Callahan said.

He would not say how a name gets on the list. But other Government officials
said that information provided by local authorities, the Central Intelligence
Agency and diplomatic reports can all result in an individual's name appearing
in the computer.

Apparently, Mr. Yatani was included after his arrest along with a number of
student radicals in a 1968 protest against the Vietnam War in Osaka, Japan. Mr.
Yatani denies he ever belonged to any radical organization.

One Government official said yesterday that ''in the 1950's and 1960's, a lot of
names were put in without a lot of checking on who they were.''

Those listed on ideological grounds generally remain on the lists ''until the
age when the average lifetime would end,'' Mr. Callahan said.

Removal Easier for Radicals

Getting one's named removed from the list earlier appears to be simpler for an
individual who had actually been a radical than for one wrongly accused.

A former radical can go to a United States Embassy or consulate abroad and
submit documents showing that he resigned from the organization in question at
least five years earlier and has publicly renounced it.

But an individual who, like Mr. Yatani, claims never to have been a radical must
establish his nonmembership in any organization and his nonparticipation in any
subversive activities.

''It's a classic McCarthy situation where somebody stands up and says 'I have a
list and you're on it,' '' Mr. Shapiro said. ''But he won't say how you got on
it or how you can get off it.''

Beliefs Called Immaterial

Representative Barney Frank, the Massachussetts Democrat who has written a bill
that would change immigration law, said that in his view it should not matter
what Mr. Yatani's beliefs are. ''We should only worry about keeping out those
who would do damage to the United States by breaking laws or spreading
illness,'' he said.

Early next week, Mr. Moynihan is expected to request that the State Department
remove Mr. Yatani's name from the list. If they do not, said Ms. Loiselle, ''our
next request will be for access to the information so that Mr. Yatani can rebut
it.''

If that is also denied, said Arthur Helton, a director of the Lawyer's Committee
for Human Rights, he said a lawsuit would be filed.

Mr. Helton said he could not estimate the chances for success. ''I don't think
this has been tried before,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. DATA SAID TO CONCLUDE SOVIET MISTOOK KOREAN PLANE

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1540 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 23


The South Korean airliner shot down by the Soviet Air Force in 1983 was not on
an espionage mission, but the Russians, in a series of blunders, believed they
were attacking an American reconnaissance flight, according to a magazine
article.

The article, which will be published next month in The Atlantic Monthly, is
based on a review of American intelligence data and on interviews with Soviet
officials. It concludes that the plane penetrated Soviet airspace because of
navigational errors by the Korean Air Lines crew and not, as the Soviet Union
contended, because it was on an espionage mission.

The evidence gathered by American intelligence, which has not been made public,
also contradicts the United States' initial contention that the Soviet Union had
knowingly shot down the airliner, killing the 269 people aboard.

The article is drawn from a new book by Seymour M. Hersh, a journalist who has
reported for The New York Times on corruption in Panama and on intelligence
topics and who uncovered the My Lai massacre in Vietnam for an independent news
agency.

Mr. Hersh investigated the South Korean airliner incident for two years and was
invited to the Soviet Union in May 1984 for interviews with high officials,
including Marshal Nikolai V. Ogarkov, then Chief of the General Staff, and
Georgi M. Korniyenko, then a First Deputy Foreign Minister.

The Soviet officials told Mr. Hersh that they were giving him the Soviet side of
the story in the hope that he would also investigate what they contended was a
Central Intelligence Agency role in the matter.

The question of what happened to K.A.L. Flight 007 has been a matter of dispute
in the press and in books. Some accounts contend that the plane was part of an
intelligence operation since it flew over sensitive Soviet installations.

According to the Atlantic article, American listening posts intercepted the
initial Soviet communications related to the airliner's intrusion, but the
information was not analyzed until hours later, when it was too late to warn the
plane.

The intercepted information reportedly showed that Soviet radar operators had
confused the airliner with an American plane on an electronic surveillance
mission, that Soviet jet fighters were unable to find the airliner during the
first of two penetrations of Soviet airspace and that the fighter that fired the
fatal missiles did not follow orders to make a visual identification before
attacking.

A Reason for Confusion

The article quotes intelligence officials as saying that some of the confusion
was understandable in view of the heavy traffic of American military
reconnaissance flights in the area.

The information intercepted by the United States is said to include recordings
of phone calls by Soviet military officials and videotapes of Soviet radar
screens.

The article says that the National Security Agency, which has responsibility for
intercepting communications, recorded a conversation in which a Soviet military
official on the Pacific coast called Moscow over an open telephone line to ask
about shooting down an American military intruder.

''He was obviously under pressure to get a decision,'' the article quotes an
analyst as saying. ''He was not going to shoot down an American aircraft without
getting some authorization from higher headquarters.''

U.S. Referred to Civilian Target

After the incident, the United States accused the Soviet Union of having
deliberately attacked a civilian plane. President Reagan said in a speech four
days after the incident, ''There is no way a pilot could mistake this for
anything other than a civilian airliner.''

The article says that American intelligence subsequently found that a succession
of Soviet errors had led to just such a miscalculation.

The article attributes the straying of the Korean airliner to mistakes in
programming its navigation system.

The device, which was installed in the 1970's, is reliable, but not failsafe.
According to the article, American investigators sent to South Korea after the
incident learned that three other K.A.L. flights, from Honolulu, Paris and
Anchorage, had been aborted because of misprogrammings.

Quoting from a theory developed by Harold H. Ewing, an airline pilot, the
article says the errors on the ill-fated airliner could have begun with mistaken
coding of a single digit in the coordinates needed for navigation.

Captain Ewing's account, the article says, matches navigational details in
secret United States Government studies of the plane's flight path. Captain
Ewing, who has flown the route to test his hypothesis, did not have access to
intelligence data.

As it happened, when the airliner first mistakenly entered Soviet airspace over
the Kamchatka Peninsula, an American reconnaissance plane was in the area hoping
to gather data on an expected Soviet missile launching.

Missile-Watching Program

The article says the reconnaissance flight was part of an intelligence program,
in which refitted Boeing 707 planes, designated RC-135's, gather telemetry data
from missiles while flying figure eights just outside Soviet airspace and on the
edges of Soviet radar coverage.

On the night of Aug. 31, the Soviet missile launching was canceled and the
American reconnaissance plane returned to its base, the article says.

Soviet officials have contended that the airliner and the reconnaissance plane
flew side by side. But according to the article, the National Security Agency
found no such evidence.

According to American analysts, the Soviet commander apparently first mistook
the airliner for a reconnaissance flight that would be expected to remain
outside Soviet airspace. For this reason, the Russians waited several minutes to
launch interceptors, too late to find the airliner as it crossed Soviet airspace
over Kamchatka, the article says.

A complicating factor, monitored by the Americans, was that a Soviet radar post
had initially given the interceptor pilots incorrect coordinates for pursuing
the airliner.

There were different American explanations for the Russians' apparent belief
that they were dealing with an American intelligence plane.

According to the article, officials of the National Security Agency told
Congress in secret briefings that the Russians had tracked the RC-135 back to
its base and had assumed that the airliner was part of another American program
aimed at intercepting communications.

But the United States Air Force's Electronic Security Command, which is a
military component of National Security Agency operations, contended that Soviet
radar operators had been confused by the proximity of the RC-135 and believed
they were tracking the same plane into Soviet airspace.

Soviet Radar Found Faulty

The article says Soviet radar is not effective in distinguishing sizes of
planes. In some instances, Soviet forces have mistakenly attacked Soviet
airliners, the article says. It adds that the United States appears to be
keeping a better record of Soviet radar tracking than do the Russians themselves
because the United States routinely videotapes intercepted Soviet radar
information while the Russians rely on the memory of operators. The article says
this may explain why the Soviet Union and United States differ on the flight
path of the airliner at key points.

After having crossed Kamchatka without being challenged, the airliner reportedly
was picked up again on Soviet radar screens over the Sea of Okhotsk as it was
heading toward Sakhalin Island, the site of military installations.

This time, Soviet fighters were able to get close, but in the dark, according to
the article, they were still not certain about the identity of the plane they
had under surveillance.

In fact, ground controllers asked a fighter pilot to activate an automatic
system that would show whether the plane was Soviet. The Boeing 747 has a
similar device identifying it as an airliner, but that device can be triggered
only by ground stations.

A Call Is Placed to Moscow

It was during this pursuit over the Sea of Okhotsk that a deputy air defense
commander in Khabarovsk tried to place a call to Moscow to reach Marshal
Aleksandr I. Koldunov, commander in chief of Air Defense Forces, according to
the article.

The officer in Khabarovsk tried three times to use scrambling equipment before
giving up and speaking in the clear. As a result, a project of the National
Security Agency to monitor the use of the Soviet scrambling equipment was able
to pick up part of the conversation before the scrambler suddenly became
effective.

American intelligence also was said to have intercepted a message from the
deputy air defense commander in Khabarovsk reminding a Sakhalin air base of the
rule requiring visual identification of an intruder before firing.

Soon afterward, a Soviet fighter pilot was told by the Sakhalin commanders to
signal with cannon fire and, if this was unsuccessful, to attack the plane.

''Oh my God!'' the pilot was said to have exclaimed, according to the article,
which gave the original Russian expression as ''Yolki-palki!''

No visual identification had been made when the missiles flew and the pilot
radioed back the words: ''The target is destroyed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of relatives of Japanese passengers who died when Korean Air
Lines Flight 007 was shot down dropping flowers near crash site in September
1983 (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

F. PALMER WEBER, 72, IS DEAD

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 36, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 239 words

DATELINE: CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va., Aug. 23


Frederick Palmer Weber, a prominent labor and civil rights activist in the
1940's who later helped organize business people against the Vietnam War, died
Friday. He was 72.

Mr. Weber, who lived in Charlottesville, died at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester,
Minn., after a long illness.

A native of Smithfield, Va., Mr. Weber attended the University of Virginia and
taught philosophy and economics there while studying for his doctorate in
philosophy, which he received in 1940.

He was also an advisor to the university's Carter G. Woodson Institute for the
Study of Afro-American and African Studies.

Mr. Weber served on a committee in the House of Representatives that
investigated the concentration of economic power in the South, and also worked
for the Senate's War Mobilization Committee.

In 1944 he became research director of the Political Action Committee of the
Congress of Industrial Organizations.

He was elected to the national board of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People in 1946 and in 1948 became southern regional
director of the Progressive Party.

Mr. Weber was a co-founder of Businessmen Against the War in Vietnam.

At the time of his death he was a financial advisor and investment banker. He
was called the ''Renaissance man of Wall Street'' in an article published in
Barron's magazine on June 5, 1967.

He is survived by his wife, a brother, four sons and nine grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW CHIEF SEES WEST POINT UPSWING

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 44, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 743 words

DATELINE: WEST POINT, N.Y.


The United States Military Academy's new superintendent, Lieut. Gen. Dave R.
Palmer, reached for a nautical image. The 184-year-old institution, he said, was
a ship that had been through a storm but now was sailing in calmer waters.

''I probably should find a better analogy,'' he said, ''but a decade ago we were
buffeted by a cheating scandal, the admission of women, a major expansion of the
corps of cadets, the aftermath of Vietnam and Congressional leaders looking at
our appropriations.''

Gens. Andrew J. Goodpaster and Willard W. Scott Jr., who headed West Point for
the last nine years, ''got us out of the storm,'' General Palmer said, ''but
with our sails in tatters, water aboard and cracks in the rudder.'' Now, the
Academy was headed for a new horizon.

It will be a more complex future, he said, with the introduction of a
computer-aided educational system preparing cadets for ''a more technologically
advanced Army,'' but one enriched by an upbeat national mood and a widespread
feeling of patriotism.

Cadet Generation Gap

General Palmer, who took command here four weeks ago, said he had never been
able to define a generation gap, ''but there is one.'' Today's cadets were more
like those who reached maturity in the 1950's and early 1960's, rather than
those influenced by Vietnam in the late 1960's and the 1970's.

''The class of 1990,'' he said, referring to this year's entering plebes, ''is
in the best sense of the word a chauvinistic group, very patriotic,'' with
''dedication, eagerness for a challenge and a willingness to accept
discipline.''

The director of admissions, Col. Pierce Rushton, said the quality of entrants
continued to grow each year, with 88 percent of the new class in the top fifth
of their high school graduating classes. All but a few had varsity letters and
half were team captains.

The Academy this year had its second-largest candidate pool, 13,000 applicants,
and a record number of fully qualified candidates, 2,822. West Point offered
admission to 1,830 men and women and enrolled a class of 1,333.

'Beast Barracks' Attrition

Nearly 100 have dropped out, a predictable attrition during the rigorous summer
training known as ''beast barracks,'' leaving 1,096 men and 140 women. But
overall retention remains at record levels, Colonel Rushton said, with the last
two graduating classes representing 70 percent of those who entered, compared
with 63 percent and 64 percent in previous years.

Some problems remained, with debates still raging in the Army over the role of
women, General Palmer said. They are trained for combat, he said, ''but we have
laws precluding women from being in combat.''

''We've never come to grips with that as a nation,'' he said.

The Army also has had to cope with career marriages, or ''joint domicile
assignments,'' a problem that also exists in civilian life. Admissions officers
say that women are more than ever attracted to the Academy, and that it is no
longer necessary to seek qualified entrants through special recruitment, as
remains the case for black, Hispanic and other minority group applicants.

The General's Background

General Palmer, who said he had a background of ''academic experience and muddy
boots,'' is a 52-year-old graduate of the Academy. As a ''tanker,'' he served in
armored units and spent two years in Vietnam, three years in the Pentagon, and
commanded the First Armored Division before coming to West Point.

He taught military history here, and said he would do so again, the first
superintendent to spend time in the classroom, as far as is known. He is also
the author of three books, one on the West Point's role in the Revolutionary
War, another on General Washington and the last on Vietnam, ''from a soldier's
standpoint,'' he said.

''It's the only one that's made a lot of money, and I gave it away,'' he said,
''to my wife's aggravation.'' He turned the proceeds of ''Summons to the
Trumpet'' over to the West Point Fund at the time of publication because it was
critical of the Johnson Administration and he did not want to be accused of
writing it ''to turn a dollar.''

He said he saw his job now, as in the past, as being ''to develop leaders.'' If
they serve their 30 years in a time of peace ''they'll all retire as Lieutenant
Colonels and Colonels and never be known,'' he said, but if there is a war, the
same people will retire ''and be turned into statues, as you see all around
here.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lieut. Gen. Dave R. Palmer (NYT/Suzanne DeChillo)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Advisers, Then and Now

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 501 words


True, Central America isn't Indochina, and Nicaragua isn't Vietnam. But old
memories stir uneasily at the news that the Reagan Administration plans to send
''advisers'' to train Nicaraguan rebels.

The advisers won't actually fight, officials insist. They won't be allowed
within 20 miles of Nicaragua. They won't even cost an extra nickel, the
officials add, since the costs will be covered by the $100 million voted by
Congress to help the ''contras.'' All this is disclosed as President Reagan
asserts that the rebels may have to ''take over'' if the Sandinistas refuse to
make political concessions.

When a President climbs onto the ''adviser'' track, his own advisers are sure to
stress that the risks are minimal. So it was with Dwight Eisenhower, who in 1954
committed the United States to training South Vietnamese troops. But when John
Kennedy took over in 1961, hundreds of American advisers had been unable to turn
the tide, and that fall he sent Gen. Maxwell Taylor to Saigon to find out why.

The Taylor mission proposed increasing the number of advisers and deploying
three squadrons of helicopters, to be flown by Americans, making the advisory
group ''something nearer - but not quite - operational headquarters.'' In an
''eyes only'' report to the President, the general also urged sending 8,000
troops, ostensibly to deal with a flood then devastating the Mekong Delta.
Another cable advised the White House that South Vietnam is ''not an excessively
difficult or unpleasant place to operate'' and that North Vietnam ''is extremely
vulnerable to conventional bombing.''

The Taylor reports neglected or minimized the political realities that propelled
an insurgency against an unpopular ally. But the President embraced the
general's proposals, and by mid-1962 the number of advisers had grown to 12,000.
In a flying visit through Vietnam, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara was
impressed by apparent progress: ''Every quantitative measurement . . . shows
that we are winning the war.''

There were some dissenters, among them George Ball, the number two man at State,
who warned that the Vietnam War might one day require as many as 300,000
American troops. ''Well, George,'' the President responded, ''you're supposed to
be one of the smartest guys in town, but you're crazier than hell. That will
never happen.'' Then it was Lyndon Johnson's war, and before long there were
nearly twice that many American troops in Vietnam.

None of these recollections are intended to force a parallel. North Vietnam was
the Prussia of Asia. Nicaragua is smaller, weaker and remote from the Soviet
Union or China. What's disturbingly similar is how discreetly the Administration
ups the ante, how it scorns political ambiguities, how it believes that calling
its client rebels ''freedom fighters'' will make them so. In a prescient moment,
John Kennedy confided to an aide after ordering more advisers to Vietnam: ''It's
like taking a drink. The effect wears off, and you have to take another.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COURT NOMINEES CANNOT PLEAD JUDICIAL PRIVILEGE;
The Case of William X

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 426 words


To the Editor:

What if Jesse Jackson had been elected President in 1984 and his choice for
Chief Justice of the United States was a former Black Panther, William X, who
had graduated at the top of his class from Harvard Law School and had been a
black activist in Chicago in the 1960's? And what if witnesses, including a
former assistant United States attorney, testified that they saw him harass
elderly white women delegates to the 1968 Democratic National Convention in his
role as a black activist?

Would it be enough for this black nominee to say he did not do it? Would it be
sufficient for the defenders of this black nominee to say he may have directed
loud and intimidating language at these elderly white women delegates, but did
not violate the legal definition of disorderly conduct?

What if Senator Jesse Helms had asked Mr. X at his confirmation hearings what he
thought about the Vietnam War in 1968? Would it be a plausible answer for Mr. X
to say, ''I can't remember what I thought about the war,'' or, ''I did not have
an opinion about the war at that time because I thought there were arguments on
both sides of the Vietnam issue''?

Those of us who lived through the scars of that war, particularly the many who
fought it in the streets of Chicago and on the campuses, remember with great
clarity what we thought. Some of us have altered our views, but it is impossible
to believe that a young Chicago activist would not have had an opinion on
questions central to his activities.

Those of us who are discrete and insular minorities hope that the person who
will lead the Federal courts will look beyond the technical questions to general
notions of justice. A person who stands on his procedural rights may be a good
lawyer - although I would question even that - but he certainly is not fit to be
Chief Justice of the United States.

For the Senate, the Rehnquist vote is simply the case of William X, who
unrepentantly and defiantly told the Senate and the country a number of
unbelievable things. A Senator must vote against someone who engaged in attempts
to intimidate black and Hispanic voters and has refused to admit in hindsight
the error of his ways. Justice Rehnquist and his defenders have made much of
their commitment to a color-blind society. If the Senate is to adhere to the
true color-blind requirements of the Constitution, the Senate must treat William
X and William Rehnquist in the same way.

JEROME MCCRISTAL CULP JR.
   Assoc. Prof. of Law, Duke University
   Durham, N.C., Aug. 7, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WOMEN, BLACKS, SPOUSES TRANSFORMING THE MILITARY

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2693 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 24


In the 13 years since the United States ended the draft and returned to
volunteer military service, blacks, women and young married people have
transformed the nation's armed forces.

From World War II until 1973, when conscription ended, the services were male
preserves dominated by white officers and noncommissioned officers, and the
lower ranks were populated by single young men. #3 Changes in Military Life
Today, three changes have reached into every corner of military life:

* The armed forces, especially the Army, have carried racial integration further
than most American institutions. Charles C. Moskos, a sociologist at
Northwestern University who specializes in the study of military personnel,
calls it ''an American success story.''

* With women, the armed forces have embarked on an ambitious experiment that has
raised moral, political and practical questions. Even so, says Carolyn Becraft
of the Women's Equity Action League, ''The United States is far and away ahead
of other nations in making use of women in the military.''

* One-third of lower-ranking enlisted soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines are
married, and this has resulted in marked changes in service camaraderie,
discipline and housing. Coping with the needs of young families, says an Army
white paper, has become ''an institutional imperative.''

The Way Was Opened

While these changes had begun before 1973, the end of the draft and the post-
Vietnam distaste for the armed forces among young white men opened the way for
more black Americans and more women in both commissioned and enlisted ranks. And
the higher pay of the volunteer force attracted young married men who needed
jobs.

The consequences have especially affected military commanders leading troops.
Leaders once concerned primarily with preparing their forces for war must be
sensitive now to race relations, to dealing with women and to the needs of young
married people.

In integrating blacks, the armed services differ from civilian institutions in
that they can regulate behavior. ''Because we are a controlled society,'' says
Maj. Gen. Robert C. Oaks, a senior Air Force personnel officer, ''the Chief of
Staff can say, 'We are going to do this,' and it will happen.''

Thus the services have set up programs in race relations, appointed interracial
counselors and desegregrated housing and recreational facilities. Food in dining
halls and commissaries, products in post exchanges and music in clubs now take
blacks' tastes into account. Promotion boards have been screened for racial
bias.

The presence of women has caused greater changes in military life than nuclear
weapons have, says Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., the former Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff. ''We've taken a male institution in a very short period of time
and turned it into a coed institution,'' he says, ''and it has been a traumatic
exercise for us.''

Among the obvious changes, women require separate living quarters, different
sizes and shapes in clothing, different standards for physical training and
different medical services.

Then there is sex. Commanders worry about men and women distracting each other
on duty. Dating, or what military people call ''fraternization,'' has led to new
rules. That has led to complicated administrative problems when two members of
the service marry, when women in the military become pregnant and when a member
of the service is a single parent.

Combat Issue Undecided

Most perplexing of all has been defining the role of women in combat, an issue
far from decided. Underlying this are cultural questions: the place of women in
Western civilization; the instinct to preserve women to bear children, and
concepts of chivalry that date back to the Middle Ages.

Young married men and women have forced commanders to assume responsibilities as
surrogate parents. Some commanders grumble that they are warriors, not baby
sitters, but most say they must reassure young men, and occasionally young
women, worried about their families or the young people will neither serve well
nor re-enlist. Wives and children, moveover, have added to costs.

Commanders have set up networks in which the wives of senior people look after
wives of younger people. Family service centers help with finances, personal
safety and the hassles of moving.

In sum, relative simplicity has given way to a complicated military culture, but
one that more closely reflects American society.

Integration of Blacks Begun by Truman in '48 The integration of blacks into
military life began in 1948, when President Truman decreed ''equality of
treatment and opportunity'' in the armed forces. Before that, blacks had served
in segregated Army units or as mess stewards in the Navy.

In the Korean War integration proceeded slowly. In Vietnam it came to a halt
except in the rice paddies, where the fight for survival wiped out color lines.
In the last year of the draft, 1972, blacks comprised 11.1 percent of the armed
forces, or about the same ratio as in the American population.

The following year the services began actively offering equality in assignments,
schooling and promotions to attract black recruits. The ratio of blacks in the
armed forces rose to nearly 20 percent in the early 1980's, in contrast to 12
percent in the general population. Since then, it has leveled off at about 19
percent, mainly because more whites are also enlisting.

But the ratio varies by service. In the Army 27 percent of the soldiers are
black, as are 19 percent in the Marine Corps, both down slightly from the early
1980's. But the percentage of blacks has risen to 15 percent in the Air Force
and 12 percent in the Navy.

Those differences appear to reflect the numerous Army and Marine Corps positions
that can be filled by men or women of lesser skill, which blacks who enlist tend
to have, while the Air Force and Navy require people with technical skills.

Rear Adm. David L. Harlow, a senior Navy personnel officer, acknowledged the lag
in recruiting blacks. ''But we've really moved out in the last five years,'' he
said.

Similarly, the ratio of blacks in various ranks differs. Among the top
noncommissioned officers, 30 percent of the Army's sergeants major and 17.5
percent of the Marine Corps's are black. In the middle, 38 percent of the Army's
sergeants are black, as are 25 percent of the Marines' sergeants.

But in the Air Force, blacks comprise only 11 percent of the chief master
sergeants and in the Navy only 6 percent of the master chief petty officers.
Below that, 18 percent of Air Force staff sergeants and 13.5 percent of the
equivalent Navy rank, second-class petty officers, are black.

Fewer Black Officers

Among commissioned officers, the contrasts are sharper, with black officers
concentrated in the lowest three grades. Even so, only in the Army do black
commissioned officers reach the proportion of blacks in the population. At the
rank of colonel or the equivalent Navy rank of captain, only 2.6 percent of the
officers are black.

Recruiting blacks as officers has been difficult, according to personnel
officers. ''We're competing in a tough, competitive marketplace,'' said Admiral
Harlow. Industry, law schools and the professions seek able young black men and
women, and can pay better than the military.

Commanding officers in units of all sizes are responsible for making race
relations work. Brig. Gen. James Mead, commanding officer of the Marine Air
Station at Cherry Point, N.C., emphasized that leaders must be aware of
potential racial problems. ''As commanders,'' he said, ''if we don't pay
attention to these issues, there are ugly consequences.''

In everyday duty, officers and noncommissioned officers say, blacks and whites
work well together in training and operations. But off-duty social relations,
especially among older whites and blacks, can be distant.

Outside observers agree. ''The rule of thumb is that the more military the
environment, the more absent racial segregation,'' Mr. Moskos says. ''Racial
integration is stronger in the field than in garrison, stronger on duty than off
duty, and stronger on post than off post.''

For the long term, some critics of the volunteer force question whether it is
fair that the military has a greater proportion of blacks than society does.
They say that blacks might suffer greater casualties than whites in combat,
which would be morally and politically intolerable.

Defenders of the volunteer force argue that, in peacetime, casualties from small
operations like those in Grenada and Libya are so few as to be statistically
meaningless.

On the other hand, they say, the United States would be required to return to
the draft if the nation became engaged in a war the size of those in Korea or
Vietnam. In a fairly administered draft, they say, young men would be drawn
proportionally from all ethnic groups.

Women Edging Closer To Being in Combat The first women to serve in crews
controlling Minuteman 2 nuclear missiles descended to two command capsules 65
feet underground at Whiteman Air Force Base, Mont., on March 25.

Although women have served with men in Titan missile crews in teams of four, the
Titans are being eliminated and the Air Force has decided to have all-male or
all-female, but not mixed, crews of two for the Minuteman.

The Air Force thus took another step to define a place for women. The armed
forces have edged closer to placing women where they could be in combat. In a
nuclear war, women in Minuteman capsules would be prime targets and might be
among the first ordered to fire.

In conventional forces, Air Force women recently began serving in the military
police, who are armed like the infantry. Army women drive trucks that could go
close to combat zones and Navy women are aboard support ships that could be
targets in a conflict.

In Israel, women are subject to the draft but are restricted to noncombat
positions. In the Soviet Union, women in the armed forces are mostly nurses; a
few are administrators.

American law and military regulations forbid sending women into combat, meaning
that women may not carry rifles on offensive operations, serve aboard warships
or fly warplanes.

But as warfare has become more technical, skills have become more important than
strength. And new questions have arisen: If women can serve in missile control
centers, why not in submarines with ballistic missiles?

The reasons for not permitting that, so far, have been doubts by some military
and civilian leaders, male and female, that women have the physical or
psychological stamina to cope with the stress of battle.

Today, 10 percent of the 2.1 million people in the armed forces are women. But
there are differences among the services. Women comprise 11.9 percent of the Air
Force, which has a large support structure. All but 5 of 230 enlisted job
classifications are open to women.

In the Army, which also has a large support force, 10.3 percent of the soldiers
are women. Of 351 military occupational specialties, 302 are open to women. In
the Navy, 9.3 percent of the sailors are women. The Marine Corps, for which the
Navy provides most of the support force, has 4.9 percent.

For the last decade men and women in the service have struggled with workaday
issues of attitudes, discipline and social relations.

The attitudes of senior men seem to fall into three categories:

* Some believe women have no place in the armed forces. ''Their attitude,'' said
a young woman who is an officer, ''is that we should be home cooking and having
babies.''

* Others see female subordinates ''as their long-lost daughters,'' said another
young woman. A Marine colonel, asked if he would treat male and female
lieutenants the same if each made a mistake, said: ''No. I would brace that
young man, but I'd counsel the woman.''

* Still others have come to accept women. A third young woman said, ''More and
more colonels look at me as if to say, 'You are a lieutenant in the United
States Air Force and I expect you to do your job.' ''

But even officers who accept women are sometimes diffident about correcting
them. ''How am I going to tell a young woman that she needs a haircut or that
she had too much to drink in the club last night?'' a naval officer asked.

Fewer Problems With Women

Many men who are officers say women miss fewer days on duty, even with
menstruation or pregnancy, are less often absent without leave and get into less
trouble with drinking or drugs.

Socially, the services forbid commissioned officers to date enlisted people.
Dating is tolerated so long as it not between supervisor and subordinate.

Whatever the strictures, a steady increase in marriages between service members
has complicated the transfers common to military life. The services try to move
such couples to bases within 50 miles of one another, but are not always
successful. ''In that case,'' said a personnel officer, ''the needs of the
service come first.''

Marriage and Military: 'We Re-enlist Families' Around Hampton Roads, Va., is the
world's largest naval complex, with nearly 100,000 military people plus their
families. Into that military community 400 babies are born each month to couples
in which the average age of the father is 21 years and the mother 19.

That fact underscores the change in military life from the largely unmarried
force of earlier days to today's married force. In the era of the Vietnam draft
few enlisted people were married. Now about one-third are.

Just why so many young men and women in the military are married is not clear,
although it is connected to better pay. Some young men enlist because they need
a job to support a wife; others find that, once in the service, they can afford
to marry.

In any event, numerous young married people complicate the lives of commanders
at every level. They must help young people, many away from home for the first
time, cope with the demands of military life, strange surroundings, the strains
of marriage and new financial responsibilities.

Commanders do so not to be seen as nice but because if they do not their ships
or battalions or squadrons will be ineffective. A soldier confident that his
wife is secure back home pays attention to duty, but a sailor at sea may not
perform well if he is worried about his wife and baby in port.

Longer range, the ability of the military to retain experienced noncommissioned
officers often turns on how well families are looked after. ''The Navy enlists
sailors,'' says a naval officer, ''but we re-enlist families.''

The married force is also more costly, although the Defense Department does not
know how much more because of the many variables. The Pentagon says the annual
cost of pay and allowances to sustain a married Army sergeant come to $20,300,
in contrast to $15,200 for an unmarried sergeant.

And transferring a married sergeant with his family and their personal
belongings costs an average of $3,200, while the average cost for moving an
unmarried sergeant is only $750.

A critical issue to all commanders is what is called unit cohesion. An old Army
saying holds, ''Soldiers don't fight for their country, they fight for their
friends.''

Before, young soldiers and sailors spent their waking hours training or working,
lived together in barracks or aboard ship, ate together in the mess hall, and
used their meager pay for 25-cent movies on post or for carousing together in
town on Saturday nights.

Today, when the married soldier or sailor is not away in the field or at sea, he
lives at home, takes most of his meals there, uses his pay to support a family
and, according to many noncommissioned officers, causes fewer disciplinary
problems.

That makes some commanders worry that the troops will not form close bonds. But
others say that combat units spend so much time training in the field or at sea
that an erosion of unit cohesion is not a problem.

The first sergeant in a Marine company shrugs it off. ''Times change, and you've
got to change with them.''

Next: Black Americans, women and young married people talk about their lives in
the military services.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: First of two articles on how growing numbers of women, blacks and
married couples have changed the armed forces.

GRAPHIC: Graph shows the percentage of blacks and women in the armed forces each
year, from 1972 to 1986 (Source: Defense Department); Photo of Charles C.
Moskos, sociologist at Northwestern University (Jim Ziv); Photo of Sgt. Maj.
Emmett L. Byrum with soldiers taking primary leadership course (NYT.Zigy
Kaluzny); Photo of Gen. John W. Vessey Jr. (UPI); Photo of new recruits awaiting
processing at Fort

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PHILADELPHIA'S FESTIVAL: A FOLK RITE OF SUMMER

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 677 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, Aug. 24


As the driving rain turned gullies into wide streams and hayfields into
quagmires, Diane McGuiler ducked under a tarpaulin 15 years ago on the Old Poole
farm near here.

In the makeshift tent she found love - Charles Waller, a banjo player, guitar
picker and crooner. By the time the sun emerged, the couple were holding hands.
A little more than year later they were married.

This weekend Mr. and Mrs. Waller returned to the farm in the rolling hills of
Upper Salford. It had been transformed into a tree-lined amphitheater, where
nearly 20,000 people had gathered for what has become a rite of summer: the
Philadelphia Folk Festival.

''It's a way of remembering,'' Mr. Waller said. Each year he and his wife return
with their two girls, Leslie, who is 7 years old and Anne, who is 5.

''It's sort of a renewal, a reunion,'' he said. ''It brings the family together
and creates a history.''

Silver Anniversary

The three-day festival celebrated its silver anniversary this week with a
sell-out crowd. In the mercurial world of mass market music, where today's hit
is next year's golden oldie, the festival has become one of the country's
longest-running summer music events.

David Baskin, who has worked all 26 festivals and was co-chairman this year,
said: ''We've survived because we refused to change. We're locked into place.
People know what to expect and that there aren't going to be any downside
suprises.''

For Ralph Rinzler, an assistant secretary at the Smithsonian Institution who
performed with his band, The Greenbrier Boys, the festival was ''like putting on
an old familiar glove.''

''The truth of the matter is that there are traditions in America that will
never die,'' he said. ''They may come in and out of public focus, but they live
on.''

Twenty or so years after folk music joined the Beat Generation to produce the
counterculture movement, the twangy melodies and simple rhythms of folk music
are once again resonating at festivals. And record companies are once again
finding a market for folk singers, even if it is mainly for reissued classics.

A Family Affair

So it is no suprise that the festival, which is sponsored by the Philadelphia
Folksong Society, has become a family affair. Children bounce in time to the
music while their parents sing along with the performers.

''Tommy went down to the river and pulled me in,'' said a little boy, who was
leading his younger brother by the hand through the mud.

''That's all right, darling,'' his mother said. ''You can sleep in the dirty
jeans again. I don't care.''

The crowd seems to have aged, with Izod sports shirts now outnumbering tie-dyed
T-shirts and costly tents more visible than plastic tarpaulins. Officials say
most people now charge their tickets on their American Express cards.

In the past the festival's medical teams, drawn from area ambulance crews, set
up ''trip tents.'' There they treated people suffering from bad trips brought on
by hallucinogenic drugs. And Upper Salford officials, worried by reports of drug
use, nudity and sex at other concerts, canceled the festival's permit to use a
township park, forcing it to move to the adjacent farm.

'Burns, Bee Stings, Hatchet Cuts'

But now the first-aid tents are kept busy treating ''burns, bee-stings and
hatchet cuts - city folk making like country folk for the weekend,'' said Joan
C. Huhn, the festival's medical director. ''It's a vast improvement, an
extremely pleasant experience for everyone.''

Gerry Berman, who was dipping into a steamy sprout broth cooked over a wood
fire, said: ''The only real problem is carrying the beer from the parking lot.
It gets heavy.''

If the crowd has aged and become more sedate, so has its politics. ''It was more
political when there was a reason to be political - Vietnam,'' Mr. Baskin said.
''It's more fragmented now, more varied - Nicaragua, South Africa, Chile, child
abuse.''

''Sure it's political,'' Sigmund Finman, a stage hand, said. ''Some people in
the festival's administration are little more rigid than they need be.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

The Editorial Notebook;
Mr. Rehnquist's Opinion

BYLINE: By JOHN P. MacKENZIE

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 597 words


Supporters of William Rehnquist's promotion to Chief Justice have not yet
answered a serious charge against him: that he cast the deciding vote in a major
case that he publicly prejudged before going on the Supreme Court.

Prejudgment is obviously a heavy accusation. It is a judge's duty to withdraw
from a case when it crosses his or her present interests or prior judgments.
Acting on that duty, judges frequently recuse themselves, in lawyers' language,
leaving a case for their colleagues to decide. Failure to recuse oneself is a
breach of ethics.

The breach of ethics alleged against Justice Rehnquist occurred in 1972, just
after he joined the high Court. The case in question, Laird v. Tatum, challenged
surveillance of anti-war dissidents by Defense Department agents.

It was pending in the lower Federal courts in 1971, when Mr. Rehnquist was an
Assistant Attorney General. In fact, he appeared as the Nixon Administration's
witness in Senate hearings called on the issue by Senator Sam Ervin, who showed
the interest in privacy that he later displayed in the Watergate hearings.

As a witness, Mr. Rehnquist defended the spying. For one thing, he said, it had
ceased. For another, it hadn't hurt anyone. Sparring with Senator Ervin, he
denied that the free-speech rights of anti-war protesters had been chilled; the
protests remained strident. He told the Senator:

''My point of disagreement with you is to say whether, in the case of Tatum v.
Laird that has been pending in the Court of Appeals here in the District of
Columbia, that an action will lie by private citizens to enjoin the gathering of
information by the executive branch, where there has been no threat of
compulsory process and no pending action against any of those individuals on the
part of the Government.''

In context, he was saying that, contrary to Senator Ervin, he had concluded that
the suit should be dismissed because even if the spying had been illegal, it
hadn't hurt the dissidents. The Court of Appeals disagreed, ruling the case
should be heard. But then the case, like William Rehnquist, went to the Supreme
Court. With Justice Rehnquist in the 5-to-4 majority, the Court threw out the
suit on precisely the grounds Mr. Rehnquist had given Senator Ervin.

It certainly looked like prejudgment, and the losers petitioned for a new
hearing without Justice Rehnquist. The Court refused, however, and Justice
Rehnquist issued a memorandum, unique in Supreme Court annals, explaining his
refusal to recuse himself.

He denied any involvement in the case while serving as a Nixon Administration
official. In the hearing, he said, he and Senator Ervin had merely had ''a
discussion of the applicable law.'' The Rehnquist memorandum went on to quote
from another exchange with the Senator - but not the one cited above in which he
stated how the case should be decided. To this day, scholars find the memorandum
a seemingly reasonable pronouncement on ethics - until they find out about the
omitted quotation.

Why did the losers wait until they had lost before moving to disqualify Justice
Rehnquist? They said they feared offending the Court needlessly when it seemed
possible he would not participate without having to be asked. Senator Ervin had
urged caution on them, saying he was sure the Justice would recognize the need
to disqualify himself.

Senators who want to approve Justice Rehnquist for Chief Justice might say that
Laird v. Tatum represents a minor lapse in a brilliant career. So far, however,
they haven't said anything. They owe the public their ethical judgment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

F. PALMER WEBER, 72, IS DEAD

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 238 words

DATELINE: CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va., Aug. 23


Frederick Palmer Weber, a prominent labor and civil rights activist in the
1940's who later helped organize business people against the Vietnam War, died
Friday. He was 72.

Mr. Weber, who lived in Charlottesville, died at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester,
Minn., after a long illness.

A native of Smithfield, Va., Mr. Weber attended the University of Virginia and
taught philosophy and economics there while studying for his doctorate in
philosophy, which he received in 1940.

He was also an adviser to the university's Carter G. Woodson Institute for the
Study of Afro-American and African Studies.

Mr. Weber assisted a committee in the House of Representatives that investigated
the concentration of economic power in the South, and also worked for the
Senate's War Mobilization Committee.

In 1944 he became research director of the Political Action Committee of the
Congress of Industrial Organizations.

He was elected to the national board of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People in 1946 and in 1948 became Southern regional
director of the Progressive Party.

Mr. Weber was a co-founder of Businessmen Against the War in Vietnam.

At the time of his death he was a financial adviser and investment banker. He
was called the Renaissance Man of Wall Street in an article published in
Barron's magazine on June 5, 1967.

He is survived by his wife, a brother, four sons and nine grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 26, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

COURT FINDS F.B.I. HARASSED SOCIALIST GROUP UNLAWFULLY

BYLINE: By WILLIAM G. BLAIR

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 771 words


A Federal judge yesterday awarded $264,000 to the Socialist Workers Party, a
tiny Trotskyist group, as damages for harassment and rights violations by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation over a period of 18 years.

The party, which says it has about 2,000 members, had sought $40 million when
the civil suit against the Federal Government was begun in Federal District
Court in Manhattan in July 1973.

In a 210-page decision that was delayed by legal actions after he had presided
over a nonjury trial in 1981, Judge Thomas P. Griesa noted that the F.B.I. had
subjected the party to disruptive activities, surreptitious invasions of
premises and the wide use of informants between 1958 and 1976.

'No Legal Authority'

The judge held that there was ''no legal authority or justification for such
operations,'' which began after the party first came under Federal scrutiny
during the administration of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. The operations
reached their peak during the Vietnam War and ended in 1976.

He said the evidence had demonstrated that the F.B.I.'s actions had been
directed ''against entirely lawful and peaceful political activities'' of the
party.

Judge Griesa held that the F.B.I. had violated the party's First Amendment
rights of free speech and assembly and that the surreptitious entering of
premises had violated Fourth Amendment protections against unreasonable searches
and seizures.

Peter C. Salerno, deputy chief of the civil division in the office of the United
States Attorney in Manhattan, said he would have no comment on the substance of
the decision.

As for a possible Government appeal, he said this would be decided by the
Federal Solicitor General, Charles Fried, after he had studied the opinion.

Lawyer Sees Mixed Results

Leonard B. Boudin, the lawyer who defended the party during the first eight
years of the proceedings, said the significance of the ruling was that a court
had ''actually addressed the Government's counterintelligence program and held
that a political organization has a right to privacy.''

However, he added, that ''the amount of damages is not really proportionate to
the damage done.''

Judge Griesa dismissed on procedural grounds all but one of the party's other
damage claims, including those for electronic surveillance and three individual
claims. A fourth individual claim, by Morris J. Starsky, was dismissed on the
merits.

Mr. Starsky, a member of the party who lives in Cincinnati, said when informed
of Judge Griesa's ruling that it ''sounds like a victory'' for the party.

It would seem, he said, that ''a revolutionary socialist and Marxist party has
the same legal status and rights as anyone else to carry out its beliefs without
interference by the secret terrorist apparatus of the United States
Government.''

Mr. Starsky, who is 53 and retired with a heart disability, testified at the
trial that in the late 1960's he was active in the antiwar, civil rights and
labor movements and was ''a very controversial figure'' at Arizona State
University, where he was an assistant professor of philosophy.

He had maintained in his suit that an anonymous F.B.I. letter to the
university's committee on academic freedom and tenure led to his dismissal from
the faculty in June 1970. Judge Griesa ruled that Mr. Starsky had failed to
prove his point.

The judge also dismissed all but one of the party's claims for declaratory and
injunctive relief on the basis that there was ''no present or threatened
activity which warrants such a remedy.'' The exception involved certain
documents that had been illegally obtained by the F.B.I. The nature of an
injunction to limit their use will be determined in a later court proceeding,
Judge Griesa said.

The decision said the F.B.I. had paid $1.7 million to 300 members of the party
and 1,000 others to serve as informants during the investigation of the group as
a purportedly subversive organization.

The judge added, however, that there was ''no indication that any informant ever
observed any violation of Federal law or gave information leading to a single
arrest for any Federal law violation.''

The opinion said the program to disrupt the party, which included such methods
as anonymous letters and planted news stories, involved 46 operations carried
out in New York City, the party's national headquarters, and elsewhere.

During the trial Federal lawyers argued that the Government had the right to
''keep itself informed on the activities'' of groups that advocated
revolutionary change of the Government, ''even if such advocacy might be within
the letter of the law.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 26, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BLACKS AND WOMEN FIND ROADS FOR ADVANCEMENT THROUGH LIFE IN MILITARY

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2124 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 25


When Staff Sgt. Jacob I. Wills was a drill instructor at the Marine Corps basic
training base on Parris Island, S.C., in 1980, a white recruit from Georgia took
one look at him and said: ''What's this - a nigger in charge?''

Then he spat in Sergeant Wills's face. The sergeant, recounting the incident,
said he first ordered two other sergeants, his assistants and both white, to
stay away from the recruit because they were about to beat him up.

Next, Sergeant Wills laughed at the recruit - ''What else could I do?'' he said
- and called the military police, who took the recruit away. He was dismissed
from the Marine Corps shortly afterward, for misconduct.

For Sergeant Wills, that incident was something of a turning point in racial
relations within the Marine Corps. When he enlisted in 1973, he said, ''It was
'nigger this' and 'nigger that.' '' But in recent years, he said, the lot of
black marines has vastly improved. ''Now the letter of the law is enforced,'' he
said.

In the 13 years Sergeant Wills has been in the Marine Corps, he has been part of
a revolution in the armed forces. What was once a culture dominated by white
leaders, a preserve of males and a force of largely single men in the junior
ranks, has changed as more blacks, women and young married people have joined.

In recent months, dozens of discussions with blacks, women and young married
people in the service produced two distinct conclusions:

Many blacks and women feel they are better off in the armed forces than they
would be in civilian life; young married people say they could not have married
so soon as civilians.

However, many blacks and women say the services have not entirely lived up to
their promises of equal opportunity, with officers expressing more
dissatisfaction than noncommissioned officers on that score; for young married
people, separations from their families were sometimes more than they expected.

In particular, many blacks say they have found the services perhaps the best
equal opportunity employers in America. ''Today, we are head and shoulders above
civilian life in avenues to get justice,'' said Chief Master Sgt. Johnnie E.
Charles of the Air Force.  Charles C. Moskos, a sociologist at Northwestern who
has studied military personnel issues for 30 years, has written that ''blacks
occupy more management positions in the military than they do in business,
education, journalism, government or any other significant sector of American
society.''

Similarly, many military women say they are ahead of their civilian sisters in
responsibility and, especially, in wages. Men and women of the same rank receive
the same pay in the services. ''I've done a lot of things and had a lot of
opportunities to surpass my peers in civilian life,'' said Capt. Marianne F.
Rowland of the Army.

Young married people in the service, like their civilian peers, struggle to make
ends meet but seem pleased with the job security, medical benefits and
discounted prices in the post exchange.

Like Sergeant Wills, black noncommissioned officers in all services said in the
interviews that despite vestiges of discrimination they have a clear chance of
being promoted to the senior enlisted ranks.

But black officers were skeptical, many saying that discrimination has gone
underground and that they have often been overlooked for assignments that could
lead to promotion.

Among women, both noncommissioned officers and officers said they had seen
progress. But the officers said their careers were hampered because they were
excluded from combat and thus from senior command positions. Blacks Find Avenues
For Gains in Military Gunnery Sgt. William D. Brown, who is black, was drafted
into the Marine Corps in the Vietnam War and decided to stay because the corps
''was something I could grow into - no one was telling me that this was
something I couldn't do.''

Sergeant Brown, on duty at the Marine Air Station at Cherry Point, N.C., said he
found the Marine Corps ''something of a cult.'' Wherever he went in uniform, he
said, a former marine would come up to shake hands ''even if he was the biggest
bigot in the world.''

For Yeoman 1st Class Gregory D. Lewis, the Navy was a way out of Mississippi. He
did not have the money for college, so he enlisted for two years thinking he
would go back to school later. After 13 years in the Navy, he said: ''Here, I
can make this work. I would not have done any better on the outside.''

Nonetheless, life in the Navy had been a struggle that white sailors did not
have to share, he said at the naval base in Norfolk, Va. ''I've had to prove
myself to my superiors: I can read, I can spell, I can run this office.''

Yeoman Lewis found a difference between what superiors said and what they wrote.
''A lot of times, I've been told: 'Outstanding job. Attaboy.' But the written
markings were a lot lower. All the ghosts came out of the closet.'' Black
noncommissioned officers said they sometimes had trouble getting white
subordinates to obey orders. ''You can't let being in a minority handicap you,''
said Signalman 1st Class Wayne E. Bursey of the Navy said. ''But sometimes you
have to fight to be accepted.''

On the other hand, he said black sailors occasionally sought favors. ''They'll
say: 'We're both black, so give me a break.' When I don't give them a break,
they hate me.''

At Maguire Air Force Base, Senior Master Sgt. Titus Andrews said: ''There will
always be an underlying current of racial tension, but most of the outdated
ideas are out of the Air Force. It's gotten more sophisticated; it's not a
missile fired at you.'' Black Officers Voice Praise and Criticism Among the
black officers, Lieut. Col. Melvin P. Smith Jr., an officer in the Adjutant
General Corps at Fort Dix, N.J., said, ''The Army has been better than anything
I saw growing up in the South.'' He came into the Army in 1964 through the
Reserve Officers Training Corps at Virginia State University, a predominately
black school.

Even so, he said, ''A lot of ideas haven't changed; they've just gone
underground.'' Although he had been selected for promotion to full colonel
himself, Colonel Smith pointed to the few black officers who had made that
grade. Among the reasons, he contended, was the ''faint praise'' with which
white officers often rated black subordinates.

Lieut. Col. Paul Lewis, the provost marshal, or chief of police, at Fort Dix,
said another obstacle confronting black officers was the competition perceived
by white officers. To those officers, he said, ''I am an aggressive, articulate
officer, and I am threatening.''

Black naval officers gave their service mixed reviews. Lieut. Marvin E. King,
who graduated from the Naval Academy in 1978, a class with 44 blacks among 1,000
graduates, said, ''The black Navy officer is still looked on as a novelty.''

''If you're white, you can be one of the boys,'' he said. ''But blacks are
different; you still have something to prove.''

Lieut. Col. John D. Hopper of the Air Force was one of five blacks who graduated
from the Air Force Academy in 1969. He observed: ''The Air Force has done a
better job of providing a structure that allows a person to do his best. It
hasn't been a perfect opportunity, but as much as can be mandated by public law,
the chance is there.''

First Lieut. Joe L. Winbush left rural southwestern Virginia to enlist in the
Marine Corps and come up through the ranks to become an officer. ''It would be
naive to say that you have not run into someone who is prejudiced,'' he said.
''But in the Marine Corps, we don't look at you as black or white, we look at
you as green.'' Lack of Acceptance Key Problem for Women Women as
noncommissioned officers said their greatest problem has been gaining acceptance
by men, either as superiors or subordinates. Many women said that lack of
acceptance was a more frequent form of sexual harassment than overt advances.

Getting male subordinates to follow orders has sometimes been difficult. Petty
Officer 1st Class Carol L. Denson said at the Norfolk Naval Base in Virginia,
''Some of the men are afraid of having women in positions of authority.''

''It's hard to assert your authority,'' she said, ''because the men will go
around you to a male superior, and he'll take their side.''

A Marine Corps sergeant, Alicia D. Thompson, said that male subordinates used to
try to take advantage of her. The sergeant, who is black, said: ''I haven't
suffered any prejudice because of my race but I've experienced prejudice for my
gender.''

''Not any more,'' she said. ''When I give an order to a Pfc. I say 'please', but
there's no doubt about what I want done. And if it's not done, we're going to
have a little talk.''

Like many women in the service, Sgt. Graciela M. Nollner, another marine, has
been troubled by gossip. When she invited marines who worked with her in the
motor pool to her backyard on a Saturday afternoon for Mexican food and beer,
she said, rumors flew. After that, she invited a married couple whenever she
asked people to her place.

Senior Master Sgt. Ruth A. King said women had slowly become accepted in her 19
years in the Air Force. She said that male noncommissioned officers expected
more of female subordinates now and women had less need to prove themselves
before being given responsible work.

When Lieut. Comdr. Dana S. Koch entered the Navy in 1973, she was among the
first women commissioned in the volunteer force. Although women in the Navy have
come a long way since then, she said, they still have not arrived, mainly
because of the law that excludes them from combat, nor did she see much chance
of that changing. ''My folks in Texas are just not going to let that happen,''
she said.

Lieut. Col. Suzanne Phillips of the Air Force said, ''I have trouble with the
perception of being a token and not being taken seriously.'' She found that
especially true when she reported to a new base until she had won the confidence
of her commanding officer.

An Army captain, Ruth E. Thomas, found her peers in the Corps of Engineers
resentful. ''Engineers do not like women in their corps,'' she asserted. ''It
hurts their macho image.'' When the engineers would not give her command of a
company at Fort Belvoir, Va. - a job she needed for promotion to major - she
said she paid $1,000 out of her own pocket to move to Fort Dix where she was
given command of a training company.

First Lieut. Joan E. Stubbs of the Marine Corp found older male officers had
trouble dealing with women, looking upon them as daughters. She recalled a
colonel who put his arm around her shoulders one morning and said: ''Honey, you
sure did a good job last week.''

The lieutenant said she had to think fast so as not to give him or other marines
the wrong idea. ''Sir,'' she said firmly but politely, ''I am not your honey, I
am Lieutenant Stubbs.'' Special Problems For Young Couples Cpl. Randall L.
Kaster of the Marine Corps and Airman 1st Class Richard Y. Merrell of the Air
Force were both married in their late teens to hometown girls, Corporal Kaster
just before he finished high school and Airman Merrell just afterward. Then they
enlisted.

Like young civilians, young military people struggle with housing and finances.
Corporal Kaster had been stationed at the Naval Air Station in Meridien, Miss.,
where he and his wife lived in a trailer, and at Camp Pendleton, Calif., where
housing was expensive.

But when his first tour ended, Corporal Kaster received a $16,000 bonus to
re-enlist because the Marine Corps was short of aviation maintenance clerks. He
was also given less expensive base housing at the Cherry Point Marine Air
Station.

Airman Merrell, in his first enlistment, lived outside Maguire Air Force Base in
a small apartment that he complained was too expensive. Moreover, his wife could
not work because they had a new baby. But he expects to move into less expensive
base housing next year.

Corporal Kaster faced a problem common to many young men in the service: He was
often away from home, leaving his wife behind to cope with family matters. The
corporal said she had gotten accustomed to it, and the base's family service
center had helped.

But the Kasters now face a possibile new problem. The corporal has been told he
might be sent to Okinawa in Japan for a one-year tour in which he would not be
permitted officially to take his wife and baby becaue of the lack of living
space. ''She doesn't mind when I go off for two weeks or even a month,''
Corporal Kaster said. ''But the unaccompanied tour, she's really scared about
that.''

Because of his wife's feelings, the corporal said he might take his family to
Okinawa, even if he had to pay for their air transport and find a place for them
to live.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Second of two articles on how growing numbers of women, blacks and
married couples have changed the armed forces.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gunnery Sgt. William D. Brown

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 27, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING;
Destination America

BYLINE: By Wayne King and Irvin Molotsky

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 210 words


In less than four years, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial has become one of the
most visited of Washington's many monuments. But not all people who lost
relatives or friends in Vietnam can come to the capital, so a record of it will
be taken to them. After a brief display in Washington, a photographic exhibition
of ceremonial events at the monument will be taken on tour over three years by
the Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service.

The curator is Edward Ezell, who is also curator of the Smithsonian
Institution's armed forces history division. He said of the exhibition: ''It is
dedicated to all who served their country when called upon to do so. It is also
dedicated to those who lost someone close over there.''

The 70 photographs in the exhibition, taken by Smithsonian photographers, will
be shown Nov. 10-21 at the Russell Senate Office Building. Subsequent stops on
the still-incomplete itinerary are Airman Memorial Museum, Suitland, Md.;
Gallery on the Hill, Farmingville, L.I.; Washington Capitol Museum, Olympia,
Wash.; Georgia Southern College Museum, Statesboro, Ga.; Rock County Historical
Society, Janesville, Wis.; Beloit Historical Society, Lincoln Center, Beloit,
Wis., and Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 27, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Military Life as Real Life

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 372 words


One big wound the Vietnam War inflicted on America was diminished public support
for the military, and one might expect today's all-volunteer services to be all
the more alienated. Yet as Richard Halloran reports in The Times, the isolation
may be breaking down. That's welcome news.

The coming of an all-volunteer force ended the mix of social classes that the
draft had brought. For millions of Americans, the military became a kind of jobs
program, a place for minorities and others who felt disadvantaged to seek upward
mobility. That inevitably encouraged a sense of isolation. Yet other changes in
military life now raise interesting possibilities. Today's military barely
resembles the male preserve of the era between World War II and 1973, when a
largely white officer corps presided over ranks filled with single young men.

Compared with society at large, today's armed forces are models of racial
integration. Responding to rising enlistments of women, the services have
learned how to make better use of them than have other nations' military forces.
And among their lower enlisted ranks one-third of service personnel are married,
a change apparently connected to the volunteer services' better pay.

Such changes complicate military life - in all-too-familiar ways. If an airman
is worried about his new baby, the Air Force has to worry about how to
accommodate young families. Women and blacks have to deal with new positions of
authority. Sexual relationships in the ranks distract from attention to duty.
Today's military commanders worry over the sizes of women's clothing, setting up
family support services and making sure the food in dining halls and the music
in clubs will appeal to blacks.

What all this means for troop morale, fighting readiness or leadership potential
remains to be seen. Blacks still have legitimate grievances and women are far
from achieving a fully equal military role. The debates over whether women
should be in combat and how broadly to define combat jobs remain unresolved.

But those questions ought not to detract from the fact that military life begins
to look more and more like real life. For both the military and the public whose
support it needs, that's an advance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 27, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Airline Workers Seek To Protect Seniority

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 258 words


To the Editor:

Your Aug. 4 editorial ''When Wages Fly Higher Than Airlines'' missed the major
point in proposed Federal legislation to protect airline employees - seniority.

When United Airlines purchased the Pacific division of Pan American World
Airways, 1,202 Pan Am flight attendants were ''sold'' along with the routes.
Each attendant had to face a hard choice: go to United or lose your job. The
more senior of the group could have found work on the East Coast or in London,
but the more junior would have been on the streets.

Immediately upon transfer, these flight attendants found themselves with less
seniority than United flight attendants who had started only days before. And in
the airline industry, seniority means everything, from the choice of the trips
you get to fly to the dates of your vacation. Pan Am attendants who had built
the Pacific division, who had worked the flying boats, introduced jet aircraft
and flown countless trips into Vietnam at the height of the Vietnam War now
found themselves with leftovers.

Labor protective provisions would not have required one additional penny in
wages or compensation, but rather a fair and equitable seniority integration.
Instead, a dedicated group of employees who had kept Pan Am alive through wage
concessions and productivity agreements now have to fight for the seniority
earned by building the very routes and passenger base that United needed.

BRIAN K. MOREAU
Vice President, Independent Union of Flight Attendants
  Burlingame, Calif., Aug. 14, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 28, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. COURT BLOCKS PLAN TO USE AGENT ORANGE FUND

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1069 words


A Federal court plan to distribute more than $200 million among 250,000 Vietnam
veterans and family members who claim injury from the wartime herbicide Agent
Orange has been blocked by an appeals court.

The stay came more than two years after settlement of a lawsuit by Vietnam
veterans against seven chemical manufacturers, and just two days before parts of
the plan were to take effect. The stay, ordered Tuesday in Manhattan by the
United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, was announced yesterday
by Federal District Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Brooklyn, in whose court the plan
had been set up.

In one of many strange twists in the eight-year-old case, the stay was sought by
lawyers heading the veterans' case. The lawyers argued that the distribution
plan failed to connect the veterans' ailments to their exposure to Agent Orange
and thus ignored a fundamental contention of the veterans.

Link to Chemical Disputed

The distribution was based on a key ruling by Judge Weinstein that it was
scientifically and legally unfeasible to connect the ailments to Agent Orange
exposure. Instead, the judge decided, awards would be made on the degree of
disability, regardless of cause.

But some veterans groups have contended that this undermined a fundamental
contention that their ailments were service-related. They also say they were
more eager to establish corporate and government responsibility for their
condition than to win a cash grant.

The veterans' lawyers asserted that contrary to Judge Weinstein's ruling, there
was enough evidence to link Agent Orange to ailments, and that those veterans
most likely to have been made ill by the herbicide should get the most money.

It was not clear from the terse order by three appeals court judges whether the
panel had serious objections to the plan or only wanted to review it.

Judge Weinstein, who had approved the plan and was to announce its first
financial managers Thursday, issued his own order postponing some work.

The judge's so-called special master for the plan, Kenneth R. Feinberg, a
Washington lawyer, termed the delay ''terribly unfortunate.''

Tears From a Veteran

The president of Vietnam Veterans Agent Orange Victims Inc., Frank McCarthy,
first learned of the delay from a reporter's telephone call and could not
contain his tears.

''I got no more cards,'' he said, choking back sobs. ''I got no more hope.''

He said that while proposed cash grants under the distribution plan were meager,
many veterans who were sick or had birth-deformed children had set great store
by a $50 million foundation to counsel and aid veterans and their families.

''I just can't believe it,'' he said of the stay. ''It's the worst scenario I
can think of. It's absolutely devastating. The implications are horrifying.''
Fund Set Up in 1984 At issue is the disposition of what was a $180 million fund
provided by seven Agent Orange manufacturers under the settlement of the
lawsuit, reached May 7, 1984. The fund, invested in time-deposits at Citibank,
has since grown to about $225 million.

If the stay had not been granted, Mr. Feinberg said, the first payments could
have gone out between Thanksgiving and the end of the year.

Despite the settlement, the chemical companies maintained there was no proven
connection between dioxin in their products and any illness or birth defect. The
seven companies are the Dow Chemical Company, the Monsanto Company, the Diamond
Shamrock Corporation, Uniroyal Inc., the T. H. Agriculture and Nutrition
Company, the Thompson Chemical Company and Hercules Inc.

No Statement From Companies

The companies have taken no position on the distribution of the fund and made no
statement yesterday.

The number of potential claimants was not known when the settlement was reached.
Since then, about 250,000 Vietnam veterans and family members have filed injury
claims. The number was far larger than anticipated and means that if the fund
were to be divided equally, each claimant would get no more than $1,000.

Instead, as devised by Judge Weinstein and Mr. Feinberg, about $50 million was
to go to a foundation to finance services to ill veterans and family members.

The remainder was to go to survivors of dead claimants and to those suffering
total disability. The death benefits would go to about 18,000 families over 10
years and average about $1,800, with a $3,400 top payment. Disability payments
would go to about 31,000 veterans, and average $5,700 with a $12,000 maximum.

'Chump Change'

''The majority do not want a welfare giveaway where chump change is distributed
to shut them up,'' said Victor John Yannacone Jr., a Long Island lawyer who
brought the original Agent Orange lawsuit in 1978 and later was eased out of the
litigation after disputes with other lawyers and the court.

Mr. Yannacone yesterday applauded the appeal court's stay as an opportunity to
redraft the fund plan to provide for a study of the causes of the veterans'
health problems.

The lawyers who were named by the court to head the veterans' class-action suit
as the Plaintiff Management Committee, and who filed July 31 for the appeal
court stay, were Neil R. Peterson and Eugene Locks of Philadelphia and Thomas W.
Henderson of Pittsburgh. None of the three returned phone calls to their offices
yesterday.

The stay was issued in an order by 3 of the appeals court's 17 judges, Ellsworth
A. Van Graafeiland, Ralph K. Winter and Roger J. Miner, who apparently conferred
by telephone.

Announcement Delayed

It came less than 48 hours before Judge Weinstein was to announce the names of
two banks he had selected to manage the investments of the fund and the
insurance company he had picked to review the claims.

After he learned of the stay yesterday, Judge Weinstein issued his own order
directing Mr. Feinberg ''to postpone distribution of funds to veterans and their
families.''

The judge also called a halt to any work by the companies to be named today. He
said, however, that work would resume within five days of the lifting of the
stay, if it were lifted.

Meanwhile, Judge Weinstein ordered that the computer center continue to maintain
files of claimants and that the 24-hour, toll-free numbers continue to dispense
information about the case to veterans and family members. In New York State,
the number is (800) 832-1303; outside New York it is (800) 645-1355.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 28, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ALASKA VOTERS REJECT GOVERNOR AND FORMER GOVERNOR IN A PRIMARY

BYLINE: By WALLACE TURNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 845 words

DATELINE: ANCHORAGE, Aug. 27


Gov. Bill Sheffield was defeated by a 2-to-1 margin Tuesday in the Democratic
gubernatorial primary by former State Senator Steve Cowper, a Fairbanks lawyer.

State Senator Arliss Sturgulewski of Anchorage won the Republican nomination.
Mrs. Sturgulewski led former Gov. Walter J. Hickel, 23,211 to 21,242, with 96
percent of the vote tabulated. Five other Republican candidates were in the
race.

While the plunge in oil prices has left economic concerns paramount in Alaska,
they were of secondary importance in the race for Governor as the candidates
took similar positions in pledging to try to create jobs.

Both Mrs. Sturgulewski and Mr. Cowper, who foiled Mr. Sheffield's bid for a
second term, favor exploration of the coastal plain of the Arctic National
Wildlife Refuge for possible petroleum deposits.

''We need to build a coalition in Washington to see that this 1.5 million acres
is explored and not frozen up as wilderness,'' said Mrs. Sturgulewski.

Murkowski Opponent Chosen

United States Senator Frank H. Murkowski, a Republican, was not opposed for
nomination to a second term. His Democratic opponent will be Glenn Olds,
president of Alaska Pacific University.

Representative Don Young, a Republican, will be opposed by Pegge Begich, widow
of Representative Nick Begich, who held the Alaska House seat until he was
killed in a plane crash 15 years ago.

By a 3-to-2 margin Alaskans approved an voter-initiated referendum that urges
prevention of nuclear war and calls for a freeze on nuclear weapons and
reduction in their numbers.

In a concession statement early today, Governor Sheffield spoke of the state's
economic difficultes caused by the drop in oil prices, which cut state income
from petroleum taxes and royalties by two-thirds and compelled him to cut about
$1 billion from the state budget this summer.

''When we had the billion-dollar shortfall,'' he said, ''it cost me a lot, but I
met the responsibility head on.''

Earlier cuts in state spending slowed Alaska's 15-year run of economic growth.
Oil companies have also cut back on field development programs and dismissed
workers. Home mortgage foreclosures are at an all time high here, and in July
unemployment was 10.6 percent, highest ever for Alaska in that month.

Mr. Cowper, 48 years old, said his victory came after a campaign in which ''we
were pushing a different line.''

''It has been customary for years for candidates to promise benefits paid for by
the state,'' he said, ''but we said it was necessary for Alaskans to adapt to
changes in the economy.''

Through his four years, Mr. Sheffield, 57, a millionaire hotel owner, has been
involved in controversy.

The issues ranged from criticism of his raising money to repay personal loans to
a State Senate public hearing on whether he should be impeached.

No Charges Against Sheffield

While the State Senate declined to bring charges, statewide television coverage
of the 1985 hearings hurt Mr. Sheffield's image.

He was alleged to have tried to steer a lease for state office space to benefit
a campaign supporter, which the Governor denied.

Mrs. Sturgulewski, 58, is a veteran of eight years in the State Senate. She
operates an accounting firm and has investments that make her a millionaire. Her
husband, an engineer in the Army Corps of Engineers, was killed in a 1968 plane
crash.

She said she believed Alaskans were recovering from the economic fears created
by falling oil prices. She said of campaign issues, ''Obviously it gets down to
where the state is headed, and jobs and the economy.''

At 67, Mr. Hickel now has lost three Republican primary campaigns for Governor
after winning his first one in 1966 as well as the general election.

He resigned in 1969 to become Secretary of Interior in the first Nixon
Administration, a post from which President Nixon dismissed him two years later
when the two disagreed about matters ranging from the Vietnam War to
conservation policies.

''I am at peace,'' Mr. Hickel said early today when his defeat became apparent.
Asked if he might run again, he said ''Wally Hickel is never through.'' ----
Results From Oklahoma OKLAHOMA CITY, Aug. 27 (AP) -Former Gov. Henry Bellmon
easily won the Republican nomination to succeed Gov. George Nigh, but David
Walters and Attorney General Mike Turpen will meet in a Democratic runoff.

In the senatorial primary, Representative James R. Jones handily won the
Democratic nomination Tuesday to challenge Senator Don Nickles, a Republican who
had no primary opposition in his bid for a second term.

With all the votes counted, Mr. Bellmon, also a former Senator, had 111,107
votes, or 70 percent, burying four opponents. Running a distant second was State
Representative Mike Fair, who had 33,211 votes, or 21 percent.

Mr. Nigh, a Democrat, was barred by law from seeking a third term.

In the six-way Democratic gubernatorial race, Mr. Walters had 235,013 votes, or
46 percent, while Mr. Turpen had 205,741 votes, or 40 percent.

Because neither received a majority, they will meet in a runoff Sept. 16.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Steve Cowper (UPI); Photo of Gov. Bill Sheffield (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 28, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, AUGUST 28, 1986

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 846 words


International

Tightened trade curbs on Libya are a major goal of the United States, according
to Reagan Administration officials. They said one possibility would be a ban on
imports of all refined products like gasoline made with oil from Libya. The
other, they said, would be to ban activities of American affiliates overseas
that do most of their business in Libya. [Page A1, Column 6.]

Syria pledged to Libya that any future attack against Libya would be viewed as
an attack against Syria, according to a communique issued in Benghazi, Libya,
after a meeting between President Hafez al-Assad and Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.
[A8:2-4.]

In the latest U.S. statement on Libya, the White House said its assertions that
Colonel Qaddafi was planning new acts of terrorism were based on ''a realistic
assessment.'' But senior White House officials again refused to disclose details
to support the assertions. [A1:6.]

Soviet proposals are inadequate to make acceptably safe the five major Soviet
nuclear plants similar to the failed Chernobyl unit, according to Western
nuclear experts who have reviewed Moscow's plans. [A1:5.]

The U.S. made a concession in bilateral negotiations with the Kremlin, according
to diplomats in Stockholm. They said Washington had agreed that NATO will give
to Moscow notice of troop movements from North America to Europe. [A3:1-2.]

Twelve blacks died in violence in Soweto township, South African authorities
reported. Some estimates by anti-apartheid activists put the toll higher.
[A1:1.]

An archdiocese, deploring apartheid, has announced it will divest itself of all
its holdings in companies that do business with South Africa. The action by the
Archdiocese of Baltimore would be the first such step by a Roman Catholic
diocese in the United States. [A6:3-6.]

Mexico protested to Washington that American antidrug agents were operating in
Mexico beyond the limits permitted by their diplomatic status. As a result,
Mexico said in a diplomatic note, American-Mexican ties are being harmed when
American agents encounter difficulties. [A4:3-4.]

National

Quotas for women and minority members are appropriate in choosing national
leadership, according to a ruling approved by the founders of the new Lutheran
denomination of 5.3 million members. The ruling requires that 10 percent of
members of the panels must be ''persons of color and/or persons whose primary
language is other than English'' and that 50 percent must be women. [A10:1.]

Amish farmers are thriving in Lancaster County, Pa., at a time when leading
agricultural economists have declared the small commercial family farm a relic.
By holding their size to 80 or 100 acres and mixing farm technology with hard
work, the Amish provide a vibrant farm economy. [A10:2-5.]

Gov. Bill Sheffield was defeated 2 to 1 in the Democratic gubernatorial primary
in Alaska by Steve Cowper, a lawyer and former State Senator. Republican voters
nominated State Senator Arliss Sturgulewski for Governor over a former Governor,
Walter J. Hickel. [A10:2-5.]

Metropolitan

Luring back high school dropouts is the goal of Dr. Frank L. Smith Jr., who took
over New York City's 111 high schools this month. He proposed abolishing the
traditional distinctions between grades 9 through 12. Under the plan, students
would graduate from high school by collecting a specific number of credits over
more than four years, or less. [A1:3-4.]

A jury acquitted John J. McLaughlin, a former chief of New York City's health
and hospitals agency, on charges of accepting bribes and of stealing $250,000
from a wealthy heiress in the first trial growing out of the city bribery
scandal. But he was convicted of four felonies, including grand larceny and
forgery, and a misdemeanor charge. [A1:2.]

The victim and suspect in the slaying Tuesday of 18-year-old Jennifer Dawn Levin
moved in the same Manhattan circle of rich and privileged young people, a circle
centered on underage drinking at an Upper East Side preppy hangout, according to
the police and people close to the case. But for the suspect, Robert E. Chambers
Jr., 19, it was also unemployment, academic futility and signs of cocaine abuse.
Mr. Chambers was arraigned this morning on murder charges. [A1:1-2.]

A Federal appeals court has blocked a lower court plan to distribute more than
$200 million among 250,000 Vietnam veterans and their relatives who claim injury
from Agent Orange. The unexpected action occurred more than two years after the
settlement of an eight-year-old lawsuit by the veterans against seven chemical
manufacturers. [A1:3-5.]

Abraham Hirschfeld cannot run in New York State's Sept. 9 Democratic primary
because of defective designating petitions, a state appeals court ruled. The
court affirmed unanimously a lower court's ruling that Mr. Hirschfeld, who seeks
to challenge the nomination of Stan Lundine for lieutenant governor, had filed
defective petitions. The state's highest court will decide today whether to hear
an appeal. [B1:5.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 28, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FROM 2 VETERAN HELICOPTER PILOTS, VALOR AT NIGHT IN A JERSEY RESUCE

BYLINE: By ROBERT HANLEY

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 616 words


Most nights, John Francis and Gary Kane, helicopter pilots since the Vietnam
War, shuttle gamblers between Manhattan and Atlantic City.

Both Mr. Francis, 39 years old, and Mr. Kane, 41, have worked the last two years
for Damin Aviation, a helicopter shuttle service based in Weehawken, N.J. They
say that compared to flying in jungle combat zones in 1969, the work is a snap.

But their routine was broken yesterday in post-midnight blackness, as they
touched down on a bog near Atlantic City's Bader Field to rescue the sole
survivor of a light plane crash that killed two people.

It began at 12:05 A.M. while Mr. Francis and Mr. Kane waited in Bader Field's
tiny terminal for passengers from the casinos who were late for midnight
flights. Word came to a small group in the terminal that there had been a crash
just north of the field.

A Man Found Wandering

Immediately, the two ran out to Mr. Francis's helicopter, a six-seat,
turbine-powered AStar, and flew north over Runway 11 toward the marsh. In the
glare of the helicopter's landing lights, they spotted the wreckage, about a
quarter-mile from the airport. The plane was upside down, its nose slightly
embedded. A man was wandering about 10 feet away.

''I tried landing just north of the plane, but it was too swampy,'' Mr. Francis
recalled yesterday. ''I picked it up again and circled around and got in about
20 feet south of the plane.''

''All around the area, there was water. But John managed to find a piece of firm
ground,'' Mr. Kane said. He said the patch was about 10 feet by 10 feet. ''It
took us a couple of minutes to set down.''

As the helicopter hovered just off the ground, Mr. Kane jumped out and ran over
to the man.

'Please Help Them Out'

''He was just standing there, sort of dazed,'' Mr. Kane said. ''He had gashes
over each eye and his left arm looked dislocated or broken. He kept saying,
'Please help. There's two in the plane.

Please help them out.' ''

The two pilots went to the wreckage. The plane's engine was thrust into the
cockpit, Mr. Kane said.''There was no sign of life,'' he said.

''I couldn't see the second person at all,'' Mr. Francis said.

As both were tending the dazed man's cuts, rescue boats from the Coast Guard and
the State Police Marine Bureau pulled up at the bog's edge from a bay. The
survivor was placed on a stretcher and carried back to the helicopter in
knee-deep water by the two pilots and four men from the boats.

He was flown back to a waiting ambulance at Bader.

Victims Identified

The survivor, William Eavers, 37, of Baltimore, was reported in critical but
stable condition yesterday at Atlantic City Medical Center with ''multiple
trauma,'' including a broken left shoulder.

Police identified the victims as the pilot, Raymond E. Bolander Jr., 48, of
Baltimore, and Mary E. Berends, 30, of Baltimore.

Mr. Bolander was trying to land at Bader when his plane, a single-engine Piper
Cherokee, crashed, the police said. A crosswind was sweeping the runway at the
time, according to Frank Ghiorsi, head of the New York office of the National
Transportation Safety Board.

Witnesses told authorities the plane hovered briefly above the runway, bounced
on an attempted landing, and then took off again before crashing.

Mr. Eavers told Atlantic City police of ''trouble landing with the wind,''
Detective Sgt. Steve Mangam said. Mr. Kane estimated that his flight with Mr.
Francis cut 30 minutes off the rescue time for Mr. Eavers.

''If in fact the two dead could have been saved by the pilots, they would have
been,'' Sergeant Mangam said. ''As for the injured man, he could have fallen
into the water and drowned if they hadn't come.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of helicopter pilots Gary Kane and John Francis (NYT/Burt Swayze;
A.J. Sundstrom)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 28, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Publication Is Delayed On Renata Adler Book

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 217 words


''Reckless Disregard: Westmoreland v. CBS et al.; Sharon v. Time,'' by Renata
Adler, originally listed for publication by Alfred A. Knopf next month, has been
postponed briefly while undergoing a legal review by the publishing house.

''The book is now in production and will be published at the latest in early
November,'' William T. Loverd, Knopf vice president and spokesman, said
yesterday.

A two-part article derived from Ms. Adler's book appeared in The New Yorker last
June. The article reported and analyzed the litigation in two unsuccessful libel
suits - Gen. William C. Westmoreland's action against CBS because of its news
documentary ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' and the action brought
by Ariel Sharon, Israel's former Defense Minister, against Time Inc.

Last month CBS News sent The New Yorker a 49-page letter setting forth what it
called ''errors'' and ''misrepresentations'' in Ms. Adler's articles. Time Inc.
also criticized the article as ''one-sided.'' This month The New Yorker
responded, maintaining that the author's ''facts are solid and her opinions are
supported by her facts.'' The Knopf spokesman said that ''Reckless Disregard''
had been undergoing a legal review independent of the CBS News and Time Inc.
complaints against the magazine article.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JERSEY HOUSE TIED TO MARCOS IS PUT UNDER MANILA'S CONTROL

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 582 words

DATELINE: TRENTON, N.J., Aug. 28


A judge gave the Philippine Government authority today to take control over a 13
1/2-acre estate near here linked to Ferdinand E. Marcos, the deposed Philippine
President, that has been stripped of most of its contents.

The Philippine Government also took steps to seek the deportation of Orlando C.
Dulay, a former Philippine Army colonel, provincial governor and supporter of
Mr. Marcos, who authorities said had escaped from his homeland, where he is
charged with several murders and election fraud.

The police said Mr. Dulay was found on the Lawrence Township property Tuesday,
removing trash bags from the garage.

Since March, the property has been under a judge's order that forbids its sale
and the removal of any contents until the judge can determine whether it was
bought with money Mr. Marcos is said to have stolen from his country.

In light of the discovery of Mr. Dulay on the property and the apparent removal
of furniture, paintings, crystal chandeliers and other items, Superior Court
Judge Judith Yaskin authorized the Government of President Corazon C. Aquino to
secure the property and change the locks.

Apparent Violation Cited

The judge said there had apparently been a violation of the March order, which
was issued by Superior Court Judge Paul G. Levy.

During a hearing today, the judge issued an order sought by Clive Cummis, a
lawyer for the Aquino Government, to Mr. Dulay to submit to questioning under
oath and to appear in court to explain why he should not be held in contempt of
the March court order.

Mr. Dulay declined to attend the hearing voluntarily and said he wanted to be
accompanied by a lawyer when he appears, Judge Yaskin said.

The judge also granted Mr. Cummis's request to take the sworn statements of two
New York men who Mr. Dulay said directed him to clean up the property at Mr.
Marcos's request.

Mr. Dulay originally told authorities that the men, Lee Dicker and Bob Steele,
were attorneys. After the police determined that they were not lawyers, he
described them as ''Vietnam combat buddies,'' Judge Yaskin said.

Mr. Dulay, a retired constabulary officer, former Assemblyman and former
Governor of Quirino Province, is suspected of being involved in several murders
and is accused of trying to manipulate the last presidential election in the
Philippines, authorities said.

''I already telexed to cancel his Philippines passport,'' said Francisco
Rodrigo, Consul General at the Philippine Consulate in New York City. ''Once the
passport is canceled, at that point he's deportable.''

Secret Service agents from New York questioned Mr. Dulay at the Lawrence
Township estate this morning, Police Capt. Nicholas Loveless said. [In
Washington, a State Department spokesman, Charles E. Redman, said the department
had not been contacted by the Philippine Embassy. [''We would note that the
United States does not have an extradition treaty with the Philippines,'' Mr.
Redman said. ''However, if the department is contacted by the embassy, we'll
consider courses of action open under United States law.''] Township policemen
and Mercer County sheriff's officers said they had no clues about the
disappearance of furnishings from the house. There were no signs of forcible
entry.

''It's pretty much stripped,'' Mr. Cummis said. ''It was a fully and opulently
furnished home.''

Detective Jerome Gorski of the township police said: ''Everything that was of
value is gone. The chandeliers were taken out of the ceiling.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NAVY RECOVERS FROM YEARLONG RECRUITING SLUMP

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 993 words

DATELINE: CINCINNATI


Of the 81 Navy recruits who were sworn in at a Cincinnati Reds baseball game at
Riverfront Stadium recently, more than 75 percent had scored in the upper mental
categories in their military entrance tests.

In contrast, a smaller company was sworn in here a year ago with less than half
the recruits in the top mental categories, according to Navy recruiting
officers. ''We just needed the bodies then,'' said an officer.

The difference between the two companies reflected a Navy recruiting slump from
which the Navy has just begun to recover, with Navy officers saying this region
in southern Ohio mirrors the rest of the nation.

Navy recruiters attributed the slump to a high-level decision to cut the number
of recruiters and hold down television advertising because recruiting did so
well in the early 1980's. At the same time, the number of Navy ships expanded,
and with it the need for more sailors.

Impact of Parents

In addition, some recruiters have found that parents who were youths in the
period of protest against the Vietnam War 20 years ago discourage their children
from enlisting today. ''We get a lot of doors slammed in our faces by those
people,'' said Chief Petty Officer Stephen A. Lane.

After 1984, which was a remarkable recruiting year for all the services, the
Navy slipped in attracting men who graduated from high school. The services
consider a high school diploma a key indicator of whether a young person can
become a good soldier, sailor, airman or marine.

In the first half of the current fiscal year, only 77 percent of the men the
Navy recruited were high school graduates, as against 92 percent in 1984. In
April and May, before high school graduations, it fell even lower.

In the slump, however, recruiting the far fewer women the Navy needs was not a
problem, with almost all the women recruited being high school graduates.

Trend Turns Upward

In recent months the trend has turned up, Navy officers said, with over 90
percent of the new recruits in June and July having high school diplomas. By the
end of the fiscal year on Sept. 30, the ratio will be up to 84 percent of the
94,600 Navy recruits this year, they said.

To get out of the slump this year, the Navy has 400 more recruiters in the field
than it did last year, with 140 more to be assigned by Oct. 1. Altogether, that
will increase the Navy's recruiting force about 10 percent.

In the Cincinnati suburb of Hamilton, for instance, the Navy had only two
recruiters a year ago; now there are four, with another due. Petty Officer 2d
Class Durke Donelson said that having enough recruiters to get out and show the
uniform made a difference.

''Before, they knew what a soldier looked like, but not a sailor,'' he said.
''When I walked into a high school, they asked me who I was. I didn't like that.
Now they know what a sailor looks like.''

Recruiters With Experience

The Navy has also assigned senior noncommissioned officers with extensive sea
duty to be recruiters. In downtown Cincinnati, Senior Chief Petty Officer Edward
Law recently reported for recruiting duty after many years at sea in missile
submarines.

Another lift has come from a new plan for educational benefits, designated Sea
College. A youth can obtain $18,800 by enlisting for two years, serving where
the Navy sends him, and spending four years in the reserves. As part of the
commitment, he must contribute $1,200 from his own pay to that fund.

Petty Officer 2d Class Stacy Murray in North College Hill, another suburb of
Cincinnati, said, ''We see a lot of guys coming in asking about that.'' He
thought that cutbacks in Federal financing of educational loans had made more
bright young people consider enlisting.

The Navy recruiters said that many young men seeking to enlist came from
families in which their fathers, uncles or older brothers served in the armed
forces, in some contrast to children of parents who actively opposed enlistment.


'System Is Self-Perpetuating'

''The system is self-perpetuating,'' said Senior Chief Petty Officer Anthony G.
Bakarian, the chief recruiter in this region.

To cultivate those family ties, Senior Chief Bakarian insists that recruiters
call on parents and be available to answer questions for six months to year
after a recruit leaves for basic training. Satisfied parents, he said, ''are the
Navy's best advertising.''

In commercial advertising, the Navy more than doubled its television budget from
$4.3 million in 1984 to $9.9 million this year. But it will be held to $8.5
million, 25 percent less than it wanted for the fiscal year starting Oct. 1,
because of overall budget cuts.

Public awareness of the Navy has also been helped by movies like ''Top Gun,''
which is about naval aviation; by several recent television reports about the
Navy, and by the two raids launched from aircraft carriers against Libya in the
spring.

But Capt. Michael Brown, a senior recruiting officer in Washington, said that
while ''Top Gun'' had caused the recruiters ''to hear a lot fewer 'noes,' they
still have to make the phone calls and wear out the shoe leather.''

Quality of Recent Recruits

In the North College Hill recruiting station, Michael A. Harbison and Scott E.
Landin reflected the quality of recruits the Navy has been getting in recent
months. Both scored 90 on the entrance test, putting them in the top 4 percent
of the nation's youth.

Both had elected to go into the Navy's nuclear training program, which takes
about two and a half years after eight weeks of basic training. If they complete
the program, however, they will have about half the college credits they need
for a degree.

Mr. Landin, who hopes to enter the Naval Academy from the fleet, said his
parents could have sent him to college but he wanted to try this route on his
own.

Mr. Harbison, who hopes the Navy will send him to college to finish his degree,
was a tad less idealistic, saying, ''I needed the money.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senior Chief Petty Officer Anthony G. Bakarian with recruit,
Wayne Miller (NYT/Kevin Fitzsimmons; Graph shows percentage of Navy recruits who
are high school graduates

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOTH SIDES ACT TO STRENGTHEN POSITIONS ON STALLED AGENT ORANGE PLAN

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 788 words


Both a Federal judge in Brooklyn who approved a plan to distribute more than
$200 million among those who say they are victims of Agent Orange and the
lawyers opposing the plan maneuvered yesterday to strengthen their positions in
the face of an appeals court order blocking the proposal.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit blocked the proposal
Tuesday at the request of a panel of lawyers representing Vietnam veterans who
blame the wartime herbicide for a range of health problems. The lawyers said
they objected to some of the plan's costs and its grounds for compensating
claimants.

Other veterans' representatives yesterday, however, sharply questioned the
lawyers' move. They argued that a halt, two years after the settlement of a
lawsuit against seven chemical manufacturers, betrayed sick veterans and family
members who needed the awards and aid services in the plan.

Proposed Contracts Filed

In an apparent effort to advance the plan, which was formulated in his court,
Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in Brooklyn put on the record
yesterday proposed contracts with an insurance company and a bank and investment
house to review claims and invest and distribute the assets from the settlement,
which now total about $225 million.

The documents filed by Judge Weinstein included a proposed agreement with the
Aetna Life Insurance Company and Aetna Technical Services to evaluate the
roughly 250,000 compensation claims already filed by veterans and family
members. The companies' total fee for their work through 1994 was estimated at
$6.8 million.

Other documents included proposed agreements with the Irving Trust Company and
Brown Brothers Harriman & Company to manage the assets and provide banking
services. The proposed contracts set forth a sliding fee scale depending on the
sums handled, but according to Richard J. Davis, the court's special appointee
for investment policy, the total fees would probably amount to about $300,000
the first year and lesser amounts subsequently as the assets were paid out.

Documents showed the court also proposed to hire Jeanne M. Stellman of the
Columbia University School of Public Health, and Steven D. Stellman, assistant
vice president for epidemiology of the American Cancer Society, to develop a
method for evaluating claims in relation to Agent Orange exposure. Their total
fee was estimated at $142,800.

Plans to Create Foundation

Also filed were papers to create a National Foundation for Vietnam Veterans and
Their Families. Under the judge's plan, the tax-free unit run by an unpaid board
would administer about $50 million of the settlement fund to finance services
for ill veterans and family members.

The remaining $150 million or more would be disbursed to totally disabled
claimants and survivors of veterans who had died.

Judge Weinstein's plan is opposed by a group of lawyers representing veterans
who filed the original class-action lawsuit. The lawyers who won the appeals
court stay this week dismiss the judge's plan as a welfare program.

They argue that contrary to the judge's findings, there is enough scientific
evidence to warrant giving the largest awards to those suffering ailments most
likely to have been caused by exposure to dioxin in the herbicide.

'Diverting Money'

''We challenge the propriety of the court's diverting money from the purposes of
the lawsuit to persons who may have no relation to Agent Orange,'' said a member
of the so-called plaintiff management committee representing the veterans, Neil
R. Peterson of Philadelphia.

He said the panel also opposed allowing the contractors to incur up to $500,000
in what he called ''guaranteed expenses.''

But Kenneth R. Feinberg, appointed by Judge Weinstein to help devise the plan,
said yesterday that the court's plan was not more expensive than the veterans
group's own.

Asked why the veterans' lawyers had waited so long to oppose the distribution
plan, Mr. Peterson said he and his colleagues had had to wait until the plan had
been put in final form. Mr. Feinberg, however, said their opposition could have
been registered much earlier.

Mr. Peterson, in a new submission to the appeals court yesterday, called for a
ban on all further work on the plan and sought to block Judge Weinstein from
filing his documents. But the judge had already put them on the public docket.

Keith Snyder, a lawyer for Vietnam Veterans of America, the nation's largest
such group, with about 30,000 members, said that the lawyers were not
representing the views of veterans he knew.

''Who do they think they're kidding?'' he said of the lawyers. ''Are they going
to litigate this forever? And at whose expense?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PBS LEADS IN EMMYS FOR NEWS

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section C; Page 5, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 415 words


Public television dominated the news and documentary Emmy awards with PBS
programs winning awards in 22 out of 48 categories, the National Academy of
Television Arts and Sciences announced Wednesday night.

But CBS's ''Evening News'' with Dan Rather received the most prizes for any
single show, culling seven awards. CBS's ''60 Minutes'' and PBS's ''Frontline''
were second with four each.

In all, PBS won 22 awards, CBS won 14, ABC won 9, NBC won 5 and a syndicated
show, ''Entertainment This Week,'' won 1. The awards were presented at a dinner
at the Grand Hyatt Hotel.

Multiple Winners

Many award categories had more than one winner.

''The shows weren't competing against each other, they were up against a
standard of excellence,'' said Jan Andrew, a spokesman for the awards.

The ''CBS Evening News'' and ABC's ''Nightline'' shared the Emmy among programs
for outstanding coverage of a single breaking news story; the CBS entry was
''Mexican Earthquake'' and ABC had two winning entries, ''Crash of Delta'' and
''Colombian Volcano.''

ABC's ''20/20'' and the ''CBS Evening News'' also won in the category of
outstanding coverage of a single breaking news story (segments); the ''20/20''
segment was ''In the Fire's Path'' and the two CBS segments were ''A Bank
Fails'' and ''Trojan Horse.''

PBS's ''Frontline'' won the Emmy for outstanding investigative journalism
program for ''Retreat From Beirut.''

The award for outstanding investigative journalism for segments went to ''NBC
Nightly News'' for ''Military Medicine'' and ''Mob Gas'' and ABC's ''World News
Tonight'' for ''International Christian Aid Investigation.''

PBS was the lone winner in the categories of outstanding interview or
interviewers on a program for ''The Times of Harvey Milk'' and for outstanding
coverage of a continuing news story (program) for ''AIDS: Chapter One.''

In the category of outstanding background analysis of a single current story
(programs), the Emmy was shared by ABC's ''Nightline'' for ''In South Africa''
and two by PBS -''Nova'' for ''Acid Rain: New Bad News'' and a ''Frontline''
program on ''Men Who Molest.''

Three networks - ABC, PBS and CBS - shared the award for outstanding background
analysis of a single current story (segments); the winning shows were CBS's ''60
Minutes'' for episodes on ''Schizophrenia'' and ''Ronald Reagan: The Movie'';
PBS's ''MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour'' for ''Farm Suicide,'' and ABC's ''World News
Tonight'' for ''Vietnam Remembered.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 30, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HERBICIDE EXPOSURE LIKED TO GREATER RISK OF CANCER

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHABECOFF, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 846 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 29


Farmers and workers exposed to herbicides face a much higher risk of lymphatic
cancer than others, according to a new study by the National Cancer Institute
and the University of Kansas.

The study was based on an examination of health histories of farmers in Kansas.
It showed that if farmers were exposed to herbicides 20 days a year or more they
were 600 percent more likely to contract lymphatic cancer than people who did
not work with such chemicals, according to Dr. Shelia Hoar, a senior staff
scientist at the Cancer Institute who is chief author of the report.

The risk for farmers who actually mixed or applied the chemicals increased
eightfold, according to Dr. Hoar. She said that farmers who failed to use
protective equipment such as gloves and masks while working with pesticides were
40 percent more likely to contract cancer than farmers who did protect
themselves.

Risk Associated With 2,4-D

Dr. Hoar said in an interview today that the higher cancer risk was particularly
associated with 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, or 2,4-D, a chemical compound
used in a broad range of herbicides. Tons of these herbicides are spread
annually by farmers seeking to keep weeds out of wheat, corn, sorghum or rice
fields and pastureland.

Agent Orange, the herbicide sprayed in Vietnam that is the source of lawsuits
filed by exposed veterans of that war, contains 2,4-D. On Wednesday a Federal
appeals court blocked a lower court's plan to distribute more than $200 million
among 250,000 veterans and relatives of veterans who say they were injured by
the herbicide.

While there have been other studies examining possible links between cancer and
exposure to 2,4-D and other herbicides, a number of Government, industry and
environmental exports said today that the National Cancer Institute findings
would carry great authority.

''One can't base a regulatory program on one study alone, but if this finding is
confirmed there would be serious regulatory implications such as restricting the
use of herbicides,'' Dr. Hoar said.  Findings in Sweden Differ The study found
that farmers exposed to herbicides did not show a higher incidence of Hodgkins
disease, a prevalent form of lymphatic cancer. Nor did such use appear to
increase the risk of soft-tissue sarcoma, or malignant tumors on muscle and
connective tissues, which researchers in Sweden have associated with exposure to
herbicides.

The report did note that lymphatic cancers other than Hodgkins disease accounted
for about 3 percent of all newly diagnosed cancers and cancer deaths each year.
The American Cancer Society estimates there will be 930,000 new cases of all
kinds of cancer diagnosed in 1986.

John A. Moore, assistant administrator for pesticides and toxic substances at
the Environmental Protection Agency, said the study was a ''very good one'' that
would probably cause his agency re-examine the rules now governing the use of
pesticides made with 2,4-D.

''We certainly are going to dissect the report in fine detail,'' he said.

''What is of concern to the regulatory community is that this chemical now
enjoys such wide use - a lot of people are exposed,'' Dr. Moore said. He noted
that 2,4-D was one of the most commonly used weed killers used on lawns.

Protective Measures Noted

Dr. Moore said that one encouraging finding was that risks of exposure to cancer
could be reduced by protective measures such as masks and gloves.

He also pointed out that the had study found that the risks of exposure to
herbicides were correlated with the duration of such exposure and that most
people other than farmers were exposed only for short periods of time.

But he said this study appeared to ''establish clearly'' that 2,4-D was
associated with non-Hodgkins lymphoma.

The report investigated and ruled out out other factors such as smoking,
radiation and family cancer histories as causes for the higher incidence of
cancer among the farmers studied.

The study focused on 948 male cancer victims in Kansas and an equal number of
non-cancer victims for comparison. Interviews to obtain information about
exposure to pesticides were also conducted with relatives of farmers who had
died.

Link to Other Health Problems

Diane Baxter, staff toxicologist for the National Coalition Against the Misuse
of Pesticides, an alliance of health, environmental and citizen groups, said
that 2,4-D was one of the most widely used pesticide ingredients and that the
new study showed ''it should be used a lot less.'' She said other studies had
found that the substances caused serious health problems other than cancer,
including neurological diseases.

John McCarthy, director of scientific affairs for the National Agricultural
Chemicals Association, which represents many major pestide makers, said he had
not seen the report and could not comment its findings. But he said: ''We will
be extremely interested in how the scientific community in and out of industry
judge the strength of their data. The people at the National Cancer Institute
are very good epidemiologists.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 30, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 587 words


1. This was a result of an unusual geoglogical catastrophe. What happened?
2. Lawyers representing 250,000 Vietnam veterans and family members who claim
injury from the wartime herbicide Agent Orange successfully blocked a Federal
court plan that would have distributed more than $200 million among their
clients. Why did the lawyers argue against the award?
3. Blutrich, Falcone & Miller, a New York City law firm established in 1982, has
attracted special interest, to a large degree because of its junior partner. Who
is he?
4. Sexual fantasy is nearly universal (in men/in women/in men and women),
according to recent studies.
5. A review of evidence gathered by American intelligence agencies, which has
not been made public, contradicts the initial contention by the United States
about a 1983 event. What event was it and what was the contention?
6. Paul Annacone eliminated John McEnroe with a four-set victory in the United
States Open tennis championship, the earliest that McEnroe had been eliminated
in (8/9/10/11) years at the Open.
7. The White House abandoned its plans to eliminate an independent Government
agency by transferring its operations to the Commerce Department. What agency
was involved?
8.A renowned film director once said he thought ''It's All True,'' an
uncompleted semidocumentary believed lost for four decades, was cursed and
marked the downfall of his career in Hollywood, according to the man who
compiled footage into a 22-minute short. Who was the director?
9. For technical reasons, not political ones, the United States will not exceed
the limits of the 1979 strategic arms treaty before a possible summit meeting
between President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev. Explain.
10. The average time on a legendary list is 157 days, but this man, Leo Joseph
Koury, has been among the current Top Tenners since 1979. What list is it?
11. ''You'll really see sparks fly,'' said Governor Cuomo, acknowledging that
proposals he was drawing up would probably renew debate over the role of schools
versus the role of parents. What is involved?
12. Seventeen years after it was introduced to the American market, a fixture of
1970's crash pads has not become passe. What is it?
13. In Dallas, a Federal judge rejected a request to delay foreclosure sales on
more than $100 million in personal assets. Whose assets are they?
14. El Salvador joined Honduras and Panama in publicly and categorically
rejecting an American proposal. What was it?
15. ''When this becomes public, it will give a considerable edge to those people
in possession of the analysis,'' a chess grandmaster said with astonishment and
chagrin. What was he referring to?
16. According to Western nuclear experts, the Soviet Union's announced plans to
fix flaws in reactors similar to the failed Chernobyl unit (would/ would not)
make them acceptably safe.
17. ''Time for Results,'' a report by the National Governors' Association,
proposes legislation that would give states the authority to declare some places
''bankrupt'' and then take over and reorganize them. What places are they?
19. ''I realized we'll get flak, but I'm more worried about learning to drive
the truck,'' said one of two women trainees to join the last all-male uniformed
service in New York City. What service is it?
20. At a time when leading agricultural economists have declared the small
commercial family farm a relic, farmers in Pennsylvania are thriving on their
plots of 80 to 100 acres. Who are they?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Quiz photos

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EDWARD LARKIN, PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONER

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 44, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 557 words


Edward Paul Larkin, the senior member of the state Public Service Commission in
Albany, died yesterday of pulmonary distress in Albany Medical Center. He was 71
years old and lived in Hempstead, L.I., where he had served as the town's
Presiding Supervisor in the late 1950's.

Mr. Larkin had served as a Public Service Commissioner since his appointment by
Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller in 1961. According to Francis S. Rivett, a spokesman
for the agency, that made him the longest-serving member of any regulatory
commission in the country. Mr. Rivett said Mr. Larkin had fallen ill at a
commission meeting on July 23 and had been hospitalized.

A product of the Nassau County Republican organization, Mr. Larkin was regarded
as leaning toward the utilities in their quest for rate increases. Mr. Larkin's
answer to that assertion was, ''We can't change the laws of economics; we must
give a company what it needs to render service.''

His renomination by Governor Cuomo in 1983 ran into opposition from consumer
groups who reminded the Governor of his earlier criticism of Mr. Larkin and his
promise to reshape the agency to strengthen the hands of consumers. But Mr.
Larkin, firmly backed by the Senate majority leader, Warren M. Anderson, won
Senate confirmation for yet another six-year term.

Quotes From Philosopher

A large man with a ready laugh and robust speech, Mr. Larkin rose from humble
beginnings. He was a college dropout who quoted Nietzsche, read Jean Genet and
liked to relax cooking beef Burgundy or going to the ballet.

He was born in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn and grew up on Long Island.
After high school, he enrolled in a prelaw night course at St. John's University
but quit after two years to support himself as a ditch digger, rod man and
construction foreman in the 1930's.

He worked in public works programs of Nassau County and Hempstead and for 10
years from 1942 was the executive secretary of the Town of Hempstead Board of
Zoning Trustees, with time out for service as an Army engineer in Europe during
World War II.

On his return, he began to play an active role in Republican politics and was
elected to the Assembly in 1952 and to the State Senate in 1954. In 1955, he
made headlines heading a legislative panel that investigated Communist
infiltration into philanthropies and children's summer camps but resigned to run
for Presiding Supervisor of the Town of Hempstead.

A champion of expanded park and recreation programs, he was narrowly re-elected
for a third term in 1959. But a restless Republican organization, fearing a
Democratic upsurge, sought out a fresh slate of candidates two years later, and
Governor Rockefeller appointed Mr. Larkin to the public service agency.

Mr. Larkin's first wife, the former Grace Marie Miller, died in 1983 and a son,
William, a Marine, was killed in action in Vietnam in 1969. He is survived by
his wife, the former Eleanor Isacsen; another son, Edward of Atlanta; four
daughters, Judith Krauser of Los Angeles, Kate Larkin of Fresno, Calif., Deborah
Larkin of Boston, and Carole Mastrianni of Morris Plains, N.J.; two sisters,
Dorothea Miller of Floral Park, L.I., and Gertrude Donecker of Southampton,
L.I.; and four grandchildren.

A funeral service will be held at 10 A.M. Tuesday at St. Joseph's Roman Catholic
Church in Garden City.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Edward Paul Larkin (AP, 1974)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
HOLLYWOOD'S SPOTTY RECORD ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1496 words


As a summer rich in recycled monsters, refurbished romances and slow-witted
comedies draws to a close, the moviegoer may feel a craving for something that
somehow connects with the real world. It is as natural as the need for a fresh
salad after a spree of junk food.

No one expects Hollywood to take on the budget deficit, the trade balance or tax
reform. But what about all those international commotions, which have as much
drama as any director could ask and more than most of the people involved can
stand: the American involvement in Central America, the play of passions in the
Middle East, the powerful pressures building in Southern Africa, the daily
bombings and shootings around the globe? While I was laughing at the
British-made ''No Surrender,'' it occurred to me that the last American movie I
could remember about the Irish ''troubles'' was ''The Informer'' - produced in
1935.

What can we expect when the vacation of the mind comes to an end? Hollywood's
record on foreign affairs is spotty. There have been spurts of daring and spells
of passivity. Commercial moviemakers look for at least the semblance of
consensus before they strike, and consensus on, say, Central America, is hard to
find these days.

The one event that unfailingly stirs the juices of our moviemakers is a popular
war. Although there was some flirting with pacifism in Hollywood before 1917,
for example, no sooner had America entered World War I than did the ''brutal
Hun'' become everybody's favorite villain. And so we got ''Outwitting the Hun,''
''The Claws of the Hun,'' ''To Hell with the Kaiser,'' ''The Prussian Cur'' -and
don't forget ''The Kaiser - Beast of Berlin.''

The intoxication of war is commonly followed by a national hangover, and no
smart moviemaker could ignore the rising antiwar sentiment of the 1920's, yet
war patriotism died hard and the response was carefully ambivalent. Several
major productions, such as ''Wings,'' ''The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse''
and ''The Big Parade,'' sought to have it all ways; to combine the camaraderie
of the trenches and the skies with wartime romance and inklings of
disillusionment. These movies were examples of what David Manning White and
Richard Averson, in their interesting book, ''The Celluloid Weapon,'' called
''contraband-message'' films - the antiwar message was sort of sneaked in,
perhaps in hopes that only receptive persons would notice. The screen adaptation
of ''What Price Glory?,'' the play by Maxwell Anderson and Laurence Stallings,
subordinated its antiwar sentiments to the camaraderie.

But if Hollywood is a beat late in catching onto a trend, once the way is safe
it goes charging in. By 1930, as the old spirit of isolationism and mistrust of
Europe were enjoying a resurgence, pacifism became an O.K. theme, and Hollywood
gave us the memorable ''All Quiet on the Western Front'' as well as other
antiwar movies.

Hollywood's deference to public feelings and the international market was never
better demonstrated than in the 1930's, as fascism was on the move in Europe.
This country was divided between isolationists and interventionists, and the
studios, though run largely by Jewish executives whose sympathies were hardly
with Germany, could gain little by being prematurely antifascist. There were
only a few movies about what was going on in Europe. Hollywood's solitary effort
to deal with the Spanish Civil War as a contemporary event, the 1938
''Blockade,''starring Henry Fonda, managed to avoid identifying either side as
loyalist or fascist. Nevertheless, it brought protests from supporters of Franco
in this country. By 1940, with Europe at war, anti-Nazi movies such as
''Escape,'' ''The Mortal Storm'' and ''The Great Dictator'' found acceptance.

Today, when concern over nuclear war is at least as widespread as aversion to
the Soviet Union, moviemakers deal with United States-Soviet relations without
quite dealing with them. In ''Top Gun,'' to use a current and hugely popular
example, American pilots are sent into a battle against what appear to be Soviet
planes, with only a throwaway explanation of what the whole fight is about. As
in the scenarios of Sylvester Stallone, the battle is the thing. Hollywood needs
enemies for its stars to defeat and doesn't mind virtually declaring war in the
interest of a good show, but the moviemakers cannot go all out with a barrage of
gung-ho productions like ''Guadalcanal Diary,'' ''Bataan'' and ''Wake Island,''
which drew Americans together during World War II. Nobody is about to make a
movie that follows the logic of Rambo and has our guys nuking the Kremlin. The
idea of all-out nuclear war is unsettling. Movies about the bomb (''Seven Days
in May,'' ''Fail-Safe'') or even about nuclear energy (''The China Syndrome'')
dramatize their dangers; there's an audience for that.

Hollywood has learned that even seemingly safe films may become subversive after
the fact. Several of the rah-rah World War II movies drew attention to the
heroism of America's allies, including the Soviet Union. ''Mission to Moscow,''
the most notorious of them, was a publicity release for Joseph Stalin; his pact
with Hitler and the executions of his fellow Bolsheviks after show trials were
presented as beneficent. Shortly after the war, however, Hollywood was chastened
by the attacks of the House Committee on Un-American Activities, and before you
could say, ''I am not now and never have been . . . '' the moviemakers obliged
the Communist hunters with ''I Married a Communist,'' ''I Was a Communist for
the F.B.I.'' and, most memorable of an unmemorable lot, ''My Son John,'' with
Robert Walker and Helen Hayes. Cardboard Communists were substituted for the
cardboard Nazis of the 1940's.

Just as there were no anti-Soviet movies during World War II, so there have been
no pro-Soviet movies since. It's a tricky area. Since America and the Soviet
Union are not at war, you can't really go all out for total victory; but since
our nations are not on good terms, one doesn't wish to appear to be overly
amiable. ''A Letter to Brezhnev,'' an agreeable comedy made in Britain, has been
criticized on the right for presenting Soviet society in too kindly a light.
Hollywood has never felt comfortable with complexity. The most intelligent and
entertaining movies about Soviet-American relations have been adult adventure
tales like John Le Carre's ''The Spy Who Came in From the Cold,'' which played
on the similarities in the techniques of the espionage establishments of East
and West.

It has been more than four decades since America's movies have been able to go
all out to war. The Korean conflict never aroused much enthusiasm around the
country, and the one big effort to raise a cheer for the Vietnam War, John
Wayne's ''The Green Berets,'' drew raspberries. Two notable movies released in
1970, ''M*A*S*H'' and ''Catch-22,'' had strong antiwar themes, but neither
explicitly dealt with Vietnam. The one effective anti-Vietnam movie released
while the war was still on was ''Hearts and Minds,'' Peter Davis's 1974
documentary. It was tendentious, but it gave you something to argue about. Only
after the war did we get such seriously intentioned if flawed dramas as ''The
Deer Hunter,'' ''Coming Home'' and ''Apocalypse Now.'' Otherwise, antiwar movies
such as ''The Strawberry Statement'' and ''Getting Straight,'' both made during
the Vietnam War, were flimsy youth-rebellion flicks that proved of little
interest to the generation to which they pandered.

The action today is in places like Nicaragua, where America is financing a rebel
force, and once again America is split. The most direct attack on the issue in
an American movie so far came in ''Salvador,'' Oliver Stone's driving melodrama
about another Central American land where the United States finds itself
involved. ''Salvador'' jiggles with the facts, much like Costa-Gavras's 1982
''Missing,'' to suit the thesis that Washington is in cahoots with Latin
America's most reactionary and brutal elements. Whatever one thinks about that,
these movies demonstrate that it takes a politically committed moviemaker to
address the subject, and although Hollywood is filled with people who sign
petitions, investing real money in controversy is something else.

The conclusion from this quick review of Hollywood's bursts of patriotism,
opposition and evasion is that even after the summer doldrums, the headlines
will be but lightly reflected on our screens, and when they are, it is likely to
be in a melodramatic form or as a pretext for adventure with a heavy dose of
action. Yet even melodrama can be effective - witness the fine Argentine film
''The Official Story,'' about political kidnappings in Argentina, which showed
how much power can be found in the headlines. Let's end on a hopeful note: The
news from Hollywood is that the rights have been bought for a movie about Winnie
Mandela, and Richard Attenborough is working on a movie about Steve Biko.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Elpedia Carrillo, James Woods and James Belushi in
''Salvador,'' 1985 and Lew Ayres and Louis Wolheim in ''All Quiet on the Western
Front,'' 1930

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
Twists and Turns On Agent Orange

BYLINE: By Mary Connelly and Laura Mansnerus

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 264 words


The $180 million settlement Vietnam veterans reached with manufacturers of Agent
Orange two years ago was hardly the end of the case. When the Federal District
Court devised a plan to distribute the money, the veterans' lawyers contested
that, too. Last week they won a stay from the United States Court of Appeals for
the Second Circuit that, for now, calls the plan to a halt.

Many veterans groups favored the plan, which was drawn up under the direction of
Judge Jack B. Weinstein in Brooklyn. But the lawyers managing the veterans'
class action objected to his decision that it was not feasible to trace
individual claimants' ailments to Agent Orange and that the money should be
distributed solely according to the degree of disability. The lawyers said the
ruling undermined their contention that Agent Orange, a defoliant used widely in
Vietnam, was the cause of cancer, nerve damage and birth defects. The chemical
companies have maintained through eight years of litigation that there is no
proven connection.

Under the District Court plan, cash grants would have gone to the totally
disabled claimants and survivors of the dead. About $50 million was set aside
for a social service foundation for veterans and their families.

Although the Second Circuit is considering appeals seeking to upset the entire
settlement, the District Court had proceeded with a plan to start issuing checks
by the end of the year. In response to the stay, Judge Weinstein halted work on
the plan, but he announced the names of concerns he had chosen to manage the
fund and process claims.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of U.S. Air Force plane spraying Agent Orange over Vietnam in
1966 (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW MANY MORE CARDS DOES GARCIA HAVE TO PLAY?

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 864 words

DATELINE: LIMA, PERU


PERU'S young President, Alan Garcia Perez, is by instinct a gambler, a man who
believes that only through daring actions, such as limiting military
expenditures and foreign debt payments, can he find the resources necessary to
attack the acute domestic problems he inherited.

His audacity has paid off. Using money that might otherwise have gone on weapons
or payments on debt, he has been able to slash inflation, promote a modest rise
in real wages and prime economic growth after years of recession and to start
addressing the plight of the urban poor and the long-neglected Indian
communities in the Andean sierras. The political returns have been positive:
Today, with the polls showing an approval rating of more than 70 percent, the
37-year-old social democrat is more popular than the day he took office 13
months ago.

But now the stakes are being raised, and the perils of political polarization at
home and economic isolation internationally are growing.

The armed forces, which as recently as 1984 received 25 percent of the
Government budget, are upset by cutbacks, including reduction from 26 to 12 of
the Mirage fighter planes on order from France, and cancellation of a $240
million contract with the Netherlands to renovate the Navy's flagship. Further,
in private, army officers blame tightened controls on human rights abuses for
their limited success in combating Maoist Shining Path guerrillas.

And two weeks ago, the International Monetary Fund, reacting to payment of only
$35 million of the $192 million that Peru owes the fund, placed it on a short
list of countries - along with Vietnam, Guyana, Liberia and Sudan - which will
no longer receive credits. This action stirred fears that the World Bank and the
Inter-American Development Bank might follow suit, cutting the country off from
almost all outside resources.

President Garcia's response on both fronts was typical. He moved quickly to
reinforce civilian authority over the military, embarrassing them by mocking
recent rumors of a planned coup d'etat. And he stepped onto the balcony of his
downtown palace to tell a wildly enthusiastic crowd that Peru's needs would
continue to come before those of the I.M.F. and other creditors.

Yet, for the first time, his style of government is coming under attack from
conservatives who believe he is risking long-term recovery in exchange for
short-term political gain. Mr. Garcia's fiery ''anti-imperialist'' rhetoric,
they say, wins applause in the plazas, but alienates Western Governments and
financial institutions that could help the country. ''To recover from the
crisis, we don't need speeches complaining and blaming others for our ills,''
the opposition magazine, Oiga, said last week.

Critics on the left and right and even some within his own party, the American
Popular Revolutionary Alliance, accuse him of running a one-man show, surrounded
by second-rate ministers with little independent authority.

''We're being governed by opinion polls on the President's popularity,'' an
opposition politician said. ''Everything is measured politically.'' However, the
President's supporters argue forcefully that, without Mr. Garcia's charismatic
leadership, Peru's fragile democracy could not have resisted the continuing
assaults of terrorism, the interventionist instinct of the armed forces and the
disenchantment of a chronically impoverished majority that had seen its living
standards tumble dramatically since 1980. They credit Mr. Garcia's ability to
communicate with the people, using his oratory to educate and inspire, with
holding Peru together.

''If I were here as a result of a coup, I would have no right to ask for your
support,'' he told the crowd after the I.M.F. decision this month. ''You elected
me and you have an absolute obligation to be at my side at this hour. Democracy
means to share and you must share this responsibility. How easy it would be to
vote every five years and see how the President gets burned. I won't be burned
alone. I'll be burned with you all and all of you with me.''

A senior Peruvian official said Mr. Garcia's popularity has thrown the powerful
Marxist United Left coalition onto the defensive and made a rightist military
coup unthinkable, while his reassertion of Government authority has bought time
to start addressing long-term national problems. ''When Alan took office,
inflation was running at over 200 percent, everything was speculation and no one
thought more than one week ahead,'' he said. ''Now at least we can start arguing
about the longterm.''

The panorama remains bleak, with the challenges posed by leftist terrorists and
narcotics traffickers still untamed, but the Government believes the key to the
survival of democracy lies in combating extreme poverty. While the Government
insists that it will seek an understanding with its foreign creditors, it
remains determined to maintain its limit of 10 percent of export revenues for
debt payments.

Last week, when the 1987 budget was announced, a good part of the $3.7 billion
due to be paid abroad by the end of 1987 was instead assigned to priority
investments for agriculture, transportation, education and health.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Peru's President Alan Garcia Perez,peasants in Ayacucho
region and crowds protesting in Lima (Visions/Vera Lentz;
Gamma-Liaison/Lochon;Gamma-Liaison/Bonnet)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Harriman as a Supporter of Vietnam Policy

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 261 words


To the Editor:

Roger Hilsman's Aug. 10 letter (''Harriman Was Prescient About Vietnam'') gives
the impression that W. Averell Harriman opposed, though not publicly, President
Johnson's policy in Vietnam. My experience gave me the impression that he was
less interested in this problem than in narrow party loyalty.

In 1965-67, I took a leave of absence from Harvard to serve in the Paris Embassy
as cultural attache. In the spring of 1966, as I recall, all the top cultural
officers were summoned to London to discuss common problems and to be addressed
by Ambassador Harriman. When he arrived, he delivered his message in one
sentence. I recall it was something like this:

''I came to remind you that your most important duty, in what you say and in all
the activities of your post, is to press for acceptance of Presi-dent Johnson's
policy in Vietnam.''

There was a long, embarrassed silence. He asked for questions. Career officers
did not dare object. I felt I had nothing to lose, for I could happily return to
Harvard, and it was certainly up to someone to say something! So I said: ''Sir,
there is so little possibility of persuading people in our countries to accept
the American Vietnam policy that if we base our total program on it, all our
activity will collapse.''

He said nothing but at once turned on his heel and left the room.

I was not impressed when under the Republican regime that followed he came out
against the Vietnam War.

By the way, I did not get sent back to Cambridge.

LAURENCE WYLIE
  Cambridge, Mass., Aug. 13,1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

EDITOR-NOTE: The writer is C. Douglas Dillon Professor of the Civilization of
France emeritus.

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT MEN;
NO MORE ZERO-SUM GAME

BYLINE: BY ARTHUR ASHE; Arthur Ashe, the former tennis champion, now an
investor, is still involved in tennis as a consultant and businessman.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1064 words


THERE ARE A bunch of us black men between the ages of 39 and 45 who share the
bond of being in the first generation that took full advantage of the civil
rights laws of 1963-65. Few of us felt genuinely comfortable with that new
privilege, because, from birth, we were conditioned to feel that life would be a
zero-sum game.

Early on, I learned that white society would tolerate only so many of us in one
group at any one time: only so many - or none in some places -''nice Negro
families'' in a previously all-white suburban neighborhood; only so many in
certain public schools; only so many in white colleges. When I got in any of
these, I was supposed to feel lucky. My self-confidence was constantly being
tested, but it was exhilarating just the same. Not that I was among the very
first, mind you.

The first black college graduate received his diploma back in 1826, at Bowdoin
College. Yet, even today I can count on two hands the number of my childhood
friends whose parents were both college graduates. So what made us different
from those black men before us who got degrees? Simply that our expectations
were much higher. Our predecessors knew they could go only so far. But America
was telling us, ''The sky's the limit!''

I have kept up with my friends, and some have done very well. The smartest in
our class has lived up to his potential and is the conductor of a Northern
symphony orchestra. Another became the president of the National Bar
Association. Still another friend, from Little League baseball, heads
TransAfrica, black America's first foreign-policy lobby.

But my 39- to 45-year-old black professional buddies have paid a very heavy
emotional toll. Divorce is the norm rather than the exception. Nearly everyone
is hypertense. The stress is barely bearable most of the time, but it is hidden
behind ingenious subterfuges. I am not the only one to have had a heart attack
before age 40 - and I was in excellent physical condition. Most of my friends
are frustrated, and some are now visiting shrinks - something our older black
professionals almost never did. Black shrinks themselves are grossly
overscheduled.

In the corporate world, few white superiors will risk running interference for
us. Our white peers - men more than women - generally think we got to where we
are because of a quota. That notion rankles more than anything else. They are
still stuck with the idea that though we make great entertainers and athletes,
we do not have the right stuff for the business world.

Fortunately for me, I can now kid my buddies from grade school who told me that
tennis was a sissy sport. They are now frantically taking tennis lessons to help
them adjust socially as they aspire to be senior vice presidents. Some may be
aiming higher, but no one really thinks he will be president of a
multibillion-dollar corporation. In public, we say, sure, we'll do it, but few
of us really believe it will happen, because ''these things take time.''

Some of us have gone out on our own and tried the entrepreneurial route.
However, not many black banks are willing to risk much on a man with no track
record who wants to run a business outside the big corporate womb. Can you blame
the banks? I have done well as a tennis player and as an investor. Yet a black
bank turned me down for an uncollateralized loan - I wanted to sign a note - for
a purchase of land even though my net worth was 52 times the amount of the loan.
The fact that I still understand the bank's conservatism says a lot.

Once we are in business, I'm told, some of us are forced to do some things we
could never tell our mothers about. The teachings of the traditional black
church on morality, honesty and a good name have always been clear. They begin
with the Ten Commandments. Black media preachers like the Reverend Ike aside,
our churches still stress the biblical passages ''Lay not up for yourselves
treasures upon earth . . .'' and ''It is easier for a camel to go through the
eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.'' The
messages connect. Most black children are officially classified as poor. But the
consensus now among most of us professional blacks is that such rules have to be
bent to get ahead.

Still, we sometimes laughingly imagine how America would react if someone like
T. Boone Pickens were black. Not that Pickens has done anything illegal. Hell,
he is genuinely admired, but quite a few black deacons would wonder how much is
enough. The closest analogy to him we can think of in our world is Muhammad Ali,
who stood up to the Federal Government and won.

Our primary worries now, though, are the young black males between 16 and 24
years old who were so dramatically highlighted during Bill Moyers's ''Vanishing
Family'' documentary a few months ago. Their condition has reached crisis level
as a result of their woeful upbringing in mostly-fatherless homes. They see no
need to study hard to get ahead. Drugs, high dropout rates in school, petty
crimes and teen-age pregnant girlfriends mark their passage to young adulthood.
Some have succeeded, despite all this, and are doing well at college. I was
lucky, I guess. Even though my mother died when I was only 6, I grew up with a
strong father.

My generation was supposed to feel grateful for the opportunity to be able to
choose between Howard and Harvard Universities. Still, I did not have nearly so
much daring as these young men have today. The black college freshmen of today
have grown up without the psychological burdens of the black social revolution
of the 1960's or the Vietnam War, and they see the choice between Howard and
Harvard as routine - their right. If we dared to hope for the good life, most of
them unabashedly demand it. They do not even mind telling you they like
President Reagan. A large proportion of the one in six black college men who
eventually will graduate will become Republicans. My generation, burdened as it
was by being in the first wave, admires their spunk, even envies the fact that
they are unbridled.

Most of my buddies certainly have changed from the days of the sit-ins. A
mortgage, two or three kids, a couple of cars and college to pay for make you
sober up real fast. I now look forward to the first black C.E.O. of a Fortune
500 company. That day is not too far off, in spite of our doubts. But I know she
will be up to it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN LITCHFIELD, NO CHANGES AND NO PIPELINE

BYLINE: By HARRISON E. SALISBURY; Harrison E. Salisbury, a former New York Times
editor and correspondent, is an author and historian.

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 1, Column 2; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1559 words

DATELINE: TACONIC


IN this distant northwestern corner of Connecticut, most people envy my address.
Taconic cannot be found on many road maps and I have no street address. I live
off a dirt road that has no name. Very hard to find.

That's what Litchfield people like. The day after they move into a house, they
hope no one else will find his way here. They like this isolated area two and a
half to three hours from New York City. We don't complain about bad roads. We
complain about good roads. We don't want to make it easy for more people to find
their way to this extraordinarily beautiful and livable place. We think it's
just right as it is. True, the telephone service up here is not the best, and
the power often goes off in a thunderstorm, but we like that, too. It confirms
our remoteness from the big city.

I think this explains the hornet's nest stirred up here by the proposal of the
Iroquois Gas Transmission System, a consortium of several public utilities, to
build a natural gas pipeline right through our paradise. Never mind that we have
plenty of problems. Physically and geographically, we think this place is just
right. No changes.

You can see that you're not reading the words of a withdrawn, objective,
on-the-one-hand and on-the-other-hand correspondent. You are confronting the
words of a Litchfield countyian whose life and well-being he sees as threatened
with disruption. Not only would that line cut straight across this beautiful
community of Salisbury, of which, I must reluctantly admit, Taconic is a part,
but it would also slash right across Roxbury to the south, where I used to live,
and where I still have property on Tophet Road. The pipeline would be quite
distant (I hope) from my bear's den in Taconic, but it would, it seems, march
right through the Tophet Road property, swinging down from Goldmine Road,
coursing ahead along Painter Hill Road, a 100-foot-wide swath with a great steel
pipe buried only three-feet below the surface, trees and shrubs eternally
forbidden over the casing for the Canadian-produced natural gas.

I have not, I confess, yet ventured over to the town of Washington, about 50
minutes south of here, to purchase a plastic button or a T-shirt sporting the
initials GAG (for Group Against Gas). But I may pay a visit to the dry cleaners
in Washington Depot, where, as my friend, the novelist and critic Francine du
Plessix Gray, tells me, residents are queuing up to buy a new T-shirt sporting a
Rabelaisian slogan about gas.

Since 1957, I have lived where the rolling Litchfield hills gradually rise into
the Berkshires. I look out on the handsome wilderness of Mount Riga north and
west of Salisbury, an almost unbroken forest of several thousand acres that has
grown up from the devastation wrought by woodcutters producing charcoal to smelt
the iron dug out of the mountains until after the Civil War. My wife has lived
here since 1940. We are, of course, newcomers. The real citizens are the
descendants of the Raggies, families that lived on the mountains and dug iron
and smeltered it.

I'm sure that there are individuals in the Litchfield hills who back the
pipeline, but their voices have been notably silent in the extraordinary town
assemblies held in almost all the affected towns - Salisbury, Sharon, Cornwall,
Kent, Warren, Washington, Roxbury and Woodbury - in the last fortnight or so.

The meetings grew in size and, you might say, ferocity. The biggest was that
held in Roxbury, a town of 1,500. Nearly 500 came. Even with our rooted
tradition of town meetings, that was some turnout.

It was held in the auditorium of the Booth Free School and after a presentation
by the spokesman for the Iroquois Transmission people, Arthur Miller, the
playwright and my old neighbor across Tophet Road, rose. He told of flying out
to the West Coast in 1952 over the great American desert. He turned to his
seatmate, an engineer, and commented on its vastness.

''Yes, indeed,'' said the engineer, ''it is enormous, but it could easily be
entirely populated by people. All you need is water, and it is sited just above
the greatest reservoir of fresh water on the globe.''

Mr. Miller was astonished. ''Where is the water?'' he asked. The engineer said
right under the Rocky Mountains. But, Mr. Miller objected, it must be very deep
down. How would you get it out? Simple, said the engineer, a couple of atomic
bombs would do the job. But what would you do about the nuclear fallout
contamination? asked Mr. Miller.

''Oh,'' said the engineer, ''that's not my field.''

Mr. Miller turned to the gas line engineers and asked: ''Have any of you walked
over the ground? Have any of you walked down Tophet Road and the land along the
road?'' No, they said, they had not. ''Well,'' said Mr. Miller, ''that's my
field.'' Next to it, I might add, is my field. A bit later, a big man wearing a
baseball cap and a red sports jacket asked if the pipeline would use robotic
welding. Yes, the engineer said. Do you know that there is a 10 percent failure
rate in robotic welding? the man asked.

Well, said the pipeline man, we are also going to use hand-welding.

You know there is a 15 percent failure rate in hand welding, said the man in the
baseball cap. Will you X-ray every well?

''Well,'' said the pipeline spokesman, ''that's not my field.''

The Northwest Corner of Connecticut has a crusty reputation. It has eyed with
hostility many ''improvements.'' One was a plan for ''Super-7,'' a superhighway
in place of wandering, narrow Route 7, which follows the course of the long,
wandering Housatonic River north of New Milford. That was stopped dead a few
years ago. The same thing happened to projects to ''improve'' Route 44 running
west from Hartford to Millerton, N.Y., through Norfolk, Canaan and Salisbury.

A few years ago, the state's Fish and Game Commission proposed to remove all
fish from Lake Wononskopomuc and restock it with trout. Two men from the
commission came to a town meeting in Salisbury. They explained the plan and
advised the townsfolk they had no legal role in the decision. No one raised a
single negative argument. Instead, they asked polite questions: How are my
little boys going to fish for sunfish from the shore? What will happen to the
lake after 10 years with only one species of fish? What studies have you made on
the environment? After an hour or two of this, the fish men left for Hartford
and the project was never heard of again.

Anything savoring of ''outside'' influence raises the hackles of northwest
Connecticut. When Northeast Utilities a few years ago proposed to build a pumped
storage facility atop Canaan Mountain (still an unbroken forest of more than
5,000 acres), it was like a call to arms, as a Sharon resident, Donald Warner,
recently reminded the gas line representative. After several years of fierce
battling in and out of the courts, the project was dropped. Mr. Warner told
Michael S. Lucy, the spokesman for the pipeline company, that the utilities
could save a lot of money and effort by quietly abandoning the gas project
rather than further stir up the dander of the Northwest Corner.

There are a lot of writers and artists and publicly prominent citizens in the
region. One who has taken a leading role in many battles (a couple of years ago
he challenged the manners of newcomers from New York in the local Shagroy
grocery market) is the caricaturist Robert Osborn. ''Man needs the natural world
to stay human,'' he said earlier this month in a rallying cry to his comrades in
previous battles against nuclear weapons, unsafe automobiles and the Vietnam
War.

Not all the meetings were as robustious as that in Roxbury, but the message was
much the same in each. In Warren, the author Philip Roth was unfortunately out
of the country. Also absent was Warren resident Henry Kissinger, but when
William Styron, a Roxbury resident summering on Martha's Vineyard, encountered
Mr. Kissinger at a Vineyard party and told him what was going on (the proposed
pipeline route cuts close to the Kissingers' property), he vowed to investigate
and if necessary join the fray.

The most recent encounter in Warren, it might be recalled, was over a blueberry
patch. This happened to be on property that Mr. Kissinger purchased. The patch
had always been open to local residents. Mr. Kissinger's security adviser said
they had to close it. The crisis was resolved when the blueberry bushes were dug
up and planted on a field belonging to the nearby Kent School.

This would be a more balanced account if I could throw in some quotes of
Litchfield County citizens who stood up in the meetings and hailed the blessings
of the pipeline. But diligent inquiry has failed to disclose a single person on
the ''pro'' side.

A distinguished woman in Warren who has lived there for 40 years and never
spoken before at a town meeting seemed to sum up a general attitude. Between
Warren and the next town, New Preston, lies a beautiful, almost Alpine body of
water, Lake Waramaug. The pipeline, residents believe, would skirt, if not
actually cross, this gem of the Litchfield hills. The Warren lady spoke only a
dozen words: ''Lake Waramaug cannot speak for itself. We must speak for it.''

Not long after that meeting, it was announced that further public meetings in
towns not yet addressed by the pipeline representatives were being canceled.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A MONTH FOR SELF-HELP

BYLINE: Sharon L. Bass

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 26, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 627 words


TO make people aware of the wide range of support groups open to them in the
state, September has been declared Self-Help/Mutual Support Month in
Connecticut.

Governor O'Neill made the designation earlier this month, saying, ''Millions of
people whose problems and needs are not met through formal health care, social
services and counseling programs can find the help and personal support they
need in mutual-help groups.''

There are about 300 separate self-help groups statewide. Many of them have
chapters in several cities. Self-help groups are generally free and led by
volunteers who have experienced the particular problem or crisis, among them
alcoholism, rape or widowhood, that the group deals with. They give support to
others and learn from each other's sharing.

In observance of the month, the Connecticut Self-Help/Mutual Support Network, a
nonprofit New Haven-based organization of mental-health providers and self-help
group members, is publishing a directory of support groups in the state. The
book costs $10 and can be obtained by calling 789-7645.

The network's coordinator, Vicky Spiro Smith, emphasized that while self-help
groups are beneficial, they are often adjuncts to traditional one-on-one
counseling. She said she hoped that as a result of Self-Help Month more groups
would form and current ones would survive, despite small memberships.

''I think having a special time designated to self-help groups brings attention
to people who needs these groups and have nowhere else to turn,'' said Cathy
Miceli, coordinator of the Bereavement Group, which provides support to parents
whose children have died of cancer.

A statewide adoption conference will be held Sept. 20 in Glastonbury. It will
bring together several support groups including the International Adoptive
Families, for parents who have adopted Korean children, and the Open Door
Society of Connecticut Inc., which gives adoptive and perspective adoptive
parents information and an opportunity to discuss their situations. For more
information on the conference, call its coordinator, Judy Allen, her at
621-2676.

There are self-help groups for almost every physical and emotional problem,
including addictions, adoption, bereavement, domestic violence, homosexual
concerns, health disabilities, parenting and victims' rights.

One of the first such groups, Alcoholics Anonymous, now has offshoots such as
Gamblers Anonymous, Overeaters Anonymous and Smokers Anonymous. Other self-help
groups include Non-Tropical Sprue and Celiac Diseases, Mended Hearts Inc. (for
patients who have or will have heart surgery), Latino Support Youth Group (for
young, homosexual Latinos), Speakeasy of Connecticut (for stutterers), Vietnam
Agent Orange Victims Inc. and Remove Intoxicated Drivers.

Ms. Smith noted that while all the groups began as emotional support networks,
some were moving into advocacy positions. ''They realize that certain systems
need change,'' she said. ''Take parents with emotionally ill children, for
example, they worry what will happen to their kids when they die.''

As a result, Ms. Smith said, parents have worked with mental-health agencies and
legislators in getting halfway houses and other facilities set up.

She cited Mothers Against Drunk Drivers as another group that lobbies for
legislation.

The Connecticut Network, which receives two-thirds of its financing from the
State Department of Human Resources and the remainder from private
contributions, provides other services besides referral. It helps to get new
groups started, assists in maintaining existing groups, holds daylong group
leadership workshops, instructs groups on publicity and fund raising and
sponsors an annual statewide conference for all mutual support groups.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 1, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
1919 Peace Conference

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 869 words


WILSON AND HIS PEACEMAKERS:

American Diplomacy at the Paris Peace Conference, 1919. By Arthur Walworth. 618
pages. W. W. Norton. $35.

After all the millions of casualties in the trenches, the dethroning of
monarchs, the rise of irredentist aspirations and of revolutionary causes, the
Paris peace conference after World War I began as far more than an end to
hostilities. It was a lightning-rod for every human and political dream that
floated in the air over all the continents. The peacemakers and people
everywhere in the world turned to President Woodrow Wilson to bottle the
lightning of change.

Of course, most of the dream was impossible to achieve - by the President alone
or in concert with the leaders of Great Britain, France and Italy. Each of the
victorious Big Four - Wilson, Lloyd George, Georges Clemenceau, Vittorio Orlando
- had different and often conflicting agendas: Wilson's, a fuzzy idealism,
ill-suited to practical diplomacy and tempered by interests in his own
delegation that sought to dominate international trade and stop the rising tide
of revolution in Russia and elsewhere; George's, to maintain the British
colonial Empire; Clemenceau's, to acquire long-disputed regions and to insure
that a militaristic-minded Germany would not threaten France's borders again;
Orlando's, to gain sovereignty over Italian-speaking and other territories and
to steer a course between the Fascist and Socialist forces in his own country.

In Arthur Walworth's authoritative ''Wilson and His Peacemakers,'' all the
currents run together in the aftermath of the 1914-1918 war. Mr. Walworth,
author of ''Woodrow Wilson: American Prophet,'' was awarded the Pulitzer Prize
in biography in 1958. In his new book, President Wilson comes across as an
imperfect visionary, who worked hard for a new international peacekeeping
organization that would include the United States and who foresaw that the old
nationalism would lead to World War II.

Much of the diplomacy is familiar, but Mr. Walworth adds other lesser-known
factors to the story of Paris 1919.

Delegations of women appealed to President Wilson to promote the cause of
women's suffrage during the treaty making. The author notes that Mr. Wilson
''disliked aggressiveness in women'' but ''accepted the inevitability of their
enfranchisement.''

Blacks in the United States saw an opportunity to strike a blow on behalf of
African blacks, hoping to see the eventual withdrawal of European powers from
political dominance. But, Mr. Walworth writes, ''Wilson's early years in the
Deep South had left him cool to any sudden change in the status of Negroes; and
the State Department was disinclined to discuss this question at the Peace
Conference.''

Asiatics also had an interest in the peace conference, seeking to end racism.
''Their most influential spokesmen were the delegates of the Japanese empire -
the first nonwhite nation to gain admission to an international congress as a
power of the first rank,'' Mr. Walworth says. ''To grant Japan's plea would
enable Asiatics to demand the repeal of laws of the United States that excluded
them, and this would outrage public opinion on the Pacific coast of the United
States. Nevertheless, the Americans listened sympathetically to Japan's
spokesmen.''

Not every dream died. The roots were planted for certain international
organizations that achieved continuity between the wars; some remained
independent and some were later incorporated into the United Nations. An
appendix in the book includes the Covenant of the League of Nations. Several of
the high-minded sections - such as those calling upon member states to exchange
information about their armaments and ''the condition of such of their
industries as are adaptable to war-like purposes'' - seem far removed from later
reality. Other sections - on controlling traffic in ''opium and other dangerous
drugs,'' on ''fair and humane conditions of labour for men, women and
children,'' and ''for the prevention and control of disease'' -have been
attempted with varying degrees of success.

''Wilson and His Peacemakers'' is not revisionist history about the President
from Princeton University who thought the globe could be rearranged like the
curriculum on an Ivy League campus; rather, it is a quietly dramatic account of
a President and his circle of advisers and adversaries, in Paris and in the
United States, that tells how he was destined to fail to gain a lasting peace
through fine words and treaty signatures in a tumultuous postwar world.

Mr. Walworth concludes that the Americans at Paris learned much that was to be
of value at the end of World War II. He believes that the foundation was set for
''a Pax Americana that has survived the threat of world war longer than did the
fragile truce that followed the unfinished business of 1919.'' Calling the
scores of continuing small but devastating wars since the end of World War II
-including the Korean war, the Vietnam war and various offshoots of the colonial
and cold wars - a Pax Americana is a one-sided and too placid interpretation. A
different phrase is needed - perhaps Pax Atomica - to describe what has, thus
far, prevented the midnight of World War III.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Arthur Walworth (Donna Williams)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 2, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ATLANTA CONTEST PUTS STRAIN ON TIES THAT BIND

BYLINE: By DUDLEY CLENDINEN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 802 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Sept. 1


At 1 o'clock Sunday afternoon, as State Senator Julian Bond walked down the
aisle of a black church, his seventh one of the day, the pastor, the Rev. Larry
H. Williams, beamed down at him from the pulpit. ''Brother Bond, a fine young
man,'' Mr. Williams said. ''God bless him! Strong and tall and young and
handsome and fine and ready. God bless him!''

For Mr. Bond, locked in a Democratic runoff battle with former City Councilman
John Lewis in the Fifth Congressional District, this was clearly his kind of
church. In the rain outside, the parking lot dripped with Oldsmobiles, Buicks
and Cadillacs, Volvos and Mercedes. And inside the softly gleaming,
air-conditioned sanctuary, the ministers words fell as an endorsement on a
youngish, well-tailored congregation in the most affluent part of black
Southwest Atlanta.

Mr. Bond, a man known for his lean elegance and easy articulation, smiled down
on the pews. ''Friends, if you want somebody who can walk that walk and talk
that talk, send me,'' he said.

Differences in Style

The race between these two black men who are legends of the civil rights
movement has divided the district. The personal difference has been a stylistic
one, between the smooth, highly verbal Mr. Bond, the son of a college dean, and
the less sophisticated manner of Mr. Lewis, a sharecropper's son.

But the effect of the differing perceptions of the two men has been a racially
split vote. ''I won seven out of every 10 black votes in the primary,'' Mr. Bond
said. ''I lost seven out of every 10 white votes.'' In a district whose
registered vote is 58 percent black, the arithmetic plainly favors Mr. Bond, and
the numbers seemed to be consolidating as the Tuesday runoff approached.

In the Sunday issue of The Atlanta Daily World, a black-oriented newspaper here,
Mr. Lewis's advertisement claimed the endorsement of nine ministers, but Mr.
Bond's advertisement showed almost four times that number. And the black
political leadership has gravitated to Mr. Bond.

''I don't have the support of a lot of the downtown power structure,'' the
short, broad, solemn Mr. Lewis told the Sweet Auburn Avenue Merchants last week,
''and I'm not talking about the white power structure. I'm talking about the
black power structure downtown. I don't have much support there. I don't have
much money.'' As of Aug. 12, a Lewis spokesman, Kevin Ross, said, the campaign
had raised just $154,000, only half of the $350,000 that Bond's campaign
manager, Eugene Duffy, said the Bond campaign had raised.

Leaders Profess Neutrality

Such black leaders as Mayor Andrew Young, who held the Congressional seat before
becoming Ambassador to the United Nations under President Carter, and City
Council President Marvin Arrington, had professed neutrality before the primary
that led to the runoff. But a number of aides to the Mayor have been working for
Mr. Bond, and Mr. Arrington invited 2,000 people to a party for Mr. Bond at the
white-columned Arrington home on Saturday night.

Michael Lomax, the chairman of the Fulton County Commission, who is black, has
endorsed Mr. Bond. He got the black vote, Mr. Lomax says, because Mr. Lewis ''is
not as good a speaker as Julian, and the black community basically sees this as
sending somebody to Washington as its spokesman.''

Mr. Bond gained national fame 20 years ago when the Georgia Assembly refused to
seat him, citing his stand against the war in Vietnam. The United States Supreme
Court later ruled in his favor and he was seated in 1967.

He earns much of his income from speeches about the civil rights movement and
black politics, and his travels have earned him a reputation as an absentee
Senator. ''For whites, their greatest fear is that Julian's not a worker, that
he will not give as much time to his constituents as they need,'' Mr. Lomax
said. Mr. Lewis, who was beaten bloody in Selma, Ala., and in countless other
front-line civil rights battles, established himself as a hard worker, a detail
man, and the conscience of the City Council in his five years there before
resigning to run for Congress. He courted the white neighborhood vote The Fifth
District seat opened up when Representative Wyche Fowler Jr., a white Democrat,
decided to run for the United States Senate against the first-term incumbent,
Mack Mattingly, a Republican.

What could happen now, said Robert H. Brisbane, professor emeritus of political
science at Morehouse College and founder of the department, is that John Lewis's
white support could breed an even larger black vote on Tuesday for Julian Bond.

''More and more blacks are getting the idea that the whites are going to try to
take part and throw the election to John Lewis,'' Professor Brisbane said. ''If
it appears that they are, there will be a reaction among blacks against Lewis.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 2, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK;
HOW LEADERS THINK THE UNTHINKABLE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1232 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


One day in August 1980, President Carter gathered his senior advisers on
national security around the elliptical table in the Cabinet Room of the White
House to assess the implications of a buildup of Soviet military forces north of
Iran.

Zbigniew Brzezinski, the national security adviser, was there, as were Harold
Brown, the Secretary of Defense, and other members of the National Security
Council. So was Gen. David C. Jones of the Air Force, then Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, and other senior military officers.

Another official there was Jody Powell, the President's press secretary, who
recalled the meeting the other day. He said that these were the critical
questions on the table:

Would the Soviet Union invade Iran and possibly Saudi Arabia, cutting off
Western Europe, Japan and the United States from a vital source of oil? And if
the Russians intervened, would the United States be forced to use nuclear
weapons to stop them?

More Than Once It Arises

That meeting underscored a grim fact about the Presidency, which is that the
unthinkable sometimes becomes thinkable: the use of nuclear weapons for the
first time since the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in World War II
has more than once become a live possibility.

Every President from Truman to Reagan has been confronted with the question in
the abstract and most of them have met it in actuality, although Mr. Reagan has
not, so far as is known. The circumstances surrounding many of those cases have
come to light in once-secret documents, Presidential memoirs, interviews and, as
with Mr. Carter, inquiries by the press.

Each President seems to have come to office with different thoughts about
nuclear weapons. For all, however, the unpredictable consequences arising from a
nuclear weapon detonated in anger appears to have been an essential reason each
has chosen to stay his hand.

In the months before the White House meeting called by President Carter after
the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979, and the aborted attempt to
rescue American hostages held in Teheran in April 1980, the Russians began to
strengthen forces north of Iran. They filled out army divisions, reinforced
fighter squadrons and moved in soldiers trained for operations behind enemy
lines.

Invitation Is Seen

At the same time, the situation in Iran went from unstable to chaotic. The
Communist Party became increasingly defiant of the Ayatollah Khomeini's regime;
anti-Teheran ethnic groups became more restless; the economy was disordered, and
the country was on the verge of war with Iraq. Everything seemed to invite a
Soviet move.

In public, the Carter Administration warned the Soviet Union in stern but
ambiguous terms to stay home. An unidentified official was quoted in the press
as saying the United States would not allow the flow of oil to be interrupted.
''That will not happen,'' the official said, ''because it will not be permitted
to happen.''

Out of the public eye, the assessment was much more specific. The Joint Chiefs
determined, according to the minutes of a meeting with Scretary Brown reported
in a new issue of The Armed Forces Journal, that the United States and its
allies could not muster enough conventional military power to repel the Soviet
forces.

Then, in the White House meeting, the nuclear option was presented to Mr.
Carter. General Jones says nuclear weapons were incorporated into military
contingency plans, as they almost always are in a confrontation with the Soviet
Union.

But both the general and Mr. Powell stated that at no time were actual plans
made to fire nuclear weapons nor was the United States on the verge of nuclear
war at any time in that period.

'The Crisis Went Away'

In the fall, after United States intentions were made clear to the Soviet Union,
partly through Administration-induced press speculation and partly through
Government contacts, Soviet forces were taken off alert and, as Mr. Powell says,
''the crisis went away.''

Like President Carter, most of his predecessors struggled with the question of
nuclear arms. For President Truman, who ordered the atomic bombings of Hiroshima
and Nagasaki in 1945, the historical record suggests that he saw them as weapons
of last resort, to be used only in desperation to force an enemy to surrender.

In contrast, President Eisenhower saw them as weapons of first resort, with his
announced policy of ''massive retaliation'' intended to deter aggression. Secret
documents later made public show that he subtly threatened to use nuclear arms
against China to force the Chinese to negotiate an end to the Korean War.

But, in a policy paper that was eventually published, he ruled out preventive
war against the Soviet Union. Historical records show that Eisenhower rejected a
recommendation from the Joint Chiefs of Staff to use nuclear weapons to avert
the French defeat in Vietnam in 1954.

Role in Missile Crisis

President Kennedy, facing with the deployment of Soviet missiles to Cuba in
1962, put American nuclear forces on alert but responded primarily with
conventional forces, such as a naval blockade. Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor, a key
adviser, wrote later that American nuclear superiority contributed little but
that conventional forces carried the day.

There were reports in President Johnson's tenure that the use of nuclear weapons
in Vietnam was considered. But Johnson was silent on the issue in his account of
his Presidency, ''The Vantage Point.''

On the other hand, President Nixon said in a 1985 interview with Time magazine
that he considered using nuclear arms to end the war in Vietnam and when the
Soviet Union threatened to intervene in the Arab-Israeli war of 1973.

The public record indicates that President Reagan has not had to face the
nuclear issue in an actual case. But the presenting of the option to Mr. Carter
in 1980 raises the question of what Mr. Reagan might do in a similar situation.
United States interests around the Persian Gulf are much the same and American
conventional military power, while improved, is probably still inadequate to
repel a Russian invasion.

Goals in the Gulf

The Reagan Administration's objectives in the region, according to its 1982
''Defense Guidance'' paper ''are to assure the continued access to Persian Gulf
oil and to prevent the Soviets from acquiring political-military control of the
oil directly or through proxies.'' Officials of the Administration say those
objective remain the same today.

The Administration's policy would be to introduce American forces into the area
around the gulf if the access to oil was threatened. But the ''Defense
Guidance'' document, designed to be kept secret, drawn to plan military budgets
for the 1983 to 1987 fiscal years, does not mention the use of nuclear weapons
around the Persian Gulf.

The military commander responsible for defending American interests in the
region, however, has said he could not dislodge Soviet forces from northern Iran
with conventional forces nor prevent them from overrunning the rest of Southwest
Asia.

Gen. George B. Crist of the Marine Corps, commander of the Central Command, said
on the West Coast in August, ''I could give them a hell of a fight.'' But,
pointing to the Russian commander who would be his opponent, the general added:
''If he wants to pay the price, I expect he can push me out.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 2, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

Abbie Hoffman Plans New York Radio Show

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 252 words


Abbie Hoffman describes it as a leftist ''Prairie Home Companion,'' but a radio
show by the anti-Vietnam War activist of the 1960's promises to be about as
homespun as a draft-card burning.

''Radio Free USA'' is scheduled to make its debut Friday on a listener-sponsored
FM station in New York that is known for its 1960's, radical image, much like
Mr. Hoffman's own.

The weekly, two-hour program on WBAI-FM will feature guests, music and an
audience, according to Mr. Hoffman. It is to be taped on Friday afternoons at
the Village Vanguard nightclub in Greenwich Village.

''It will be the latest in high-class subversion, satire and entertainment,'' he
said. ''I'm absolutely convinced there is no show like this in the United
States.''

Mr. Hoffman, one of the so-called Chicago 7 protesters arrested at the 1968
Democratic National Convention in Chicago, said the first program would feature
doctors telling listeners how to beat urine drug tests.

Mr. Hoffman, 49 years old, said he had lined up Isaac Asimov, Kurt Vonnegut,
Erica Jong, Hunter Thompson, Norman Mailer and Jello Biafra, lead singer of the
Dead Kennedys, as future guests.

Mr. Hoffman gained national attention when he organized the Youth International
Party. He was cleared of charges of organizing violence at the 1968 convention.

He went into hiding after being arrested and charged with selling cocaine in
1973. He gave himself up in 1980 and was sentenced to performing community
service on a lesser charge of cocaine possession.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 4, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An Associated Press article Tuesday on a radio program featuring Abbie Hoffman
gave an incorrect location for the taping of the show tomorrow. It will be taped
at the Village Gate, Bleecker and Thompson Streets.

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 3, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AUTHOR HELD DEPORTABLE BECAUSE OF WRITINGS

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 434 words

DATELINE: EL PASO, Sept. 2


A United States immigration judge has ruled that Margaret Randall, an author and
advocate of women's rights, is subject to deportation because of her
pro-Communist writings, officials said today.

David Cole of the Center for Constitutional Rights in New York said the decision
by the judge, Martin F. Spiegel of the Immigration and Naturalization Service,
would be appealed.

Al Giugni, director of the El Paso sector of the immigration service, ruled last
year that Ms. Randall should not be permitted to regain the American citizenship
she renounced in 1967 when she was living in Mexico. Mr. Giugni ordered that she
be deported because she overstayed a six-month visitor's visa.

Judge Spiegel, who conducted the deportation hearing in March, issued a 35-page
opinion Thursday that was mailed to lawyers in the case. In upholding Mr.
Giugni's deportation order, Judge Spiegel based his decision on the author's
writings.

Judge Spiegel set Dec. 1 as the deadline for Ms. Randall to leave the United
States but said that as long as appeal of his order was in progress he would not
move to deport her. The judge's order can be appealed to the Board of
Immigration Appeals in Washington, a process that could take six months, Mr.
Giugni said. If that appeal failed, she could take case to the Federal courts,
he said.

Ms. Randall, a professor at the University of New Mexico who lives in
Albuquerque, is the author of more than 40 books, most of which deal with the
problems of women in third world nations. She was born in New York City and in
1961 moved to Mexico, where she married a Mexican national and renounced her
citizenship. Ms. Randall and her Mexican husband divorced.

She testified at the deportation hearing that denouncing her citizenship was ''a
big mistake.''

Judge Spiegel's opinion cites Ms. Randall's advocacy of Communism in ''Spirit of
the People,'' a book critical of United States involvement in Vietnam, ''Cuban
Women Now,'' a series of interviews, and two other books.

Mr. Giugni said Ms. Randall returned to the United States in 1984. She took a
job at the University of New Mexico and married an American citizen. Mr. Giugni
said in October 1985 that she had overstayed her visitor's permit and was in the
United States illegally.

''Randall has never advocated world Communism,'' Mr. Cole said, speaking by
telephone from New York. ''The ruling is on dangerous grounds. We will appeal
the case and expect it to be ruled unconstitutional.''

''The Government ruled there was no evidence to show Randall had ever been a
member of the Communist Party,'' Mr. Cole said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 3, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK;
FINDING THE PARK SPACE FOR FUTURE MEMORIALS

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 2


The first 210 years of United States history produced more than 100 monuments
and memorials here. Officials now wonder where the heroes of the next two
centuries will be enshrined.

Pierre L'Enfant was generous with public spaces when he designed this city, but
even he did not anticipate the American appetite for monuments. It is hard to
walk very far in Washington today without confronting some icon.

Many were erected after the Civil War in a great wave of monument-building that
left the city under the stern gaze of several Union generals. Others came a few
at a time, an almost whimsical accretion of history that honored Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow and the lobstermen of Maine, Dante Alighieri and an eclectic list of
others from the Boy Scouts to the Seabees.

As a result, the capital is under pressure: There is a dwindling amount of
Federal parkland available for monuments, and number of requests to use it is
mounting. Eighteen proposals for monuments and memorials are now before the
Congress, something of a record, according to the National Park Service. There
are already 108 commemorative works on national parkland here.

'You Have to Leave Space'

''The fact of the matter is, you have to leave some space for our nation and for
future generations, to commemorate events that they think are significant,''
said Representative Bruce F. Vento of Minnesota, chairman of the Subcommittee on
National Parks and Recreation.

Mr. Vento and others are pushing for legislation that would set strict
guidelines on monuments proposed for Federal land in Washington, particularly in
the area around the Mall. A bill has passed the House, and a similar measure is
pending in the Senate.

Under the bill passed by the House, commemorative works could be placed on the
Mall and the area immediately around it only if the subject is ''of such major
historical and lasting significance to the nation as a whole'' that putting it
anywhere else would be ''inappropriate.''

The bill also establishes guidelines for Federal lands elswhere in Washington.
For example, a monument could not be erected to honor a person until 25 years
after death. The bill would restrict military commemorations to wars, ''similar
major military conflicts'' and branches of the armed forces.

The monument issue is perhaps a particularly American problem, having much to do
with identity and pride in a pluralistic democracy. ''Each group wants to be
remembered,'' said James M. Goode, Keeper of the Smithsonian Institution
Building. ''And they think that by being in the capital, it's a mark of
permanence.''

Lobbying Can Do It

If history is written by the victors, monuments are erected by the organized.

Much of the statuary in Washington arose from efforts of widows and veterans'
groups in the years after the Civil War. Other groups have mobilized in recent
years to perserve places in history, from Vietnam veterans to women who served
in the Armed Forces.

Monument-building is not a simple process: a group must raise private money to
create the monument and obtain Congressional approval to place it on Federal
parkland in the capital. Still, a surprising number of groups and individuals
plunge in.

For example, Maurice Barboza began researching his family history several years
ago and became fasciated with the role that blacks played in the Revolutionary
War. It was a story neglected by the history books, he decided, and worthy of a
monument. He began to organize and gained considerable support.

It Passed the House

As a result, the House adopted legislation last year authorizing installation of
a black Revolutionary War patriots memorial in the capital, and the measure is
pending in the Senate.

Mr. Barboza said he sympathized with those trying to juggle demands for limited
space in the capital. But he argues, with some passion, that it would be wrong
to deny blacks and other minority groups their chance at representation in the
pantheon of national heroes.

''I think the country has a lot of catching up to do,'' said Mr. Barboza. ''I
think it would be unfortunate that at a time when minority groups, such as
blacks, have time to concentrate on these things, time has run out.''

According to the National Park Service, projects currently proposed for
Washington parklands include commemorations of the armored forces, the Third
Infantry Division, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Hispanic American and
Native American members of the Armed Forces, American astronauts, American
slavery and a peace garden.

The bill passed by the House would exempt several monuments already approved by
one or both chambers from the new, stricter guidelines, including Black
Revolutionary War Patriots.

Picture Is Unbalanced

There is general agreement that monumental Washington is not a representative
portrait of American history. Mr. Goode, for example, makes the point in his
book, ''The Outdoor Sculpture of Washington, D.C.'' There is a monument, he
notes, to the man who perfected the screw propeller for the Union Navy in the
Civil War, but none for Robert Fulton or the Wright Brothers. There is a
monument to Longfellow, but none for Thoreau, Whitman, Poe or Twain.

Indeed, only 11 American Presidents are memorialized in Washington, as against
13 military leaders from the Civil War, according to the National Park Service.
A memorial to Franklin D. Roosevelt was authorized by Congress years ago, but
supporters have not yet been able to get money from Congress to build it.

Still, advocates of the new legislation argue that there is simply not room in
the heart of the capital for many more monuments. For example, said Mr. Vento,
giving every war equal treatment with the Civil War would mean ''concrete from
the Capitol to the Potomac.''

In addition, they argue, there are many demands on Federal parkland in
Washington, from festivals to demonstrations, from frisbee throwing to
inaugurations. Adding monuments to these areas not only restricts these uses; it
also detracts from the monuments already there, they argue.

Supporters of the legislation take a long view. ''History has a way, of course,
of continuing,'' said Mr. Vento in a subcommittee hearing earlier this year.
''And future generations will want to commemorate people and events we cannot
even imagine now.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 3, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

OBSERVER;
The Federal Karloff

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 748 words


Here is another movie in which the U.S. Army carries on as though nobody with a
brain ever put on the uniform. It is ''Starman,'' a pretty good sci-fi flick
until it collapses into cliche about the villainy of the U.S. Government.

In this one a man from a distant planet visits Earth in response to that
invitation NASA sent the entire galaxy a few years ago. Instead of hospitality,
his arrival is greeted by a bloody-minded military bureaucrat who mobilizes the
Army to make the visitor's stay miserable.

His aim: to imprison the poor devil or - in the worst-case scenario, as they say
in Washington - to autopsy him in the Arizona desert.

There have been a lot of such entertainments in recent years, shows in which
Washington ogres, usually military folk, do the villain's duty required to
create plots.

This work used to be done by John Carradine, Vincent Price, Bela Lugosi, Boris
Karloff. Remember them cackling in their mad-doctor smocks as they contemplated
autopsies on cute Hollywood blondes?

Now mad-doctor smocks gather dust in costume shops. The cacklers nowadays wear
general's stars, admiral's braid or those plastic cards fixed on the lapels
which are Washington's way of denoting officially certified big shots.

I speak figuratively about the cackling. The Federal villains in these
entertainments cannot be certifiably loony, of course, without costing the show
heavily in plausibility; so in lieu of cackles they glare a lot, issue orders
with maniacal intensity and talk in conventional Federal blabspeak, which always
sounds like English undergoing psychotic trauma.

Public readiness for shows in which government is Boris Karloff is of fairly
recent origin, but not hard to understand.

Factors doubtless include the popularity of spy fiction about sinister
bureaucrats, cynicism created by the C.I.A.'s genius for publicizing itself in
the ugliest possible light, public anger about the unfairness of the tax system
and about the management of the Vietnam War, and Watergate's suggestion that
government is probably rife with conspiracies.

Jimmy Carter exploited all this in 1976 by running successfully against
Washington. President Reagan rarely misses an opportunity to spread his gospel
that the Government in Washington is the enemy of the people.

While watching ''Starman's'' U.S. Army carry on idiotically the other night, I
sympathized with the big majority of military men at the War College whose low
opinion of the ''media'' had been reported in the morning paper.

They told an opinion survey they disliked, distrusted and felt contempt for the
''media.'' In this survey, ''media'' seems to have meant newspapers, magazines
and the television news business, but I suspected they would also have included
entertainments of the ''Starman'' school.

It's only natural that military people, whose success depends heavily on
obedience to authority, should dislike, distrust and feel contempt for those in
the news business, much of whose work involves airing challenges to authority.
On this point military unhappiness can be rationalized as the inevitable
complaint of the myopic who see only the needs of their own world.

On the matter of the military as villain, however, the brass has a good point.
This view is promoted and sustained, I suspect, by people with no military
experience, whose knowledge of the military is limited to what they have read
or, worse, to what they have seen in mass entertainments.

Since young people are no longer drafted and since the kind of people who create
entertainments, bring the news and shape opinions rarely enlist, ignorance of
the American military is becoming profound among our image makers.

As a result, the picture we get of our military is often a sort of comic-book
cartooning, long on bold strokes and exceedingly dumb in content. No wonder the
War College officers grind their teeth.

This couldn't have happened a generation ago when men of all classes did
military duty and came back to civilian life to report on the real thing. Sure
there were villains and maniacs. James Jones's and Norman Mailer's Armies had
brutes and tyrants, and Joseph Heller's was a lunatic asylum.

But a trunkload of books and cartoons by men who were also there spoke of the
humanity of fools, the comedy of incompetents, the occasional occurrence of
heroes. Like life, it was a mixed bag. I suspect it still is, but how will we
ever find out, now that those who write, film and talk don't go there anymore?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 4, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

101 MEMBERS OF NONALIGNED MOVEMENT

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 202 words

DATELINE: HARARE, Zimbabwe, Sept. 3


Following is a list of the 101 members of the Nonaligned Movement who are
attending the conference here:

Afghanistan
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Colombia
Cameroon
Comoros
Congo
Cuba
Cyprus
Djibouti
Ecuador
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Grenada
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Jordan
Cambodia
Kenya
North Korea
Kuwait
Laos
Lesotho
Liberia
Lebanon
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Nepal
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
P.L.O.
Peru
Qatar
Rwanda
St. Lucia
Sao Tome & Principe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Somalia
Southern Yemen
Sri Lanka
South-West Africa People's Organization
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Syria
Togo
Trinidad & Tobago
Tunisia
Uganda
Tanzania
Vanuatu
Vietnam
Yemen
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 4, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

COMMUNISTS WARN MANILA OVER PEACE TALKS

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 642 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Sept. 3


Communist negotiators accused Philippine Government officials of bad faith today
and warned of a possible failure in cease-fire talks that began a month ago.

Their statement, which was given to reporters, intensified an increasingly
public skirmish over ground rules that appears to have stalled the talks since
an initial meeting Aug. 5.

It comes at a moment when some White House officials are voicing impatience over
progress of the talks and urging President Corazon C. Aquino to take a tougher
line against the insurgency.

Some commentators in the Philippine press have also begun to show restlessness
with the pace of the talks, and the military establishment has been open about
its own skepticism over the possibility of a peaceful solution to the 17-year
insurgency, A Communist Statement ''We deplore the cavalier, if not insolent,
attitude displayed by certain officials of the Aquino Government toward earnest
and reasonable proposals we have submitted,'' said the press release today,
signed by the two Communist negotiators, Saturnino Ocampo and Antonio Zumel.

The statement said if these officials ''are bereft of good faith and continue
behaving in the manner they have done, we are truly sorry to say that current
efforts toward lasting peace in our land may come to naught.''

The statement came two days after the disclosure by Defense Minister Juan Ponce
Enrile of what he said were rebel proposals that amounted to a demand to be
given the status of a separate and equal government in the negotiations.

An official close to Mrs. Aquino said on Tuesday that ''we know what they're up
to and we won't fall for it.''

Called Normal Manuevering

According to the official. who asked that his name not be used, the conditions
''would allow them to call themselves a rebel government and be recognized by
countries like Albania.''

However, he said he considered such manuevering to be a normal part of the early
stages of talks, and recalled the long impasse over the shape of the negotiating
table at the start of the Paris peace talks during the Vietnam war.

Mr. Enrile said the Communist proposals included fixing an official venue where
the Communist flag might be flown beside the Philippine flag; naming two
mutually acceptable foreign ambassadors to witness an agreement, and registering
any pact with the United Nations as sovereign governments do.

The Defense Minister said the Communists also proposed alternating the talks
between the Manila site, where the armed forces would provide security, and a
rebel-controlled ''liberated zone,'' where their own troops would patrol, in a
de facto claim to territory.

Manila Sees Pitfalls

''What is happening is they want belligerent status,'' Mr. Enrile said. ''You
know they are very tricky. We should watch out for these pitfalls.''

Communist negotiators today described their suggestions as ''earnest proposals
for security guarantees, immunities and related matters.''

They said these had been presented to the Government two weeks ago in the hope
of a quick written reply, to be followed by a meeting within four days, but that
these had not been forthcoming.

''Meanwhile, distorted versions of our propsals have been maliciously leaked to
certain segments of mass media,'' Mr. Ocampo and Mr. Zumel said.

Communist Suggestion

''We have no intention of negotiating behind the backs of our people,'' they
said. Therefore, they said they had called for holding the talks at a Manila
location accessible to the public, and had suggested publication in full of
their proposed negotiating conditions.

After an initial meeting that a Government negotiator, Ramon Mitra, described as
a reunion of ''old friends'' marked by reminiscences and laughter, the
negotiations immediately bogged down in squabbles over the conditions for
further discussions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 4, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Agent Orange - Let It Lie

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 588 words


The vexed case of Agent Orange has been laid almost to rest by a solution that
is almost a lie. But now, at the last minute, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
Second Circuit seems poised to overthrow Federal Judge Jack Weinstein's
elegantly contrived solution with a narrow insistence on the truth. That would
be an error that would fruitlessly prolong Vietnam veterans' tormented search
for solace.

The veterans came home from a war no one wanted to hear about. With reason, many
resented the neglect. They were too prone to believe a rumor, beginning years
after the war's end, that Agent Orange, the herbicide sprayed in Vietnam, was
the cause of many of their illnesses. An avid legion of tort lawyers stoked
their fears and filed thousands of suits against the herbicide's makers.

The medical case against Agent Orange is but shadow. True, the herbicide
contained minute amounts of dioxin, a potent poison. But poisoning depends on
dose as well. In 10 years, across six million acres, just 368 pounds of dioxin
were sprayed. Could the faint residues surviving in the soil and water of
Vietnam somehow get into troops in quantities to cause disease? Conceivable, but
far from likely. The veterans have no obvious symptoms for which dioxin might be
the explanation. Their diseases so far seem to be the same as other people's.
The pilots who sprayed Agent Orange were far more exposed than any ground
troops, but they too have shown no unusual pattern of disease.

The Agent Orange lawyers depended not on facts but fears - on their ability to
haunt a jury with a parade of injuries and on the fear of the chemical companies
and their insurers that however many cases they might win, they could not afford
to fight them all. Sure enough, the companies were happy to buy their way out of
an avalanche of litigation with a $180 million settlement, and the lawyers filed
to cream off some $40 million in fees.

But they hadn't reckoned with a judge who both understood their manipulations of
the tort system and was prepared to impose his own conception of justice. First,
Judge Weinstein reduced the lawyers' fees to $9 million. Then, saying they had
not proved causation, he ruled that all severely diseased veterans should be
eligible for a share of the settlement. But to keep the payouts reasonably
substantial, he also made the likely degree of exposure to Agent Orange a
criterion. As the veterans' groups desired, he proposed creating a fund to
provide services to families with birth defects.

The veterans are eager to start benefiting from Judge Weinstein's plan. But
their lawyers, contrary to the veterans' interests, have now appealed it. And
the appellate court seems clearly tempted to reject the plan and require that
causation must be proved. That is a recipe for the chaos the plan was meant to
avert. Instead of compensating the whole class of disabled veterans, the
settlement fund would go, after further long delay, to those who drew
sympathetic juries.

Since there's still no proof that any veteran was actually harmed by Agent
Orange, it is surely better to use the money to help the larger group. Judge
Weinstein's plan would resolve the Agent Orange nightmare, now eight years in
the making - even though in denying causation it flouts a basic premise of tort
law. The circumvention is necessary to an equitable solution. The courts do not
usually do well in handling mass tort cases like this one. It's the tort system
that needs changing, not Judge Weinstein's innovative and careful solution.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 4, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WORLD AIR TO CUT SERVICE AND STAFF

BYLINE: By AGIS SALPUKAS

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 837 words


World Airways will end its scheduled passenger service as of Sept. 15, causing
it to lay off 1,500 employees, or 57 percent of its staff, the carrier announced
yesterday.

The carrier said it would concentrate instead on its charter and aircraft
maintenance operations.

''Basically, its a question of economics,'' said Jerrold Scoutt Jr., chairman of
World Airways. ''We believe in the first six months of this year we lost $25
million.''

Based in Oakland, Calif., World Airways has been able to narrow its losses since
1982 but has not become profitable. It serves eight United States cities,
including the New York metropolitan area through Newark International Airport,
London and Frankfurt.

Mr. Scoutt said that World Airways had arranged with Pan American World Airways
and United Airlines to honor tickets after Sept. 15 at no additional cost to
fliers.

The airline is largely the creation of Edward J. Daly, a flamboyant entrepreneur
who fought for low fares and no-frills service long before deregulation.

In 1979, after years of effort, he won Government permission to charge just $99
one way in transcontinental markets, touching off a fierce fare war among the
major carriers that at one point brought fares as low as $69 one way.

Mr. Daly started the carrier in 1950 with $50,000 won in a poker game. By flying
troops and cargo for the military, he became a millionaire and owned 82 percent
of the airline. He died in 1984.

In announcing the cutback, Mr. Scoutt said the airline planned to establish a
program to help its laid-off workers find other jobs. The jobs to be eliminated
include pilots, flight attendants, ground service workers, administrative
personnel and ticket agents.

The carrier also announced that T. Coleman Andrews 3d, who is 32, would take
over as president and chief executive and that Arthur H. Hutton, the current
president, was named vice chairman.

The news of World Airways' cutback comes only a day after Eastern Air Lines
announed that it planned to cut its work force by 1,534 as part of an effort to
trim its costs by $160 million and improve its efficieny.

Last week, Frontier Airlines filed for protection under the bankruptcy code
after being unable to withstand the fare wars at its Denver hub.

Like them, World Airways has experienced severe pressures brought on by
deregulation. Still, some of the problems of the carrier were aggravated by its
own actions.

When Mr. Daly and World Airways were given the ability to cut fares on the
transcontinental market, the airline became a ''spoiler,'' undercutting other
carriers and forcing fares down further.

The strategy led to large losses at World Airways of $58.2 million in 1982 and
$29.4 million in 1983.

Mr. Daly, who had been a proponent of deregulation, then did an about-face on
the issue and in 1982 petitioned the Civil Aeronautics Board to reregulate
fares, saying the fare wars were ''disastrous and completely irrational.''

Elusive Profits

While the airline has been able to restructure its debt and narrow its losses,
it has not been able to become consistently profitable.

The cutback of its scheduled passenger service represents about 75 percent of
its 1985 revenue. World Airways began its scheduled service in 1979.

Robert J. Joedicke, an airline analyst for Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., said
that ''when you cut back to one-fourth the size, there's not much you can do.''

He added that it would be difficult for World Airways to sustain its charter and
maintenance business with the revenue was left and that the airline would
probably seek to sell some of its assets.

The carrier has four DC-10-30's, a version that has a long range and would be
attractive to such carriers as United, which is building up its Pacific service.

The Oakland Tribune has reported that World Airways is talking with United, but
both carriers have refused to comment.

Earlier Years

World Airways had done well for most of its years before it began trying to
compete with established carriers on major routes.

Mr. Daly was able to steer it through the 1950's when hundreds of carriers,
begun by World War II veterans, faltered and died.

During the 1960's, World prospered mainly because of the military buildup in
Southeast Asia.

Mr. Daly, who drove a truck to help support his family when he was growing up in
Chicago, amassed a personal fortune of about $400 million during the heavy
airlift to Vietnam.

He bought a large ranch and had an office built at the airline's headquarters
with marble floors and a plush bathroom with gold-colored shower heads.

Mr. Daly was aboard the harrowing flight in Vietnam of a World Airways Boeing
727 that made the last evacuation from Da Nang. Panicky South Vietnamese troops
forced themselves on the plane, which took off with some refugees clinging to
the fuselage.

In 1975, he also had a cargo plane take 57 Vietnamese orphans from Saigon, even
though the plane had not been given clearance at the airport, which was under
full military alert.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CHARLES E. WYZANSKI, 80, IS DEAD; JUDGE ON U.S. COURT FOR 45 YEARS

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 843 words


Judge Charles E. Wyzanski Jr., a profound legal thinker who served on the
Federal District Court in Massachusetts for 45 years and formerly headed Harvard
University's Board of Overseers, died Wednesday at Beth Israel Hospital in
Boston. He was 80 years old and lived in Cambridge, Mass.

Judge Wyzanski suffered a cerebral hemorrhage Sunday in the hospital, which he
entered last week for tests.

He was chosen by President Roosevelt to became a Federal judge in Massachusetts
in 1941. He served as chief judge of the Federal District Court there from 1965
until 1971, when he became a senior judge, sitting on Federal District Court in
San Franciso as well as Boston and on Federal appeals courts in Chicago, New
York, Richmond and Washngton.

Judge on International Court

He was also a judge on the International Administrative Court in Geneva from
1950 to 1955.

A graduate of Harvard College and Harvard Law School, he was a member of the
Harvard University Board of Overseers, the senior governing body of the
university, from from 1943 to 1949 and from 1951 to 1957, serving as the board's
president from 1953 to 1957.

In addition, he was a lecturer on government at Harvard College in 1942 and 1943
and in 1949 and 1950.

Felix Frankfurter, later a Supreme Court Justice, became a mentor of the Mr.
Wyzanski at Harvard Law School and later said, ''He was one of the most
brilliant students I ever had.''

Judge Wyzanski won wide note with rulings on issues large and small in the
1960's and the Vietnam War era. When, in 1971, the Supreme Court upheld the
right of Congress to limit draft exemptions for conscientious objectors to those
who oppose all wars, an editorial in The New York Times noted that Judge
Wyzanski had observed earlier, in a similar case, that ''this is not an area of
constitutional absolutism.'' He added that ''it is an area in which competing
claims must be explored, examined, and marshalled with reference to the
Constitution as whole'' and to existing circumstances.

''It is unfortunate,'' the editorial observed, ''that the Supreme Court failed
to consider the subtle but vital constitutional distinctions that enlighten
Judge Wyzanski's opinion.''

Ruling Backed Boy's Long Hair

On a lesser issue, Judge Wyzanski ruled, in a widely quoted 1969 decision, in
favor of a Massachusetts high school student who had been suspended because of
his long hair. The judge affirmed that there was no reason for the suspension
''except possibly the principal's personal prejudice.''

And in 1973 he ordered all 14 assistant United States attorneys in Boston to
file sworn statements about whether they had smoked marijuana.

Declaring ''hypocrisy begins at home,'' he contended that Federal attorneys in
Boston spent too much time prosecuting minor narcotics cases.

After an editorial in The Boston Globe suggested that he be named Chief Justice
of the Supreme Court, to succeed Earl Warren, Judge Wyzanski wrote in 1968, in a
puckish letter to his children, ''I assure you the only vote I have is from the
writer of the editorial.''

Charles Edward Wyzanski Jr. was born May 27, 1906 in Boston, the son of Charles
Edward Wyzanski Sr., a well-to-do Boston real estate man, and the former Maude
Joseph.

The future judge grew up in Brookline, a suburb of Boston. He attended Brookline
High School and the Phillips Exeter Academy. He was graduated magna cum laude
from Harvard College, where he was a member of Phi Beta Kappa, and in 1930 from
Harvard Law School.

Judge Wyzanski was a fanatically loyal member of the Harvard class of 1927. It
was not by chance that his Massachusetts licence plate number was 1927 H and
that his home telephone number also incorporated the number 1927.

After graduation, he practiced law in Boston before serving, in 1930 and 1931,
as a law secretary to Justice Augustus N. Hand of the United States Court of
Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan. The next year he served that
judge's cousin, Justice Learned Hand, of the same court, in the same capacity.

He Worked in Washington

Then, in the New Deal, he was a solicitor with the Department of Labor in
Washington from 1933 to 1935 before joining the staff of the Department of
Justice, where he remained until 1937, serving as a special assistant to the
Attorney General and on the staff of the Solicitor General.

He then practiced law in Boston from 1938 to 1941 before going on the bench.

Judge Wyzanski was feted by 450 guests May 27 at his 80th birthday at his house
in Cambridge.

He had served as a trustee of the Ford Foundation and had honorary degrees from
Harvard and several other colleges and universities. He was active in the
affairs of Phillips Exeter Academy.

Judge Wyzanski is survived by his wife, the former Gisela Warburg, whom he
married in 1943; two children, Charles M. Wyzanski and Anita W. Robboy, both of
Cambridge; a sister, Ruth W. Rintels of Manhattan, and three grandchildren.

Funeral services will be private. A memorial service will be held at Harvard
University later in the fall.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Judge Charles Wyzanski Jr. (UPI)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

RHYMES AMONG THE WRENCHES

BYLINE: By RON ALEXANDER

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 969 words


''The'' New York hosts and hostesses of the 80's, it has been said on more than
one occasion, are the city's department stores. The likes of Lord & Taylor,
Macy's and Bloomingdale's are frequently the after-store-hours scene of cocktail
parties, dinners, fund-raising benefits, award presentations and salutes to all
four seasons as well as to practically every country in the world.

It should come as no surprise, then, that the party concept has filtered down to
smaller shops around town. The difference, the amount of space aside, is the
cultural focus. Recently, for instance, two such events took place on successive
evenings: one in an East Village hardware store, one in a West Village rug shop.

The Intuflo Hardware Store has, since late last winter, been the scene of
monthly prose and poetry readings by relatively unknown authors. The store, at
199 East Fourth Street, between Avenues A and B, is in an area undergoing
gentrification. ''When people move into a new neighborhood, companionship can be
as much of a basic need as hardware,'' Richard Savitsky was saying the other
night, as he took an aluminum colander off the wall and filled it with
blueberries and strawberries for the crowd.

A Neighborhood Place

A former attorney in the entertainment business, Mr. Savitsky is chairman of
Intuflo, a company that owns a number of shops in Manhattan. It was the idea of
Mr. Savitsky, who grew up in the small Connecticut town of Shelton, to make the
year-old hardware store where clerks range in age from 21 to 70 a place for
locals to drop in to chat, get 10 percent off on their birthdays and, he hopes,
''walk away feeling warm and good.''

As they gobbled berries and drank white wine and seltzer from paper cups, the 50
or so casually dressed men and women - mostly in their 20's, paperbacks sticking
out of their blue-jean pockets - who showed up for the open-house readings were
quite content to be sitting on bridge chairs set up among displays of light
bulbs, ironing boards, scrubbing brushes, cake pans, plaster of paris and
Elmer's Glue-All. The night was warm: no problem, though, in a store where
electric fans are for sale.

The evening was all prose; the readings went quietly, which, according to Fran
Colgan, who coordinates the events, has not always been the case. There was the
time, for instance, a writer read her ''orgasmic love poems'' accompanied by a
loud beating of a huge gong; the night another woman read poems dealing with
''America's second-class citizens'' and the subject of revolutions (''We all got
really depressed that night,'' Ms. Colgan recalled), and there was the
unforgettable occasion when a young man, with what may or may not have been
sticks of dynamite strapped to his back, read prose on the subject of being ''a
human bomb in New York.''

The other night Diane Simmons, 38, came from Carroll Gardens in Brooklyn to read
the first chapter of her novel ''Dreams Like Thunder''; Brian Kiteley, who lives
on the Upper West Side, read from ''Still Life with Insects,'' his
novel-in-progress, and Ned Miller, 26, a resident of Brooklyn and a staff writer
for the magazine 100 Home Ideas, read three poems and two short stories,
including one entitled ''The Autobiography of Miss Rosalind Russell.'' Mr.
Miller, whose work included a goodly number of 10-letter as well as four-letter
words, got the heartiest applause. ''It's my hope that eyebrows can still be
raised in the East Village,'' he said.

He also hopes he'll be able to raise eyebrows on Columbus Avenue where, later
this month, another Intuflo store is scheduled to open at 68th Street.
Meanwhile, the East Village store is closed for renovations. ''There will be
more room for our parties,'' Mr. Savitsky promises.

The next night, across town at Bleecker and 10th Streets, Mary and Fred Parvin,
owners of La Chambre Perse, a stylish but casual rug store, on whose walls hang
handsome kilims, Bessarabians, Caucasian needlework and such, were greeting
their 70 or so invited dressed-up guests to the Parvins' first Rug Recital.

When the couple recently moved from a loft into a brownstone, they found there
was no room for their concert grand piano. Out of necessity, the piano was moved
into the rug store they have owned for 10 years. ''As long as we had the grand
piano we thought we might just as well have a combination concert and party for
friends and customers we like,'' Mr. Parvin said.

That's logical, but the Parvins also brought in a harp for good measure. ''Harps
are so visually sensual,'' said Mrs. Parvin, a cheery, good-size woman who said
she fears if she gives many more such parties, ''I'll start being known as the
Elaine of rug shops.'' She had originally considered it appropriate to hire a
belly dancer, but decided against it. ''This is a classy occasion,'' she said.

That it was. The program was spelled ''programme,'' and Michael Lewin, the
pianist, and Deborah Hoffman, the harpist (both Juilliard graduates) played
Mozart, Handel, Faure, Chopin, Liszt and Schubert. Mr. Lewin's sheet music
rested against a stack of kilm-covered pillows. There were crudites, pate,
cheese, shrimp, prosciutto, wine, wicker baskets filled with red and green
apples and blue corn chips. ''The new yuppie food,'' said the Parvins' daughter,
Sherene.

One fully expected Scheherazade to show up. She didn't, but Frances Kazan did,
and so did Peter Wormser, who is one of the designers of the New York Vietnam
Veterans Memorial, and Francoise Scheiner, who said, ''This is more than a rug
shop, it's a cultural center.''

Faces pressed against the shop's windows to look inside as the strains of a
piano and harp arrangement of Schubert's ''Ave Maria'' wafted out into the
Greenwich Village night. ''Such a lovely idea,'' one woman said. ''Even if I
wasn't invited.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of recital party at La Chambre Perse (NYT/Sara Krulwich and
Peter Freed)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 6, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SPECIAL MILITARY FORCES: CONGRESS SEES ROOM FOR IMPROVEMENT

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1115 words


In separate measures passed recently, the House and Senate have put the Reagan
Administration on notice that Congress feels proposals by the Secretary of
Defense to strengthen the military's special operations do not go far enough.

The legislation, in the form of amendments to a key military bill, seeks to
assure greater independence, authority and budgetary influence for those in
charge of armed units that carry out commando and counterterrorist operations
like the 1980 attempt to rescue the American hostages in Iran.

And although the eventual enactment of such a measure is uncertain, the votes
signal both houses' concern over the state of the country's special forces. That
concern is evident in the Administration as well, which has proposed less
far-reaching changes.

''In my view, the most likely use of force by the United States in the
foreseeable future is by our special operations forces,'' said Sam Nunn of
Georgia, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Armed Services Committee. ''The
threat that we face from terrorism and from other forms of low-intensity
conflict mean that we must be prepared to deter and respond if necessary with
special operations forces.''

Proposal Without Precedent

Depending upon what compromise emerges from the current House-Senate conference
to reconcile the two measures, the nation, for the first time, could have the
unusual situation of combat forces commanded by a civilian, independent of the
authority of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. This independence is a key feature of
the House proposal, introduced by Representative Dan Daniel of Virginia, a
Democrat.

According to Congressional aides, Mr. Daniel feels strongly that the only way to
get adequate attention and support for unconventional warfare forces like the
green-beret wearing commandos who gained fame in Vietnam is to establish an
agency beyond the control of the services.

The Senate legislation, sponsored by William S. Cohen, Republican of Maine, and
supported by Mr. Nunn, is less radical, establishing a unified military command
for special forces comparable in authority to theater commands in Europe and in
the Pacific. Like these unified commands, however, it would be within the
authority of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Senator Cohen's bill would also establish a civilian Assistant Secretary of
Defense and an assistant to the President for special operations to insure
adequate civilian support.

Criticism From Congress

Congress has been increasingly critical of the treatment of special operations
units within the services. ''We are not well prepared for unconventional
conflicts,'' Mr. Cohen has said on the Senate floor, ''and it shows.''

Criticism began to mount soon after the failure of the four-service effort in
1980 to rescue Iran's hostages. Critics have called it a result of a lack of
interservice cooperation and of a makeshift approach to special operations.

Shortly after the Iran failure, a special unit was formed for just such
missions, which saw its only action in the American invasion of Grenada in 1983.
While the Pentagon has never provided details of the operation, analysts outside
the Government have concluded that the unit was only marginally successful.

Critics also cite the conduct of special operations by the Israelis and the
British, contrasting their successes with American failures.

Efforts to Correct Problems

In an attempt to correct deficiencies, the Pentagon established a Joint Special
Operations Agency in 1983. It is generally conceded that the agency has not been
effective.

''I had many responsibilities but I had little authority,'' said Maj. Gen.
Wesley Rice, the officer who was put in charge. ''I ran a management staff but
exercised no real command or control over special operations.''

According to Congressional aides, the House and Senate bills are efforts to make
up for a failure of the Department of Defense to improve effectiveness and
support for special operations.

The Senate bill would place a four-star general in charge of special operations,
while the House version provides for a civilian director at the level of an
assistant secretary of defense.

''As a two-star general, I had little clout in a town of three- and four-star
generals,'' General Rice said of his experience heading the special operations
agency in Washington.

Congressional staff members say that at budget time the lack of a strong
advocate for special operations within the Department of Defense has meant that
funds for these forces end up low on priority lists as each service seeks money
to buy equipment for its more conventional units.

Need for Legislation Questioned

A Pentagon official who spoke on the condition that his name not be used
conceded that improvements to support special operations forces were in order,
but he maintained that legislation for this purpose was not needed.

The Joint Chiefs ''still hope they can come up with a program to satisfy
Congressional concerns and yet allow the military to do its job without detailed
legislative direction from the Congress,'' this general said.

The Defense Department plan, according to Pentagon spokesmen, would establish a
joint special operations command under a three-star general and would also
provide for special operations advocacy in budget decisions.

This proposal, however, was the one rejected by the Senate before passage of the
Cohen legislation, which would put a higher-ranking officer in charge of special
operations and give the command greater status within the military hierarchy.

Outcome Far From Clear

Defense officials expressed particular concern over the House bill, which would
separate control of special operations from conventional military operations and
command.

''Special operations, regardless of what they seek to accomplish, will always be
part of a larger effort which requires conventional forces and conventional
support,'' the general said.

The outcome of the negotiations over special operations is seen as uncertain
both in the Pentagon and on Capitol Hill. Those dealing with the issue believe
that agreement can be reached between the Senate and the Defense Department but
see little prospect for a compromise on the House version.

The future of the special operations legislation is also clouded by the fact
that both House and Senate proposals are tied to the bill establishing and
continuing military programs for 1987. If Congress contents itself with stopgap
legislation that generally continues military fund ceilings at current levels,
instead of a new program-authorizing bill, the special operations issue may not
come to a vote in this session of Congress.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 6, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GUILTY VERDICT IN MURDER CASE IS OVERTURNED

BYLINE: By KIRK JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 960 words


The murder conviction of a man linked to organized crime in Manhattan was
overturned yesterday when prosecutors said that they believed another man had
committed the crime - and that the identity of the real killer had been known by
the convicted man's defense attorneys throughout his trial.

Officials at the Manhattan District Attorney's office said that the defendant,
Francis Featherstone, who was convicted in March of the murder of Michael Holly,
a 41-year-old construction worker on the West Side, had not been at the scene of
the crime and could not have pulled the trigger in the execution-style killing.

Agreed to Other Crimes

But they said that Mr. Featherstone, who is 38, would not soon be released from
jail, where he has been held since his arrest shortly after the murder in April
1985, in part because he had admitted to other crimes and agreed to testify
against other gang members, thus putting his life in danger from his associates.

Mr. Featherstone has been tried for murder three previous times in Manhattan and
acquitted each time for crimes for which prosecutors still believe he was
responsible.

At a hearing yesterday before Justice Alvin Schlesinger, at which Mr.
Featherstone had been scheduled for sentencing in the Holly case, prosecutors
outlined a complex scenario that they said had led to their decision to ask for
a reversal of the conviction.

Aspects of Case

They cited these aspects of the case:

* Mr. Featherstone's attorneys in his trial had been told nearly a year before
his conviction that another man had committed the murder but that they failed to
bring it to the attention of the court because the killer was also a legal
client and thus protected by the attorney-client privilege.

* The man suspected of the killing, Michael Bokun, who prosecutors said is an
associate of Mr. Featherstone's in a West Side gang called the Westies, had
disguised himself during the killing in order to make himself resemble Mr.
Featherstone because of an internal gang rivalry.

* Mr. Featherstone, in bringing forth the information that led to the
overturning of his conviction, had been forced to outline his gang activities
and contacts in such detail that a Federal racketeering case has been brought
against him - punishable by up to 20 years in prison - and he was forced to
enter the Federal Witness Protection Program.

'Heinous Crimes' Cited

''It would be nice to say that Mr. Featherstone is a completely innocent
individual and an upstanding member of the community, for if I could say that,
the setting aside of this verdict would be very easy - unfortunately, I cannot
say that,'' Assistant District Attorney Jeffrey Schlanger, said in his comments
in court.

Mr. Schlanger said that Mr. Featherstone would be punished for the ''heinous
crimes'' to which he admitted in the course of cooperating with prosecutors in
the Michael Holly case but that the ''bottom line, despite the defendant's past,
is still that we are convinced that Francis Featherstone did not shoot Michael
Holly, and that William Bokun did,'' he said.

According to court records, Mr. Featherstone is a Vietnam veteran who was one of
the youngest members of the Army's Special Forces, the Green Berets.

Prosecutors said that Mr. Bokun is in custody after being indicted in another
murder case based on evidence provided by Mr. Featherstone. He has not been
formally charged in the Holly case but is considered the prime suspect, the
prosecutors said.

The authorities, including Justice Schlesinger, say that the major question
raised by the Featherstone case is whether Mr. Featherstone's lawyers should
have told the judge about the situation during the trial, or before. A spokesman
for Manhattan District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau, Mary de Bourbon, called
the attorneys' representation of Mr. Featherstone ''a monumental conflict of
interest'' and said that their conduct would be brought to the attention of the
bar association.

Lawyers Defend Action

And while the attorneys, who have represented Mr. Featherstone in all four of
his murder trials, acknowledged there was a possible conflict of interest, they
defended their action in withholding the information as being the only possible
course.

''It was one of those really horrible situations I found myself in,'' said
Kenneth Aronson, a member of the firm of Hochheiser & Aronson in Manhattan. Mr.
Aronson, whose firm excused itself from representing Mr. Featherstone after his
conviction, said he had received approval of his actions in the case from the
Association of the Bar of the City of New York.

''My dilemma was that I was not even able to reveal the conflict because to
reveal the conflict would have been to reveal the material,'' Mr. Aronson said.

According to Mr. Aronson, Mr. Featherstone was told of the conflict and knew the
identity of the killer but told his attorneys not to tell the court ''because he
didn't want to get anyone in trouble.''

Mr. Featherstone, on the other hand, contended in an affidavit to the court that
his attorneys told him during the trial that the other client would be called as
a witness and he would thus be acquitted.

A spokesman for the bar association, Alan Rothstein, declined to confirm whether
the association had considered Mr. Aronson's problem.

According to officials at the Manhattan District Attorney's office, Mr.
Featherstone has agreed to plead guilty to one count of a Federal charge that he
participated in ''a pattern of rackeetering'' activities - the evidence for
which was all gathered after he came forward and agreed to cooperate following
his conviction. He faces up to 20 years in prison on that charge. He could have
faced 25 years to life on the murder conviction.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing of Francis Featherstone (Page 31)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DENG HINTS AT GORBACHEV TALK

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 203 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Sept. 6


The Chinese leader, Deng Xiaoping, has told an American interviewer that he is
ready to meet with Mikhail S. Gorbachev if the Soviet Union withdraws its
support for Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia.

Mr. Deng also said that United States backing for Taiwan remained an obstacle to
closer Chinese-American ties.

He spoke in an interview Tuesday with Mike Wallace, a reporter for CBS News, to
be broadcast Sunday on ''60 Minutes.'' Excerpts were carried by the New China
News Agency.

Mr. Deng said China and the Soviet Union ''are actually in a state of
confrontation'' in Cambodia, where Soviet-backed Vietnamese troops have been
fighting against Chinese-supported guerrillas. ''If the Soviet Union can
contribute to the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Cambodia, this will
remove the main obstacle in Chinese-Soviet relations,'' Mr. Deng said.

China has made improved relations with the Soviet Union conditional on the
resolution of three issues: Vietnam's role in Cambodia, the Soviet intervention
in Afghanistan and Soviet troop deployment along the Chinese border.

Mr. Deng said the Cambodian issue was the most important.

''Once this problem is resolved, I will be ready to meet Gorbachev,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BOK'S OUTLINE OF RIGHT ROLE FOR ACADEMY

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 31, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Sept. 6


Following are excerpts from an address by Derek Bok, the president of Harvard
University, to a convocation in Harvard Yard this afternoon, as recorded by The
New York Times:

Fifty years have come and gone since we last gathered to celebrate a Harvard
anniversary. Looking back on the proceedings then, one is sobered by how few
glimmerings there were of the great upheavals that would alter Harvard, the
nation and the entire globe in the decades to come. Scarcely a hint appears of
the coming transformation of America's role in the world, the quest for greater
opportunity by minority groups and women, the vast changes in health care, or
the surging growth of technology that would engulf the nation. Still more
significant was the failure to anticipate the mounting importance of knowledge
itself.

In casting about for sources of concern, we can appropriately begin by looking
outside the academy itself. For success and prosperity attract attention, not
always of a welcome kind. As universities wax in influence and importance, as
their visibility increases and their assets grow, various groups are naturally
tempted to use them for a purpose of their own choosing.

Obligation to Society

Military and intelligence agencies have tried to engage professors in secret
research and impose restrictions to keep our scientific findings out of enemy
hands. Businesses search for relationships with our scientists that will help
them develop new products. Social activists press the university to use its
stock, its purchasing power, its reputation and prestige to fight against
apartheid and other evils and injustices. Communities look to our campuses as
sources of wealth and leverage to help solve local problems.

In responding to such requests, universities must be keenly aware of their
obligation to support the society that sustains them. The question is how they
can best contribute and what conditions they must preserve to keep on doing so.
All too often, outside groups mistakenly conclude that since the university is
successful in teaching and research, it can sway political institutions or solve
society's problems as well. Frequently, they press the university to risk its
independence by entering into political battles or ask it to act in ways that
compromise the openness and freedom that characterize a healthy research
environment. The problem is not that people seek the university's help to solve
a social problem but that they urge it to act in ways that contradict its proper
nature and threaten its most essential functions.

Opportunities for Professors

Faculty members, too, are increasingly caught up in the toils of fundraising and
administration as they struggle to develop their departments and maintain their
research centers. But many professors are encumbered even more by all the
opportunities that come to them in a society hungry for expert knowledge. In
professional schools and, increasingly, in arts and sciences faculties as well,
possibilities abound for consulting, government service, going to conferences,
and explaining one's field of knowledge to an interested public. Gradually,
quietly, these extramural ventures come to represent a mounting source of
excitement, variety, status and income.

A generation of scholars is coming of age that grew up in Watergate and Vietnam
and inherited a pervasive distrust of established institutions. We should not
assume that they will feel the same institutional loyalties that their
predecessors shared any more than we can count on the same loyalties elsewhere
in the country. Instead, in a world that honors success and opulent life styles,
we could easily find ourselves harboring more and more professors who try to
combine the freedom and security of a tenured academic post with the income and
visibility traditionally reserved for people who take much greater risks and
work at much less elevating tasks.

Time does not always work in obvious ways. For example, we know from watching
our students carefully that those who try to devote every moment to their
studies often lower, rather than raise, their academic performance. The same may
be true of scholars as well. People who are engaged in many absorbing tasks
bring an intensity to their work that frequently improves its quality. But we
also know that there comes a point when extracurricular burdens become so great
that academic work begins to suffer.

Only University Fits Some Roles

In particular, we will need to persuade the public and to remind ourselves that
we are not corporations, not instruments of national security, not militant
bodies anxious to force our vision of social justice on the world. Many
organizations can offer advice, or help solve society's problems, or develop new
products, or further our military aims. But only universities, or institutions
like them, can discover the knowledge on which creative solutions rest and only
they can educate the men and women who will eventually make the critical
decisions. Many individuals can be entrepreneurs, or advocates, or influential
advisers. But only scholars blessed with security and freedom can master the
largest subjects and pursue the truth wherever the quest may lead. Many
experiences may temper our judgment and help us grow. But only education can
work simultaneously to develop intellectual capacities, awaken new interests,
lift aspirations, provoke important questions, deepen understanding - and these,
not the reflected luster of the institution or the influence of its alumni, must
be the university's true contribution to its students.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

OUR TOWNS;
A Middle-Class Approach to Civil Disobedience

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINERIP, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 53, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 937 words

DATELINE: WARWICK, N.Y., Sept. 4


Before she went out for the evening, Audrey Wells fried up some pork chops and
left them in the oven to warm for when her husband got back from work.

Next door, Art Laster got home from his job at the garden store early, then took
Chester the dog out for a fast walk. His wife Patti changed their son Josh's
diapers quickly and put on his pajamas, so Josh would be ready.

Venicia Miranda cooked her husband Jose's favorite, beans and rice. After Mr.
Miranda, a prison guard, left to work the night shift, Mrs. Miranda drove to
meet the others at their weekly civil disobedience group, where they all
practice going limp.

For several weeks now the citizens of these small towns along the New York-New
Jersey border have been faithfully attending their weekly civil disobedience
meetings. Each civil disobedience group is made up of about a dozen people and
there are 20 groups meeting regularly in neighbors' living rooms, 250 people
altogether.

If the state of New Jersey carries out its threat to truck radium waste to
nearby Vernon and bury it there, the local people vow they will stop the trucks.
According to the plan, when a truck is spotted, churches in Warwick will ring
their bells, a phone squad will get the message out, the townspeople will gather
in their civil disobedience squads and then sit in the road in front of the
trucks, just like they've practiced, going limp if arrested.

When Leslie Pedersen, a housewife, first heard about this civil disobdenice
movement, she thought it was a little peculiar, and Joe McNally was against it,
just like he was against students who protested the Vietnam War. Mr. McNally's
two sons are police officers and they may be called on to escort the trucks.

But the more Mr. McNally thought about radium in Vernon - the more he thought
about what it might do to the ground water and real-estate values - the better
civil disobedience sounded. Before leaving for his group's weekly meeting
Thursday night, he said, ''This evening our topic will be who wants to go limp.
I think the way I feel in my mind now, I'm willing to stay in the road and be
arrested.''

As a member of the War Resisters League, Jean Fazzino Kenney has trained people
in civil disobedience technique for years, but she has never seen anything quite
like the people of Warwick and Vernon. Ms. Kenney has participated in sit-ins at
a nuclear submarine base in Connecticut and poured blood on the steps of the
Pentagon, but the people in these border towns were not interested in symbolic
gestures.

''They want to stop the trucks,'' Ms. Kenney said. ''This is middle-class
America. They are not hippies. These people are intense.''

When Ms. Kenney started training group leaders here, she suggested role-playing.
The people of Vernon and Warwick were not interested in too much role-playing.

Before peace protests, she has had people spend weeks getting to know each
other; people here were not interested in too much lifesharing.

''They wanted to know how to stop these trucks,'' Ms. Kenney said.

They called Ms. Kenney for help at the end of July when it appeared the trucks
could be arriving any day from Montclair, N.J. Ms. Kenney lives in a nearby
town, and had not been involved in protests for several years. ''I'd been
thinking that life was real boring and how exciting it would be to get arrested
again,'' she said. ''And they called.'' From the beginning, several people
explained to Ms. Kenney that they were different from the people she was used
to: ''They tell me, we're not like you, we don't demonstrate at the Pentagon, we
don't fight the Government. We believe in the system, but for some reason this
has happened and we have to do this now.''

Most have never been involved in an environmental issue before and they do not
have elaborate plans for what should be done with the waste -they just do not
want it in Vernon. They figure Vernon was chosen because it is a remote spot,
whose residents have little political influence. They are glad that the state
has now delayed the trucks until a special committee issues a report, but they
swear they will not be taken by surprise again.

At weekly meetings, they do not talk much politics or philosophy. ''They want to
know 'If I'm arrested will I lose my teaching certificate? Will I be allowed to
practice medicine?' '' Ms. Kenney said. The answers are not straightforward, but
she works to keep their spirits up: ''It's O.K.; it's a democratic society; it's
all right.''

Pat Heaney's group began last week's meeting at 7:30 Wednesday night. There were
12 adults and 4 children. First they discussed the best route through the back
roads to beat the trucks to the site.

They talked about handing in their bail money ahead of time, and Mrs. Wells
said, ''You want us to put it in an envelope?'' Mrs. Miranda, wife of the prison
guard, said she heard the court took Mastercard.

Patricia Kiley asked if they all had a knapsack packed in case they wound up
sitting a long time in front of the trucks. ''Remember a toothbrush, sunscreen
to protect you,'' she said, ''and something to nosh on, Fig Newtons or
something.''

They discussed whether anyone had to put down an arrest on a job application or
only a conviction. Ms. Kenney passed out armbands. ''Don't wash them,'' she
said, ''they're not washable.''

By 8:30 they were done. At the end, as always, they formed a circle, took each
other's hands and were quiet for a few seconds. This used to make Mrs. Pedersen
feel strange, but she says she is used to it now.

Outside afterward in the cool, night air, people said they felt stronger in the
face of the trucks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, a picture caption with the ''Our Towns'' column
last Sunday and a news summary of the column on page 47 misidentified the town
where New Jersey has proposed a site to bury radium waste. The town is Vernon,
N.J.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Patti Laster, Bill Schultz, Patricia Kiley and Pat Heaney
(NYT/Alan Zale)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MUSIC VIEW;
LABELING THIS ERA MAY BE EASY AFTER ALL

BYLINE: By DONAL HENAHAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1040 words


When the time comes for the art historians to choose a label for the declining
years of this century, what will it be? Perhaps in light of the quality of the
paint we are using and the messiness of the picture we are painting, they will
decide to duck the question. Maybe the final quarter of this century will simply
be ignored as of no cultural consequence, an era without a Zeitgeist to call its
own. How humiliating.

More likely, however, some picturesque tag will be settled upon, if only so
future generations of pupils may distinguish our era on their quiz papers from
the Mauve Decade, the Age of Innocence, La Belle Epoque and such. With all
modesty, I would like to offer a suggestion: the Age of Sophisticated Sleaze. At
first glance, it may not seem as catchy as the Lost Generation, but it may need
no more than the patina of time and a Hemingway to fix it in the imagination.

As you remember from your own school days, in every distinctive era there
occurred a moment that epitomized the age - Black Friday, for instance, or the
Defenestration of Prague. Our moment of epiphany, I would say, came a couple of
years back when one of Manhattan's fanciest department stores promoted a style
called ''Street Couture,'' featuring tattered, wrinkled and apparently dirty
clothes. Among the choice items advertised was a ''torn jacket, a careful copy
of those worn by the poor of this and other cities'' for $190. The idea, which
became known in fashion circles as ''bag-lady chic,'' was not an aberration or a
put-on but an acute response to our society's addiction to sophisticated sleaze.
If you doubt it, step out in the street right now and look around.

We must be careful to discriminate between sophisticated sleaze as it manifests
itself increasingly in the arts (opera, in particular) and the more obviously
barbaric variety seen on television. The calculated sleaze of ''Miami Vice''
does not concern us, because it clearly aims at nothing higher than the human
midsection. Even the mindlessly trashy opera productions of the Ken Russell
school can be passed over, because they were never suspected of great
seriousness.

But the hallmark of the new artistic sleaze is its pretentiousness. Sleaze today
has gone to college, though reaching in spirit no more than the sophomore level.
When a director such as Peter Sellars looks into ''Cosi Fan Tutte'' and finds
nothing there but an opportunity for facile cheap jokes and show-business
stunts, he cannot admit that. Instead, he diverts attention from the work's
point by setting the action in a sleazy diner and making the hero a Vietnam
veteran. Mozart's most poignantly human masterpiece - which contrary to Mr.
Sellars's arguments has never been played in my lifetime as anything but a
many-layered, seriocomic work - is then twisted into a superficial preachment
against War.

There is no question but that the purveyors of sophisticated sleaze have gained
a solid foothold in the world's opera houses during the last 15 or 20 years,
chiefly as a result of the indiscriminate hiring of directors from the
legitimate theater whose grasp of the musical side of opera is weak or
nonexistent. But, more and more, opposition voices are being heard, here and
abroad. A lively dispute has been going on recently, for instance, in the pages
of the British monthly Musical Times. One dissenter from Oxford, Richard
Drakeford, objects to the English National Opera's ''Parsifal'' on the
reasonable grounds that ''the stage spectacle seemed absolutely at odds with
Wagner's music.'' And with equal dismay to a Welsh National Opera ''Wozzeck'' in
which there were so many extras parading about and such a din set up by
barbed-wire coils being moved that ''one could scarcely hear, let alone listen
attentively to, Berg's wonderful orchestral interludes.'' The writer was
appalled, too, to find that all the characters in this ''Wozzeck'' wore masks,
even though Berg's opera had always seemed to him ''intensely humanistic.''

In an earlier issue, Barry Millington, a Wagner expert, had charged that
musicologists were blind to the merits of theatrically clever new productions
because they wrongly assumed that ''opera's significance is contained entirely
within the music.'' In a caustic response, Arnold Whittall knocked over that
straw man: ''Who, I wonder, are these musicologists who so skillfully contrive
to ignore everything but Wagner's music in their writings?'' In fact, as any
reader of opera reviews can attest, few commentators on Wagner's operas nowadays
pay any attention to the music as such, preferring to concentrate on what the
production appears to be about: novel staging concepts and philosophical
riddles.

The most cogent response to Mr. Millington's strange contention, it seems to me,
came from Robert Donington, whose ''Wagner's 'Ring' and Its Symbols,'' written
23 years ago, is a classic study of the Jungian myths in that work. Agreeing -
as who would doubt it? - that staging is an important element in opera
production, Mr. Donington deplores ''the current fashion for gimmicky
productions of ungimmicky operas'' because the directors try to tell us what the
work's symbols mean rather than staging the symbols themselves and leaving us to
work them out in our own various ways: ''Revisualize it, certainly: see it anew
with all that freshness of the imagination whch is the great artist's
giftc.c.c.cThe meaning is in the images, and not in the thinking.''

Consider, as a familiar example, one of the keystone efforts of the gimmick
movement, Patrice Chereau's ''Ring'' at Bayreuth. ''Chereau's production of the
'Ring' not only gave it an oddly tatty look,'' says Mr. Donington, but ''by
twisting it towards his own missionary vision, he drove many wedges between
words, music and staging, as when he protracted and brutalized the killing of
Siegfried long after the music had moved to other themes; or again, in
televising closeups of one character while the leading motif of another was
coming from the orchestra. An unmusical producer of opera is (or ought to be) a
contradiction in terms.''

Sorry, Mr. Donington, you are living in the past. In the Age of Sophisticated
Sleaze, whole careers are built on just such contradictions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NONALIGNED ALWAYS LEANED LEFTWARD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 294 words


SEEKING strength through numbers, Yugoslavia's maverick Communist leader, Josip
Broz Tito, joined with Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt and Sukarno of Indonesia in
summoning 21 other leaders, most of them African and Asian, to Belgrade in 1961.
The Soviet Union saluted this founding meeting of the Nonaligned Movement by
detonating a nuclear test, thus ending a moratorium that leaders of nonnuclear
countries had lauded.

From the beginning, the group's members included a few United States friends,
like Haile Selassie of Ethiopia and Habib Bourguiba of Tunisia, as well as
adversaries like President Osvaldo Dorticos Torrado of Cuba.

At first, the movement stressed independence for Algeria and other colonial
territories and ending South Africa's apartheid policy. It attacked foreign
military bases, specifying the United States base at Guantanamo, Cuba, and it
called for banning nuclear tests but did not mention the Soviet move.

Nonalignment was defined as the pursuit of independent policies, free of
military alliances. But as the membership grew to 101, including two
noncountries, the Palestine Liberation Organization and South-West Africa
Peoples Organization, the definition was loosened. Among members with ties to
Moscow, Cuba can now find brothers in Afghanistan, Cambodia, revolutionary
Ethiopia, Laos, Nicaragua, North Korea, Southern Yemen and Vietnam. A few,
including Grenada, Jamaica, Jordan, Morocco, Pakistan and Zaire, are United
States friends.

Under Arab pressure, the group damned ''Zionism as a form of racism'' and
condemned Egypt for making peace with Israel. With Indira Gandhi of India, and
later her son Rajiv, as chairmen, the emphasis shifted somewhat to economics -
rescheduling third-world debt and increasing credits.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of members of the second nonaligned Nations' Conference during a
moment of silence at the opening session in Cairo in 1964 (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SENATE RACE TESTS DEMOCRATS' WINGS

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 744 words


THE Democratic primary contest Tuesday between John S. Dyson and Mark Green will
do more than settle the matter of who gets to oppose the strong Republican
incumbent, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, in the November general election. It also
will answer some questions about the Democratic party, such as whether it has
moved to the right.

The 41-year-old Mr. Green is a certified liberal who has become known on the
national scene as a Congress watcher and consumer advocate for Ralph Nader. He
is a lawyer and the author of 12 books on government. He admires Senators like
Edward M. Kennedy, Gary Hart and Bill Bradley for their ''guts, commitment and
creativity.''

The 43-year-old Mr. Dyson is a moderate Democrat in the mold, he says, of Daniel
Patrick Moynihan, the state's senior Senator. He is an extremely wealthy
manufacturer of products including lollipop sticks and trailer hitches. He made
his mark first as a Democratic Party contributor and then as an outspoken
chairman of the State Power Authority and Commissioner of both the State
Agriculture Department and the Commerce Department. He takes credit - which has
not been disputed - for creating the ''I Love New York'' advertising campaign.

A decade or two ago, moderate Democrats would not have bothered to take their
case to a liberal party membership obsessed with such issues as ''reforming''
the party bosses (in the '50's and '60's) and later with ending the war in
Vietnam. Mr. Green is betting that the primary electorate has not changed, that
Mr. Dyson's only chance is his money. Mr. Dyson has said that his net worth is
$30 million.

''If each of us spent $1 million, I'd win 70 to 30,'' said Mr. Green, who
contends that Mr. Dyson's spending -close to $6 million over the last three
months, almost all of it his own - makes him the biggest primary spender in
Senate history. Mr. Green points to Mario Cuomo's victory over Ed Koch in the
1982 primary for governor, and Elizabeth Holtzman's defeat of Bess Myerson in
the 1980 primary for the United States Senate, as evidence that liberalism still
lives in the Democratic party.

Mr. Green emphasizes issues on which he and Mr. Dyson differ, even if only in
degree. Mr. Green came out first and more strongly in favor of a moratorium on
nuclear testing and divestment in South Africa; the same was true of the two
men's opposition to the Shoreham nuclear plant and to aid for the contras in
Nicaragua. Mr. Green opposes a home port for the Navy on Staten Island and
voluntary import quotas on Japanese automobiles; on those points Mr. Dyson
disagrees.

Mr. Green has repeatedly charged that Mr. Dyson is a ''closet conservative'' who
contributed to the Conservative Party as recently as the beginning of this year.
Mr. Dyson says he thinks the Democratic electorate is more interested in the
practical problem of trying to defeat Mr. D'Amato in November than in what he
calls ''ideological purity.'' He used to play down his wealth, but uses it now
not only to support his massive radio and television advertising campaign but
also to make the point that he has the resources to take on Mr. D'Amato and his
$7 million war chest. Mr. Green is struggling to reach $750,000.

Mr. Dyson has tried to blur issues and differences with Mr. Green so as not to
raise liberal hackles. Instead, he has talked mostly about his record as a
public official and Mr. Green's ''nonrecord.'' He drops the names of Governors
Carey and Cuomo, with whom he served, as often as possible, and he leans heavily
on Mr. Cuomo in his speeches and advertising.

The Governor encouraged

Mr. Dyson, no particular friend, to enter the Senate race even though Mr. Green
was already running. Earlier, the Governor had done little to encourage two
Democratic candidates who were perceived at the time as the strongest the party
could field: Geraldine A. Ferraro, the 1984 Vice Presidential candidate, and
District Attorney Holtzman of Brooklyn, who lost to Mr. D'Amato in 1980. Friends
of Mr. Cuomo say the Governor feared that potential opponents for the Democratic
Presidential nomination might accuse him of discouraging strong opposition to
Mr. D'Amato, with whom Mr. Cuomo has exchanged verbal bouquets on more than one
occasion, in a year when Democrats are trying to recapture the Senate.

The Governor is officially neutral, although the party apparatus he controls
generally supports Mr. Dyson. The Governor does not want to be caught on the
wrong side.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of John S. Dyson and Mark Green (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHALLENGE IN THE PACIFIC

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN; Clyde Haberman is chief of The New York Times's Tokyo
bureau

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4000 words


THIS SUMMER, IN THE BLACK waters north of Japan, the Soviet Union's Pacific
Fleet staged one of its biggest sea and air exercises of recent years. Outsiders
were not allowed near the maneuvers, but American naval intelligence concluded
that more than 30 surface ships and submarines were involved. The Soviet forces
moved with ease in and around the Sea of Okhotsk, which stretches from the main
Siberian land mass to the fingerlike protrusion that is the Kamchatka Peninsula.
Overhead, fighter planes creased the skies.

As a training mission, the maneuvers gave Soviet seamen practice in securing
waters that serve as a sanctuary for Russian nuclear-missile submarines capable
of attacking the west coast of the United States. But perhaps more important,
the exercises underscored the growing strength and proficiency of what has
become a major new element of Soviet military power.

For nearly two decades, Soviet leaders have been strengthening their Pacific
Fleet, transforming it from a relatively compact coastal operation into a
high-seas naval force with distinct offensive capabilities.

The expansion has produced some startling statistics. Across the western
Pacific, the Russians have amassed 830 ships, according to American and Japanese
estimates. That compares with about 70 for the Seventh Fleet, the main United
States naval force in the region. The Soviet buildup has, if anything, picked up
fresh steam in the 1980's, with the addition of modern aircraft carriers,
nuclear-missile submarines and advanced fighter planes.

The Pacific has long been considered an area of unchallenged American military
superiority. And American defense analysts say that if hostilities were to break
out at sea tomorrow, the United States and its Pacific allies would almost
certainly win. Many ships in the Soviet fleet, they say, are too small or too
obsolete to cause much worry. Experts give the Americans an edge in tactics and
technology, and say United States forces could quickly be reinforced by as many
as 160 ships from the Third Fleet, which is based in the eastern Pacific.

Still, the pace and scale of the Russian naval buildup are hard to ignore, and
the growth of the Soviet fleet has been accompanied by other military
investments in east Asia - on land as well as at sea - that have focused new
attention on Moscow's long-term goals in the region.

At Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam, the Russians over the last seven years have turned a
former American naval base into an important center for intelligence gathering
and logistical support in Southeast Asia. And governments in the region are
unsettled by the marked increase in the number of nuclear missiles positioned in
Soviet Asia, well within striking range of Peking, Tokyo and Seoul.

The growth of such military strength provides Moscow with a measure of influence
in Asia that it has been unable to achieve through normal economic and
diplomatic channels. And it buttresses a dramatic shift in Soviet foreign policy
under Mikhail Gorbachev, who recognizes that Moscow has neglected East Asia,
with its dynamic economic growth, for too long.

The Soviet initiative comes, moreover, at a time when the United States is
facing uncertainties about its basing rights in the Philippines and controversy
over the presence of nuclear-armed American warships in the region.

Against this background, the growth of Soviet military power is seen by many
Western observers as an increasing threat to American influence in the Pacific.
At the least, the United States is now forced into the unwelcome position of
having to compete hard in a region it used to consider its own.

''I do not think we have enough defensive strength out here,'' says Mike
Mansfield, the United States Ambassador to Japan. There is ''no immediate
threat,'' he said over coffee one recent morning. Rather, ''potential is the
word.'' The very size of the Soviet fleet, he said, coupled with its expansion
into new Pacific regions, spells danger by definition.

THE SUDDEN SURGE IN MOSCOW'S interest in Asia has focused new attention on areas
that have long gone unnoticed.

Take the case of Kiribati, an island chain in the South Pacific, a union of
rocky dots strewn across two million square miles of ocean (map, page 104).

It is a safe bet that most Americans have never heard of Kiribati, let alone
know how to pronounce it - ki-ri-BAS. Clump the dots together and you have a
land mass the size of New York City, excluding the Bronx. If people in the
United States recognize it at all, they may slip and refer to it still as the
Gilbert Islands, the name it carried until it gained full independence from
Britain seven years ago. Like many other island mini-states in the Pacific,
Kiribati has few economic resources. But it is surrounded by tuna-rich waters,
and that fact has changed security considerations for its neighbors and for
faraway Washington as well.

A year ago, in return for a payment of $1.5 million, Kiribati signed a treaty
that allowed 16 Soviet ships to fish in its waters. In two million square miles
of ocean, that is not many vessels. It may not seem like much money either. But
it represented 10 percent of Kiribati's total budget. Pressed for cash and
increasingly upset over what they consider abusive practices by big American
tuna boats, the islands' leaders gladly accepted the Soviet offer. It was
nothing more than a ''commercial deal,'' said Kiribati's young President,
Ieremia Tabai.

But the fishing treaty, the first of its kind signed by the Soviet Union in the
Pacific, has spread ripples of anxiety far from Kiribati's coast.

One concern is that the Russians may have more on their minds than tuna.
Trawlers can be employed to gather useful intelli-gence on water depths and
sea-bed mineral deposits. Then too, less than 1,000 miles north of Kiribati's
waters, within elec-tronic eavesdropping range, is a United States missile test
site at Kwajalein in the Marshall Islands.

Such fears, of course, may be exaggerated. Yet the Soviet military expansion
from the North Pacific to Cam Ranh Bay weighs heavily on many island leaders,
and some worry that it is only a matter of time before they start feeling
pressure.

If the Russian interest in the South Pacific had ended with Kiribati, the
concerns might have subsided. But Moscow has gone from one island state to
another, extending offers of economic assistance. Most have said no. But not
all.

Several South Pacific nations recently lifted a six-year-old ban on Soviet
cruise ships in their waters in order to help their listless tourist industries.
Vanuatu, formerly the New Hebrides, established diplomatic relations with the
Soviet Union just a few months ago. Now, it says it probably will soon sign a
fishing agreement that, unlike Kiribati's, would give Russians the right to go
all the way into Vanuatu harbors and to set up onshore plants.

Such cases, according to Malcolm Fraser, Australia's outspoken former Prime
Minister, have helped make future Soviet military operations in his corner of
the Pacific an ''absolute certainty.''

''It will start as a fish-processing facility,'' he warned not long ago. ''But
that will have some refueling facilities, which will require repair facilities
and, in turn, an airfield.''

''Then,'' he said, ''it is a base.''

F ROM ITS HEAD-quarters at Vladivostok on the Sea of Japan, reaching northeast
to Petropavlovsk on the Kamchatka Peninsula, and south in a wide arc to Cam Ranh
Bay, the Pacific Fleet has grown into the largest of the four Soviet naval
fleets. It is at least one-third bigger than it was in the late 1970's. In
certain critical categories, notably nuclear weapons, it is many times more
powerful. Its inventory includes about 90 cruisers, destroyers and other major
combat vessels, plus two of the Soviet Navy's three modern Kiev-class aircraft
carriers.

The nearly 130 submarines assigned to this one fleet alone is almost equal the
number deployed by the entire United States Navy. They operate largely in the
Sea of Okhotsk, an isolated area more than 1,000 miles north of Japan that
serves as a safe haven for an estimated 32 ballistic-missile submarines,
including 16 late-vintage Delta-class models, whose missiles can reach the
United States from Russian waters.

Most of the major Soviet warships stay close to home, but in recent years some
have turned up far afield, conspicuously in the South China Sea. When the United
States pulled out of Vietnam in 1975, its Cam Ranh Bay naval base had two piers.
Today, American intelligence officials say the base has six, suggesting that the
Russians intend to get their money's worth for the $5 billion in arms they have
given to the Hanoi Government since 1978.

Seven years ago, Cam Ranh served primarily as a liberty port for Russian
sailors. Now, it is not only the Russians' sole warm-water port in the Pacific,
but also their largest base outside Soviet territory.

One recent summer afternoon, senior officials aboard the United States Seventh
Fleet command ship, the U.S.S. Blue Ridge, estimated that Cam Ranh, at that
moment, contained some 25 surface vessels, five attack submarines, 16 Badger
intermediate-range bombers, 14 MIG-23 interceptors and 8 Bear reconnaissance
planes. It had none of these in 1979. The Cam Ranh installation serves as a
Soviet counterpoint to the United States bases in the Philippines, which are
within bombing range across the South China Sea. And, together with the Soviet
air base at Da Nang, it provides a launching point for air attacks against China
should hostilities erupt between the world's largest Communist nations. Equally
important, the facilities at Cam Ranh Bay could assist Soviet ships in moving
quickly from the Pacific to the Indian Ocean and then on to the Persian Gulf.

''Cam Ranh gives you a lot more staying power in that area,'' says Vice Adm.
Paul F. McCarthy Jr., the Seventh Fleet commander. ''Being able to pull in there
for 10 days or so makes for a nice way station.''

If global tensions ever came to a head, Western analysts say, the Pacific Fleet
would be in a better position from Cam Ranh - certainly better than from
Vladivostok - to blockade the vital southern straits of Malacca, Sunda and
Lombok, through which much of the West's oil and other strategic materials pass.

The growth of the Pacific Fleet, moreover, is only the most conspicuous element
of a broad-based Soviet buildup in East Asia. Since 1978, Moscow has stationed
more than 10,000 ground troops and 40 MIG-23's on four small islands in the
Kurile chain that it has occupied since World War II but that Japan claims as
its ''Northern Territories.''

Japanese and American defense officials estimate that at least 500,000 Russian
soldiers, representing more than one-fourth of total Soviet ground-troop
strength, are based in Asia. Most of them stand along the border with China,
which has reinforced its side of the frontier with an estimated 1.5 million
troops.

Soviet forces in the area now include more than 80 Backfire bombers that fly at
hard-to-detect low altitudes. The Backfire can reach deeply into China, or far
out into the Pacific, and fire cruise missiles at targets from 200 miles away.
At that distance, a potential victim would have only a few minutes to identify a
Soviet attacker, track the incoming weapons and take counteraction.

But most disquieting of all for China and other Soviet neighbors are the SS-20
intermediate-range land-based nuclear missiles in Soviet Asia. Japanese
officials say there are as many as 165 such missiles, significantly more than
were deployed there just three years ago, with each missile carrying up to three
independently targetable nuclear warheads.

I F THE GROWTH OF Soviet military forces in the Pacific is a matter of record,
its implications are still open to interpretation.

In the eyes of the Reagan Administration, the buildup is an overt challenge to
American interests. The Russians, warned Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger
during a visit to Japan last spring, ''have moved beyond what anyone might
reasonably define as a defensive posture, and they have assembled a clearly
offensive arsenal.''

As though to head off skeptics who may wince at this sort of tough talk, the
commander of United States forces in Japan, Lieut. Gen. Edward L. Tixier,
punctuates his briefings on the Asian military balance with a reminder that
''the Soviet threat is real.''

Accordingly, the United States and its allies have responded with a buildup of
their own. At a cost of billions of dollars, the Reagan Administration has
embarked on a five-year program to increase the overall number of American ships
by 10 percent, to 609, by the early 1990's. Many of those vessels are destined
for the Pacific. Surface ships and attack submarines have been equipped with new
Tomahawk cruise missiles. And while the Americans deploy only a handful of
missile-carrying submarines in the western Pacific, the few that they have can
inflict serious damage on Soviet targets.

The White House has also pressured its allies in the region - particularly Japan
-to strengthen their forces, thereby easing the United States defense burden. A
key focus of interest is the Sea of Japan, which provides an essential
passageway for Soviet warships leaving Vladivostok. To reach the North Pacific,
ships must pass Japan through three narrow straits - Tsushima, Tsugaru and La
Perouse, known to the Japanese as Soya. Defense specialists say that those
''choke points'' should not be hard to cut off, although some fear that a
blockade could invite a tactical nuclear strike against Japanese ships or
American carrier groups.

Critics of the Administration, however, both in Asia and the United States, say
the American interpretation of Soviet intentions in the Pacific is extreme.
American defense planners, they say, are prone to excessive hand-wringing, and
overlook serious shortcomings that make the Soviet fleet a poor match for
American forces in the region.

Athough some aging Soviet equipment is being modernized, these critics point
out, a fair number of ships are reportedly in disrepair, and many are simply too
old and too small. Soviet crews are believed by many analysts to be less
well-trained than their American counterparts and to suffer from morale
problems. Their vessels also have a history of breakdowns. One notable episode
occurred in 1984, when a missile submarine of the older Golf II class caught
fire near Japanese waters and had to be towed back to Vladivostok. It passed
through the Tsushima Strait, still smoking.

Cam Ranh Bay, for all its desirability, is far from home. Defense specialists
believe that American ships from Subic Bay in the Philippines could seal it off
with little difficulty. The Russians' major northern port, Petropavlovsk, faces
the open sea, but is ice-bound half the year.

Then too, the American forces have a decided advantage in key types of ships and
in air power, which must be readily available to sustain modern naval
operations. Together, the two United States Pacific naval forces, the Seventh
and Third Fleets, have a total of six aircraft carriers. Each of these carriers
bears some 85 fighters, antisubmarine planes, attack aircraft and helicopters.
In contrast, the Soviet Pacific Fleet has two far smaller Kiev-class ships,
which each carry only 32 helicopters and planes that cannot match the firepower
of their American counterparts.

The Center for Defense Information, a Washington-based research group, concluded
last year that, worldwide, ''the Soviet Union will not be able to challenge the
West for control of the open ocean in the foreseeable future.'' Rather than
plotting to take the offensive, this study said, the Soviet Navy's main goal was
to stay relatively near shore, protecting its missile submarines in sanctuaries
such as Okhotsk.

Japanese and Australian officials point out, however, that fast-growing Soviet
naval power, real or perceived, is a potent political weapon. It is enough, they
say, to prompt some Pacific countries to look over their shoulders to make sure
their policies are not causing Moscow undue irritation.

''Frankly,'' said Masashi Nishihara, a military analyst at Japan's Defense
Academy in Yokosuka, ''we feel the Soviet threat has been created more for
peacetime than for war.''

T HE DIPLOMATIC consequences of the Soviet naval buildup are difficult to
assess. But many experts believe that Moscow is hoping to attain with military
power a kind of influence and prestige that it has failed to gain through
traditional diplomacy.

It is difficult to look at a map of the Pacific and find many places where
Soviet political or economic influence has been great. Never a major player in
the region, Moscow further weakened its standing by invading Afghanistan in 1980
and, three years later, shooting down Korean Air Lines Flight 007.

The Soviet Union maintains close relations with North Korea, which has become a
good client for Russian-built missiles and MIG-23 fighter aircraft. The Russians
have a friendship treaty with Vietnam, and have stationed 2,500 military
advisers there. They also supply economic and military aid to Cambodia and Laos,
and now they have made inroads in the South Pacific with Kiribati and Vanuatu.

Yet Moscow's allies are poor countries, and have largely been left behind in
Asia's remarkable rush toward economic development. Soviet relations with Asia's
economic titans - Japan, above all, followed by South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore
and Hong Kong - range from poor to nonexistent. And the region's largest nation,
China, remains a key focus of Soviet enmity and suspicion.

In contrast, the United States has linked its fortunes to Asia, a trend that has
picked up extra force under the Reagan Administration. By now, Washington's
trade frictions with Japan and other Asian countries have assumed old-shoe
familiarity. But sometimes obscured in the bickering is the fact that the United
States has willingly put itself in Asia's hands for everything from trucks to
televisions.

American bilateral trade with Asia, Australia and New Zealand has more than
tripled in the last 10 years, reaching $202 billion in 1985. That equals, almost
to the dollar, the United States total worldwide trade as recently as 1975. Over
the last decade, trade with Asia and the Pacific has increased from 29 percent
to 36 percent of overall American foreign commerce, and presumably will keep
rising.

It is clear that Moscow has tired of being frozen out of the world's most
dynamic economic zone, and it apparently hopes, at a minimum, to chip away at
America's enormous influence in the region.

Mr. Gorbachev underlined this aspiration on July 28, when he traveled to the
major eastern port of Vladivostok and declared in a well-publicized address that
''the Soviet Union is also an Asian-Pacific country.''

This apparently unremarkable statement of fact has now become a central element
of Soviet diplomatic jargon, reflecting a conscious effort to reorient a foreign
policy that for decades has been focused almost exclusively on Europe and the
West.

There was no small irony in the choice of venue for the Gorbachev speech.
Vladivostok is the home base for the Soviet Pacific Fleet. It is also closed to
outsiders and to nearly all trade. Nevertheless, Mr. Gorbachev spoke not of arms
and isolation but of cooperation. He offered to withdraw 6,000 Soviet troops
from Afghanistan. He invited China to discuss the massive troop deployments on
their mutual borders. And he repeated an old call for Helsinki-style
''security'' agreements among Pacific countries.

Moscow's attempts to win over small island states in the South Pacific have been
one sign of the changes brought about by Mr. Gorbachev. Soviet trade delegations
have also made frequent stops in the member states of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations -Indonesia, Thailand, the Philippines, Singapore,
Malaysia and Brunei.

After years of ever-worsening tensions, Moscow and Peking have shown a desire to
calm matters a bit, signing an agreement recently to double bilateral trade by
1990. Relations with Japan have also warmed, and in January, Foreign Minister
Eduard A. Shevardnadze became the highest-ranking Soviet official to visit Japan
in a decade.

The Japanese connection is a potentially valuable one for the Russians,
particularly in light of Mr. Gorbachev's plans for modernizing the Soviet
economy. Japan's technology could help, both in supplying consumer goods and in
developing natural-gas deposits, notably those in Siberia and on the continental
shelf off Sakhalin Island. During his visit, Mr. Shevardnadze spoke in
restrained terms, avoiding the blatant threats often favored by his predecessor,
Andrei Gromyko. And last month, for the first time in 11 years, the Russians
permitted a small group of Japanese citizens to visit family graves on the
occupied Kurile Islands.

Such modest diplomatic inroads might have attracted less attention and concern
had they not coincided with a number of reverses for America's standing in the
region.

First among these has been growing uncertainty about the huge United States
military installations in the Philippines - the naval station at Subic Bay and
Clark Air Base. A movement to evict the Americans has gained strength in recent
years, and while the young Government of President Corazon C. Aquino says it
will honor the existing agreement on the bases until it expires in 1991, it
offers few words of open encouragement beyond that.

The United States defense establishment calls Clark and Subic irreplaceable, and
predicts nothing short of disaster if they must be abandoned. Other,
non-Government, analysts are less certain of that. But no one doubts that having
to pull out of the Philippines and relocate elsewhere - possibly in Guam and the
northern Marianas -would be costly and time-consuming.

To the southeast, the United States' break with New Zealand over that island
nation's ban on port calls by American nuclear warships has shattered the Anzus
alliance. Encouraged by New Zealand's stand, a dozen or more small Pacific
island groups have declared their entire area a nuclear-free zone. If a
much-discussed agreement to that effect is ever put into practice, the United
States Navy may find that, even in the vastness of the Pacific, its room for
maneuver with nuclear-powered and nuclear-weapon-carrying vessels has been
severely reduced.

To some degree, many Asians say, the United States has only itself to blame for
these Pacific woes. The island mini-states, in particular, feel that Americans
have taken them for granted for too long, if indeed they thought about them at
all. Years of refusal by American tuna-boat operators to pay fishing fees have
further fanned resentment among islanders, who believe that their control over
territorial waters is their only real economic asset, one that outsiders must
respect. Their unhappiness is spilling over, as it did when Kiribati decided
that if the American fishermen were not prepared to pay, then Russian money
would do just fine.

Recently, Washington has come around, entering into negotiations for a treaty on
fees to be paid to Pacific island states in return for the right to fish in
their 200-mile economic zones. It may be too late, though, to assuage some
islanders, such as those in Vanuatu and Kiribati who are moving toward accepting
yet more Soviet trawlers.

How something like the Kiribati agreement might be transformed into a direct
threat to American interests, no one seems prepared to guess. But, viewed
against the growth of the Soviet Pacific Fleet, it has provoked a new
appreciation of the Soviet Union's interest - and potential power - in the
region.

''I don't feel someone's going to push the button tomorrow,'' says one veteran
Australian military officer. ''But against the Russians I'd say we're on the
defensive. Maybe it's just fishing rights now. But they're getting there.''cU

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Soviet aircraft carrier and planes (Y.
Rodionov/APN/Gamma-Liaison); Photos of Capt. Boris Chernykh, a ship and Navy
pilots (Y. Rodionov/APN/Gamma-Liaison) (Pg.28); Map of the Pacific showing range
of the Pacific Fleet (NYT)(Pg.104)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PINOCHET SURVIVES HIGHWAY AMBUSH; RIGHTS CURTAILED

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 788 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, Sept. 7


Gunmen tried unsuccessfuly to kill President Augusto Pinochet tonight in an
attack that left five members of his police and military escort dead, according
to Government officials.

General Pinochet, 70 years old, appeared on television late Sunday with a
bandaged left hand and said he had been hit by a piece of shrapnel during the
ambush. He also showed his Mercedes-Benz car with 12 marks from bullets that had
not pierced the reinforced glass. The car had been damaged by a hand grenade
hurled under a rear wheel.

Interior Minister Ricardo Garcia announced that the Government was decreeing a
state of siege, further restricting civil liberties and giving the Government
additional powers of arrest and detention. Mr. Garcia did not spell out the
extent of the new restrictions. Chile was already under more limited
restrictions under a state of emergency decree.

'We Are In a War'

''We are in a war between democracy and Marxism, between chaos and democracy,''
General Pinochet said in his television appearance.

His motorcade came under attack as it crossed a bridge over the Maipo River
southeast of Santiago, the officials said.

Five members of his military and police escort were killed and 10 wounded, the
Secretary General of Government, Francisco Javier Cuadra, announced after a
round of emergency meetings by high Government officials.

The Associated Press reported that a man identifying himself as a spokesman for
the Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front telephoned news agencies 90 minutes after
the attack and said it had been carried out by members of the front, a leftist
guerrilla group. The news agency quoted the man as saying, ''We failed, but we
won't fail next time.'' However, the A.P. said, a man who was recognized by his
voice as a leader of the front later said that the rebel group had made no such
statement.

Series of Explosions

As far as is known publicly, this was the first attempt on the life of General
Pinochet in the 13 years that he has ruled Chile. He came to power as the result
of a coup in 1973 in which the late Marxist President, Salvador Allende Gossens,
was ousted.

Mr. Cuadra said the President's motorcade was hit at about 6:40 tonight by a
series of explosions and rockets as it crossed a bridge. He said snipers also
opened fire. General Pinochet was being driven back to the capital from his
weekend house in Melocoton, 27 miles southeast of here in the foothills of the
Andes. The two television networks in Chile said that once the attack began, the
car carrying the President broke out of the motorcade and drove away at high
speed. Mr. Cuadra said one Mercedes-Benz automobile and three other vehicles in
the President's motorcade were destroyed.

He attributed the attack to ''terrorist commands'' and said General Pinochet had
safely reached his home in the Santiago suburb of Las Condes. One radio station
and the Spanish news agency E.F.E. said the President stepped out on a
second-floor balcony shortly after 8 P.M. to show that he was alive. However,
reports from other people who went to the house said that it had been dark all
evening, and that nobody had seen the President.

The Catholic University television station, which sent a reporter to the scene
of the attack, said military helicopters were flying over the area in search of
the attackers. Mr. Cuadra said at least 12 people were thought to have taken
part in the assault.

The Catholic University station said that one car used by the attackers had been
located, and that three M-16 rifles were inside. Mr. Cuadra said two trucks and
a car containing M-16 rifles had been found on the outskirts of Santiago.

At the Moneda, the presidential palace in downtown Santiago, the Ministers of
Defense and Interior and other high-level Government officials went into
emergency meetings that continued late into the evening.

The attack was carried out as General Pinochet was preparing for a week of
speeches and rallies that opponents say are intended to start a campaign for a
new eight-year term when his present constitutional period ends in early 1989.
Chileans from a wide spectrum that includes the extreme left, various democratic
political parties and several important military commanders have demanded that
he give up power no later than 1989.

In addition, the attack came after a month of discoveries of clandestine arms
arsenals on the edge of the Atacama Desert north of Santiago. The Government
contends that the weapons, including nearly 3,500 M-16 rifles thought to have
come from those left in Vietnam by American forces, were intended for use by the
Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front and another Marxist guerrilla group to try to
set off an insurrection this month.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map shows location of bridge on which attack occured (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam-U.S. Talks On Refugees Fail

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 162 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 7


Vietnamese and United States negotiators failed to reach an agreement on an
American request to be allowed to resume interviewing Vietnamese who want to
settle in the United States, sources said today.

In a two-day meeting in Hanoi last month, the two sides tried to resolve
conflicts over the Orderly Departure Program, a United Nations-sponsored program
in which Vietnamese leave Vietnam for resettlement abroad.

Vietnam halted United States interviews of new applicants on Jan. 1, saying the
United States has interviewed but not yet resettled thousands of Vietnamese
already granted permission to leave. Vietnamese who were interviewed and
accepted earlier continue to leave Vietnam, but the number of emigrants has
declined sharply since interviewing was halted.

The United States, the largest resettlement country, has taken more than 45,000
Vietnamese under the program, which was established in 1979 to provide an
alternative to the dangerous exodus by boat.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

COLORADO SENATE CONTEST OFFERS STARK DIFFERENCE

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1070 words

DATELINE: DENVER, Sept. 7


The Colorado politicians with national names -Senator Gary Hart, Gov. Dick Lamm,
Representative Patricia Schroeder -are liberal Democratic products of the early
1970's, of the days when the state was swept by opposition to the Vietnam War
and by concern for the environment.

''But those days have come and gone,'' says Representative Timothy E. Wirth, who
is part of the same tradition. The statistics bear him out. Four of the state's
six House seats are held by Republicans, and the G.O.P. has a veto-proof
two-thirds majority in both houses of the State Legislature.

That has made Mr. Wirth's job this fall harder than many in Washington expected
it to be. A 46-year-old Democrat, with the kind of angular looks and
self-assurance that remind people of the Kennedys, he is trying to hold for his
party the seat of Mr. Hart, who is retiring to concentrate on the 1988
Presidential race. Mr. Wirth's contest with Representative Ken Kramer, a
44-year-old conservative Republican, is considered by leaders of both parties to
be crucial to control of the Senate.

With President Reagan due here Monday for an airport rally and luncheon expected
to raise about $700,000 for Mr. Kramer, the two men are running dead even, in
the estimation of local politicians. A poll completed by The Denver Post but not
yet published is said to show the same thing.

A Sharp Contrast

Nowhere in the country is there a Senate race with candidates as sharply
contrasted ideologically. Mr. Kramer stresses his support for a proposed
constitutional amendment mandating a balanced budget and his work in bringing to
the state major installations associated with Mr. Reagan's proposal for an
advanced antimissile system. Mr. Wirth emphasizes arms control, clean air and
water and help for older people.

There is little love lost between the two men. Mr. Kramer said in an interview
that he found his rival ''arrogant and patronizing''; Mr. Wirth described the
Republican as a practitioner of ''bumper-sticker,
sounds-good-if-you-say-it-fast'' politics. Yet their race has attracted little
public interest.

Both men have had trouble with their television advertising; each has already
parted company with one media expert, and Mr. Kramer indicated that he was
preparing to make another change. Mr. Wirth began with a commercial showing him
and his family on snowshoes, in an apparent effort to combat suggestions that he
is at heart an Eastern elitist rather than a true Coloradan. He was in fact born
in humble circumstances in Denver, and he was 3 years old when his father died.
But he went to Harvard and Stanford Universities, and he has been derided by his
opponents as ''Ben and Sally's best friend'' - a reference to Benjamin C.
Bradlee, the executive editor of The Washington Post, and his wife, the
journalist Sally Quinn, who are prominent in the social life of Washington.

Ad Was a 'Disaster'

The snowshoe commercial ''was a disaster,'' Mr. Wirth conceded. His current ads
are also ''soft,'' dealing with his work on making infant beds safe, but his
campaign manager, John Frew, promised that the whole campaign would take on a
harder edge by mid-September, when Coloradans customarily turn from outdoor
pursuits to political interests.

Mr. Kramer's campaign has had two major problems: a lack of money, which is
being remedied by Mr. Reagan's visit, by large infusions of cash from the
National Republican Senatorial Committee and by the efforts of Senator William
L. Armstrong, a conservative Republican from the Denver suburbs with good
national connections; and a fear that anything too aggressive would revive
memories of his days in the State Legislature, when the newspapers and some
politicians christened him and his friends the ''House crazies'' because of
their shrill style.

Mr. Kramer's principal commercial centers on the slogan ''not slick, just
good.'' Its evident intent is to suggest that Mr. Wirth is inconsistent or
untrustworthy, but it also makes Mr. Kramer, a shy man with wiry red hair,
appear awkward and somewhat lacking in confidence.

Nonetheless, he is a tireless campaigner - ''the hardest worker I've ever
seen,'' says Howard H. Calloway, the state Republican chairman - and he
surprised everyone in Colorado by avoiding a primary. He held two strong
opponents to less than 20 percent of the vote each at the state Republican
convention, thus winning the nomination at that early stage.

G.O.P. and Economy

Colorado has severe economic problems, but here as elsewhere, Mr. Reagan and the
Republican Senate and House candidates seem not to be blamed for them. Mr.
Kramer readily described mining, oil and farming in Colorado as ''the absolute
pits,'' but he said no one would blame the Republicans for that any more than
they would the Democrats. Mr. Wirth makes much of his efforts to preserve jobs -
he tried in vain to save Frontier Airlines, which has its headquarters here -
but Mr. Kramer has also built up a record in that area.

Mr. Wirth's strategy is to picture himself as a mainstream politician who has
always enjoyed wide support among Republicans and independents, including some
of Denver's business leaders, and to paint Mr. Kramer as a fringe candidate. The
Republican was one of only 23 House members who voted against the Safe Drinking
Water Act, according to Representative Wirth, and one of only 21 who voted
against a bill to aid elderly victims of Alzheimer's disease.

''The time is coming for the people of this state to do some comparative
shopping,'' Mr. Wirth said, ''and we intend to show them exactly what they're
going to get for their money with me and with Ken Kramer.''

Mr. Kramer is not the sort to rattle easily. He acknowledged that ''some have
said I don't care about people,'' but he said he was determined not to vote for
Federal programs, no matter how worthy, if they meant increasing the budget
deficit. Indeed, he prides himself on voting against most of Mr. Reagan's
requests for increases in the national debt ceiling, even though failure to
increase the limit would have meant payless paydays for some Federal employees.

''The only way to say no,'' he declared, ''is to keep saying no.''

Most local experts on politics think Mr. Wirth will eke out a victory, if only
because they see him as much the more accomplished legislator. Mr. Hart, they
note, was 10 percentage points behind at this point in 1980, and still won.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOM IN DRUG TESTS EXPECTED

BYLINE: By CALVIN SIMS

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1297 words


As the Federal Government and more and more large corporations consider adopting
mandatory tests for drug use among job applicants and employees, the
manufacturers of the tests are gearing up for what analysts see as potentially
explosive growth.

The total market for the tests -estimated at $80 million a year in the United
States and $115 million worldwide - will more than double by 1990, spurred by
increasing concern over the nation's drug epidemic, say analysts who follow the
diagnostics industry.

Drug tests are already among the fastest-growing product lines for such big
pharmaceutical companies as the Syva Corporation, an arm of the Syntex
Corporation in Palo Alto, Calif., and Hoffmann-La Roche Inc. in Nutley, N.J.
Both companies make diagnostic kits for testing such widely used drugs as
cocaine, morphine, LSD, marijuana, PCP, barbiturates, methadone and
amphetamines.

Mandatory Tests

More than 30 percent of the Fortune 500 companies already administer some type
of mandatory test for drugs, and the United States military, the nation's
biggest drug tester, gives more than three million tests each year. The Reagan
Administration recently proposed mandatory testing for all Government employees
in sensitive positions.

In an effort to cash in on the rapidly expanding market, a number of diagnostics
companies are scrambling to develop or market new products. Previously these
companies concentrated on tests for therapeutic drugs. Those tests are used by
hospitals, for instance, to monitor the levels of medication prescribed by
physicians. Some of the new entries in testing for abusive drugs are:

* The Diagnostic Products Corporation of Los Angeles, which recently opened a
research and manufacturing facility in Britain to develop new tests by the end
of the year. The company has been marketing morphine and cocaine tests for the
past year and a half.

* Abbott Laboratories of North Chicago, Ill., the world leader in diagnostics,
which introduced tests in July to detect cocaine, PCP and barbiturates. The
tests are designed to run on Abbott's TDx system, the most widely used system
for monitoring therapeutic drugs. Because the TDx is found in two out of three
hospitals, Abbott will have a clear advantage over other newcomers, analysts
said.

* American Drug Screens Inc. of Dallas, which has developed a home-testing kit
for parents who suspect their children of taking drugs. Parents mail urine
samples to the company to be tested for marijuana, cocaine, PCP, amphetamines,
barbiturates and Valium.

* National Patent Analytical Systems Inc. of Roslyn Heights, L.I., which is
marketing a device that scans the brain for evidence of alcohol and drug intake.
The machine is called the Veritas 100 Analyzer and resembles a portable
computer. Disposable electrodes are placed on the temples and readings are taken
by a computer. The device, which has not received approval from the Federal Drug
Administration, is undergoing tests at three universities.

Despite the anticipated growth in drug testing, these new companies will find
some difficulty in penetrating the market, said Mariola B. Haggar, an analyst
with L. F. Rothschild, Unterberg, Towbin Inc.

''Those companies that have been in the marketplace for some time,'' Ms. Haggar
said, ''will be steps ahead of the rest.''

Although many companies are adopting either voluntary or mandatory testing, very
few actually perform the tests themselves. Instead, the companies usually send
urine samples to private laboratories.

Two Types of Tests

The labs use two types of tests to detect the abusive drugs: inexpensive
screening tests to identify urine samples that need further checking and more
expensive ''confirmatory'' tests that are highly accurate in detecting the
drugs. Screening tests cost $2 to $5 each; the second-level tests run about $60
to $70 each.

The majority of the new kits under development are screening tests.

One of the most popular screening methods is the enzyme immunoassay test, which
employs two chemical reagents, substances used to create, detect or measure
another substance. The reagents are mixed with the urine sample, and the mixture
is placed in a spectrometer, which measures the amount of light energy that is
absorbed in the chemical reaction. The degree of absorption indicates which drug
is involved.

Syva's Emit screening tests have been the most successful in recent years,
generating $40 million in sales last year. Analysts put the worldwide market for
all screening tests in 1985 at $73 million. Syva entered the drug-testing
business about 20 years ago during the Vietnam War, when drug abuse in the armed
services peaked.

Hoffmann-La Roche, which had about $20 million in sales on drug kits last year,
has based its screening tests on an older technology known as radioimmunoassay,
which uses radioactive materials to identify the chemicals in the sample.
Hoffmann-La Roche sells a large portion of its tests to the military.

Most Precise Test

The more expensive confirmatory tests, such as thin layer and gas
chromatography, employ a more elaborate system of identifying chemicals found in
the urine sample. The most rigorous and precise test of all,
gas-chromatography-spectrometry, breaks down the urine sample into individual
ions.

An increased reliance on confirmatory tests - together with the national concern
over drug use - has made it less likely that legal questions about the testing
would slow the industry's growth in the future, said Ms. Haggar and other
analysts.

Many civil liberties groups and employee associations have opposed the blanket
use of drug tests on several grounds. Some see the testing as an invasion of
privacy, particularly when a test is given without notice.

The accuracy of the screening tests has also been questioned, with critics
noting that some tests register positive results for over-the-counter medicines.
For example, some cough medicines contain codeine which registers as morphine in
some tests.

Legal Challenges

While some companies have tried to use the results of the screening tests alone
to discipline or discharge employees, this practice has become much less
widespread now because of legal challenges, analysts noted.

Dr. Arthur McBay, chief toxicologist for the state of North Carolina, said the
only way to be absolutely certain that an individual has tested positive for
certain drugs was to run confirmatory tests. ''Those companies and organizations
that use drug testing must be willing to pay the cost of running such an
elaborate test if they expect to use them as evidence against an employee,'' he
said.

Despite the importance of the confirmatory tests, analysts said that the
industry's greatest potential for growth was the development of screening tests
that could be performed by the employer's company itself.

''What is really missing is a fast, highly accurate, cost-effective technology
that can be done on site,'' Ms. Haggar said. ''When that becomes available, the
market will really take off.''

This type of testing would save the companies money by cutting down on
laboratory fees.

Newcomers to the abusive-drug sector of the diagnostics industry see the on-site
market as an attractive way to gain a foothold.

Indeed, one company, Medical Diagnostics Inc., a subsidiary of the Keystone
Medical Corporation, plans to have such a test on the market within 30 days.

A company spokesman said that the test, called Quick Test Drug Screen, takes
only three minutes to screen for morphine, cocaine, amphetamines or PCP. A drop
of urine is placed on a sheet of sensitized paper that changes color if one or
more of the drugs is present. Positive results would still have to be confirmed
by more sophisticated laboratory tests.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graphs of 1985 worldwide sales for test measuring drug abuse, in
millions of dollars (NYT); photo of product for drug testing made by Diagnostic
Products Corp.

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 9, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK;
MEMENTOES AT THE VIETNAM MEMORIAL

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 412 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 8


Thousands file past the Vietnam Memorial here every day, many studying it
intently to find a familiar name among the 58,000 inscribed there, others
pausing momentarily to run a finger along the black marble wall.

Some stay longer, to make a pencil rubbing of the name of a lost friend or
relative, or to say a prayer, or to leave behind a tribute at the base of the
wall, a photograph or a letter, or perhaps a military cap or a medal.

''Right from the outset there were people who found the experience of visiting
the memorial so moving that they started leaving things,'' said Earle Kitterman,
a spokesman for the Park Service.

Park Service rangers leave the tributes at the site for a day or so. But then
they are gathered up and taken to a warehouse in nearby Maryland. Curators there
are building a history of the war as it is reflected in the memories of those
who visit the memorial and who, thus far, have left some 2,000 pieces of
memorabilia.

The Park Service originally treated the mementoes as lost and found, keeping
them in cardboard boxes in case anyone came to reclaim them, Mr. Kittleman said.
But, as the items added up and it became clear that people did not intend to
return for them, the service began saving them.

''They say something about that memorial and about what that memorial means to
people,'' Mr. Kittleman said. The collection, while not open to the public, is
available to researchers.

The collection contains hundreds of bracelets bearing the names of missing
Vietnam servicemen or prisoners. These bracelets, which were worn by many as a
way of reminding others not to forget those whose fate was unknown, are among
the items most commonly placed at the base of the wall, according to Kim
Robinson, a museum aide at the facility. Mr. Robinson draws no conclusion from
the placement of the P.O.W. bracelets, but says that things with names on them,
like service dog tags, are frequently left. Medals are sorted into types.  One
veteran this summer left his Medal of Honor at the memorial, saying he was
protesting the Reagan Administration's policies in Central America. It is now
part of the collection.

Hats also make up a sizable part of the collection, filling a display case.
Flags, which are saved if there is writing on or with them, fill another bin.

The collection's tiniest mememtoes are often its most touching. One visitor left
a dollar bill. On the back, an unsigned note says: ''I've owed you this for
years.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 9, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EDWIN T. DAHLBERG, 93, DIES; HEADED U.S. CHURCH COUNCIL

BYLINE: By JOAN COOK

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 408 words


The Rev. Dr. Edwin T. Dahlberg, former president of the National Council of
Churches, died of Alzheimer's disease Saturday at the Orangewood Retirement
Community, Phoenix. He was 93 years old.

Dr. Dahlberg headed the council from 1957 to 1960, and in that post he urged the
admission of China to the United Nations, a proposal that drew criticism from
rightist organizations that called the council subversive.

He was a confirmed pacifist from 1917 on. He was a charter member of the
Fellowship of Reconciliation, Nyack, N.Y., in 1914. In the 1960's, he spoke out
against the United States' involvement in Vietnam and took part in peace
demonstrations and sit-ins, urging a military withdrawal from Southeast Asia.

In 1983, at the age of 90, Dr. Dahlberg visited the Soviet Union with a group
from the Baptist Peace Fellowship of North America and spoke at a Baptist church
in Moscow.

He served at six Baptist churches, ranging from his first post in Potsdam, N.Y.,
1918-21, to his last at Delmar Baptist Church in St. Louis, 1951-63. Until his
retirement in 1966 he was pastor-in-residence at the Crozer Seminary in
Rochester.

He Opposed Nuclear Weapons

According to his wife, he would accept any speaking engagement that allowed him
to speak out for peace, and was a longtime opponent of nuclear weapons.

A peace prize in his name was established in the 1960's by the American Baptist
Convention. The award is given every other year to American Baptists ''who have
worked constructively for peace with justice and freedom.''

Dr. Dahlberg helped to establish policies against segregation by refusing to
hold meetings at hotels that would not allow black delegates to attend, and he
was active in Southern sit-ins urging equal rights.

He was born in Fergus Falls, Minn., in 1892, and was a graduate of University of
Minnesota in 1914. He graduated from Rochester Theological Seminary in 1917 and
received his doctorate in divinity from Keuka College, Keuka Park, N.Y.

His first wife, the former Emilie Loeffler, died in 1968.

He is survived by his wife, the former Viola Antholt Palmiter; three children
from his first marriage, two sons, Bruce Dahlberg of Northampton, Mass., and Dr.
Keith Dahlberg of Kellogg, Idaho; a daughter, Margaret Torgersen of St.
Petersburg, Fla.; 12 grandchildren, and seven great-grandchildren.

A memorial service will be held at 10:30 A.M. Friday at the Orangewood
Retirement Community, Phoenix.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of The Rev. Dr. Edwin T. Dahlberg

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 10, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'STATIC,' A SATIRE ON AMERICAN FOIBLES

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 524 words


FOR a film about spiritual emptiness in America, Mark Romanek's ''Static'' is
itself dangerously vacant. Its good looks, which are exceptional, only
exacerbate the feeling of slightness. The screenplay is by Mr. Romanek and Keith
Gordon, who stars as a would-be inventor named Ernie, and the dialogue tends to
be flippant and thin. The images, meanwhile, have a good deal more staying
power. The film begins and ends with a beautiful, barren desert vista, and
certain key scenes take place in a diner that is shaped like a fish.

A lot of this is arch and arbitrary, rock-video style. But ''Static,'' which
opens today at the Film Forum 1, is not without its serious concerns. Ernie is
first seen working in a crucifix factory, from which he steals defective
merchandise; his living-room wall is adorned with drooping Christ figures,
upside-down ones, double ones arm-in-arm and so on, which is the film's way of
saying that he is grappling with questions of faith. It turns out that Ernie,
whose parents have died in an accident, yearns to see heaven, and has invented a
machine that will show it to him. To anyone else, this miraculous vision looks
like static on a television screen.

There is a lot more at play in ''Static'': the return of Ernie's old friend
Julia (Amanda Plummer) to the small Arizona town in which the film takes place;
Ernie's halfway-comic hijacking of a bus full of elderly passengers; various
middle-American antics in the household of Frank (Bob Gunton), who preaches
survivalist tactics, talks of Vietnam and has named his twin sons North and
South. The boys wear monster masks around the house, and their father gives the
whole family fallout-proof suits on Christmas morning.

Some of this is cheerfully bizarre, but a lot of it simply falls flat. (''Some
day, if this machine works,'' someone tells Ernie, ''you may be world famous -
like Robert Goulet, only for inventions.'') Mr. Gordon, for all his close
involvement in the film (he also served as co-producer) seems quite detached,
practically smirky; even the terrible accident that took Ernie's parents manages
to leave him unmoved. Miss Plummer, once again, seems more than ready for a role
that puts her proud, baleful presence to better use. The supporting players,
among them Lily Knight as a big-hearted waitress and Jane Hoffman as a sweet old
lady, are all good enough to resist overworking their flimsy material.

On the same bill, and well worth the price of admission, is an infinitely
wittier 9 1/2-minute short by Dean Parisot entitled ''Tom Goes to the Bar.'' Tom
(Tom Noonan) happens to be upside-down, talking about his life and dousing
himself whenever he tries to drink anything, but no mention is made of this
peculiarity. Featuring beautiful black-and-white camerawork (by Yuri Neyman) and
a perfectly deadpan tone, it suggests that Mr. Parisot has a very bright future.
No Electricity STATIC, directed by Mark Romanek; written by Keith Gordon and Mr.
Romanek; produced by Amy Ness. At Film Forum 1, 57 Watts Street. Running time:
93 minutes. This film has no rating. Ernie...Keith Gordon; Julia...Amanda
Plummer; Frank...Bob Gunton.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Keith Gordon

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 11, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

COMPANY NEWS;
HEAD OF CBS QUITS UNDER PRESSURE; PALEY IN KEY ROLE

BYLINE: By GERALDINE FABRIKANT

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1804 words


After a tense, lengthy board meeting yesterday, Thomas H. Wyman, the embattled
chairman and chief executive of CBS Inc., resigned as head of the communications
giant, the company announced last night.

Mr. Wyman will be relieved of his role immediately, CBS said. Laurence A. Tisch,
the company's largest shareholder and the chairman of the Loews Corporation,
will become acting chief executive and chairman of a new management committee,
to serve until a new chairman and chief executive are selected, the company said
in a two-page statement.

In addition, William S. Paley, the 84-year-old founder of CBS and holder of 8.1
percent of the company's stock, will become acting chairman. Harold Brown, a
board member and a former Defense Secretary, will head an executive search
committee.

Paley: 'I Am Delighted'

Mr. Paley said in a statement: ''As founder of the company, I am delighted that
Laurence Tisch will serve as acting C.E.O. during this transition. Larry has not
only proven his extraordinary ability as a businessman and leader in the success
of his own company, Loews, but, most important, he shares the values and
principles that have guided CBS throughout the period of its growth. I respect
and admire him, and look forward to working with him.''

Intense speculation in the media and in the financial community surrounded the
monthly board meeting, which lasted more than nine hours. The meeting took place
amid mounting tensions among board members and heavy pressure stemming from the
power struggle between Mr. Wyman and Mr. Tisch.

The management shift comes at a time when CBS's performance has been suffering,
largely because of weakness in its broadcasting business, which has faced a
slowdown in spending by advertisers and the rise of NBC to first place in
prime-time viewership. CBS is now No. 2, ahead of ABC.  Lower Profits Forecast
Just several weeks ago, CBS forecast lower television network profits for the
balance of this year.

There have also been problems at CBS News. Belt-tightening measures, conflicts
over the direction of the venerable news operation and uncertainty about the
future of the company's top management combined to hurt morale.

Reflecting the company's financial troubles, CBS earned just $27.4 million in
1985, on revenues of $4.8 billion. In the second quarter of this year, CBS
posted $107.2 million in net income on $1.2 billion in revenues, helped by the
sale of its St. Louis television station and lower tax rates. But it posted a
loss for its continuing operations in the period.

Before the Wyman resignation was announced yesterday, CBS's stock closed $3.75 a
share lower, at $140, on the New York Stock Exchange.

As recently as early this week, there had been reports that Mr. Wyman, concerned
about a Tisch bid for the rest of CBS, was talking to other companies about a
possible merger or acquisition. It had been reported that Westinghouse and
Philip Morris were approached, but CBS denied it had contacted them. However, it
did disclose it had discussions with other companies. Last night, Mr. Tisch told
reporters: ''This is no takeover.''

In a statement, he said: ''I will hold office only during the brief transition
period until the selection of a new C.E.O. I intend to maintain the traditions
and spirit of this company as established and nurtured by William S. Paley. I am
fortunate to have Bill as my partner and mentor in this task.''

Mr. Wyman could not be reached for comment last night, and the financial terms
of his resignation could not be determined. His secretary said he had left for
the day.

Until recently, sources close to Mr. Tisch and Mr. Paley said, Mr. Wyman had the
votes of either eight or nine board members, enough to keep control. However,
his strength on the board has been dwindling.

According to one source close to the board, last week Mr. Wyman called his
supposed loyalists on the board to find an advocate to present his case at the
meeting. However, apparently no one was willing to do so.

Plan Rejected

At the meeting, he presented a plan for the future of CBS that was rejected
unanimously by the board, but details of his proposal could not be learned.
According to one source, Mr. Tisch and Mr. Paley took a very strong position,
saying Mr. Wyman had to resign.

Other members of the board were strongly concerned about stopping news reports
about dissension at CBS, but when they saw how determined Mr. Paley and Mr.
Tisch were to oversee the departure of Mr. Wyman, they switched their votes,
sources said.

For Mr. Wyman, the management change appears to reflect the backfiring of moves
he undertook last year when CBS faced a takeover bid from Ted Turner, the
Atlanta entrepreneur, and pressure from Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North
Carolina, about the fairness of CBS's news broadcasts. Mr. Helms, with the group
Fairness in Media, also tried unsuccessfully to take over the company.

In the summer of 1985, CBS said it would buy back more than a fifth of its stock
for $1 billion to thwart Mr. Turner's bid. That July, Loews told CBS it had
bought 9.9 percent of the company's stock as an investment and would increase
that stake to 25 percent. CBS had said it accepted the Loews statement that it
was buying the stock for investment, and when Mr. Tisch became a CBS director in
October, the company viewed a takeover as very unlikely.

But some on Wall Street had expressed the belief that Mr. Tisch might be
interested in owning CBS, particularly as Loews raised its CBS stake over the
past year.

Yesterday's monthly board meeting started at 9 A.M., an hour earlier than usual,
at Black Rock, as the CBS headquarters at Sixth Avenue and 53d Street is known.
The building was surrounded by camera crews, who waited expectantly as the
meeting continued into the late afternoon.

Later, after the session, Walter Cronkite, the longtime CBS News anchorman and a
CBS director, commented that it was ''a calm and thoughtful meeting,
particularly considering the weight of the decision they had to make.'' He
added: ''They took their time. It was serious and nonacrimonious. The board
feels it did its duty. It came to a unanimous independent decision. Also the
board was given assurances that Mr. Tisch does not wish to remain in his job.''

According to one source at the meeting, Mr. Paley and Mr. Tisch were asked to
leave the board room several times.

'A Long Day'

After it was all over Mr. Tisch was congratulated by a friend at a party he
attended in honor of Mike Wallace. ''Larry, it was a good day,'' someone said.
Mr. Tisch replied, ''Well, it was a long day.'' He also said the board had
appointed a three-man search committee to find a permanent chief executive.

On numerous occasions, Mr. Tisch had indicated that he was not happy with Mr.
Wyman's performance. In an article last June in The New York Times, Mr. Tisch
questioned whether Mr. Wyman was indeed capable of running a creative business
such as CBS. And he said cutbacks undertaken by Mr. Wyman to save costs were not
dramatic enough.

The situation was made more difficult by Mr. Tisch's refusal to sign a
''standstill agreement'' preventing his purchases of additional CBS shares for a
prescribed period of time. That left open the option that Mr. Tisch, who made a
series of acquisitions in building Loews and made a fortune as a shrewd
investor, would increase his stake.

Mr. Tisch, known as a man who keeps his word, had consistently said he had
promised not to buy more stock. But the two men had been unable to resolve their
differences, and reports of growing friction among board members arose.

A dinner for all 14 board members had been scheduled for Tuesday night. The
dinner was canceled at the last minute by Mr. Wyman's office. The reason given
by Mr. Wyman was that the directors had a full agenda the following day.

Someone else on the board, although it was not clear last night who, pushed the
other board members to go ahead with the dinner. That five-hour meeting, which
was not attended by Mr. Wyman and Mr. Tisch, went on until 11:30 P.M.

Presumably there was debate about Mr. Wyman's continued role as chairman. Of the
14 board members, those aligned with Mr. Tisch and Mr. Paley include Marietta
Tree, Walter Cronkite and Roswell L. Gilpatric. It was not clear who of Mr.
Wyman's former supporters had switched sides in the crucial voting yesterday.

A Social Occasion

Before last month's board meeting, the directors had a dinner at the exclusive
Links Club in Manhattan. Normally the dinners are social occasions, but that
changed at the last dinner, when several board members attempted to persuade Mr.
Tisch to sign a standstill agreement. This source said the cancellation of the
Tuesday night dinner reflected Mr. Wyman's nervousness about the friction among
board members.

Mr. Wyman, formerly No. 2 man at the Pillsbury Company, joined CBS in June 1980
as president and chief executive, the company's third president in less than
four years. Mr. Wyman, who had also been with the Green Giant Company and the
Polaroid Corporation, had acknowledged that he had little experience in CBS'
core businesses.

Mr. Wyman's record at the helm of CBS was mixed. He led CBS into the movie
business with a one-third stake in Tri-Star Pictures, an endeavor that proved
disappointing. He was also responsible for CBS's investment in the toy business,
through its purchase of Ideal Toys Corporation for about $57 million. CBS
ultimately sold that money-losing operation and its stake in Tri-Star.

In addition to fighting off the takeover attempts by Mr. Turner and the
Helms-led group, one of the brightest spots during his tenure was the successful
defense of the libel suit brought by Gen. William C. Westmoreland. He sought
$120 million from CBS for a news division program that charged he had doctored
the count of enemy troops in Vietnam but he dropped the suit several months into
the trial.

Early last year, in a move to strengthen the CBS position in the specialty
magazine business, CBS bought 12 publications from the Ziff-Davis Publishing
Company for $362.5 million, drawing criticism that CBS had overpaid for the
properties. CBS also bought five radio stations from the Taft Broadcasting
Company Mr. Wyman's track record at CBS had alienated a handful of CBS board
members. The most important member of that group is Mr. Paley, but the majority
of the board had, at least until recently, sided with Mr. Wyman.

Yesterday's developments apparently confirm Mr. Tisch's long-term commitment to
CBS. Speaking of Mr. Tisch, a source who knows him said: ''This is no longer a
financial investment for him. He believes that this is an investment he made for
history, for his children, for financial reasons, and out of the desire to
become a corporate statesman.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Thomas Wyman (NYT/Ruby Washington) (page D6); photo of William
Paley and Laurence Tisch (NYT/Susan Ferguson)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 11, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Valid Doubts About Justice Rehnquist

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 585 words


President Reagan has earned the right to try to shift the philosophy of the
Supreme Court. But the Senate has an equal right to insist on high-quality
appointments - particularly for Chief Justice, the noblest position in American
law. The debate that begins today on the nomination of Justice William Rehnquist
will properly turn on concerns beyond the mundanely partisan. The Senate's own
investigation has raised valid questions about the nominee's credibility and
convictions.

Justice Rehnquist has served on the high court for 15 years and there is no
doubt about his legal ability or agreeable personality. But brilliance and
courtesy are not enough. The Supreme Court's center seat demands a symbol of
impartiality, fairness and integrity that resoundingly affirms America's
commitment to equal justice. At critical junctures in his confirmation hearings,
when senators sought to explore Justice Rehnquist's beliefs and past actions, he
stonewalled with failures to remember and unpersuasive explanations of
embarrassing facts.

* As Assistant Attorney General in 1971, Mr. Rehnquist defended the Nixon
Administration in Senate hearings into the military's surveillance of civilian
protesters of the war in Vietnam. He testified then that plaintiffs suing the
Defense Department had no case, yet still voted as a Supreme Court Justice in
1972 to throw out their lawsuit. When Senator Charles Mathias recently asked
what role the nominee played in formulating the surveillance policy, he said
that he couldn't remember. Does the Senate believe that?

* Justice Rehnquist also testified this summer that he favored from the start
the Supreme Court's 1954 school desegregation decision. A memorandum to the
contrary that he wrote as a law clerk in 1952, he said, was not really his
opinion but that of the late Justice Robert Jackson. Does the Senate believe
that? And how does that testimony square with a memorandum that surfaced only
last week in which Assistant Attorney General Rehnquist urged a constitutional
amendment that would have permitted widespread evasion of this decision?

* Confronted with restrictive covenants on two of his homes, the nominee first
said he had been unaware of them. Then he wrote to the Senate Judiciary
Committee that he had found a letter in his file cautioning that his Vermont
home could not be sold to ''anyone of the Hebrew race.'' He said he
''undoubtedly'' read that letter when buying the property in 1974 but did not
recall doing so. If the Senate believes that, what does this say of the
sensitivity of a Supreme Court Justice?

* Accused of harassing black and Hispanic voters in Phoenix during turbulent
elections in the 1960's, Justice Rehnquist has categorically denied over the
years lodging even a legal challenge to any voter's qualifications. Yet a former
Federal prosecutor has testified that he encountered Mr. Rehnquist in 1962 at a
polling place where voters were registering complaints and that while denying
impropriety, Mr. Rehnquist never denied having challenged persons attempting to
vote. Can the Senate rest easy with this unresolved conflict?

Justice Rehnquist's unhappy record on matters of civil rights, civil liberties
and judicial ethics is a legitimate concern. He has frustrated the Senate's
inquiry with evasive and unconvincing replies. The Senate's pride and the
serious task of passing a candidate for Chief Justice ought to make it demand
more. This venerated post should not be conferred midst so much nagging doubt.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 11, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

When the Army Integrated Blacks

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 130 words


To the Editor:

Having fought in Korea, with the Second Division, Ninth Infantry Regiment, in a
squad that included not only the cross-section of white soldiers dear to World
War II Hollywood scriptwriters (the virgin, the poet, the tough kid from
Brooklyn, etc.), but also two black riflemen, I was surprised to find your book
review of ''Strength for the Fight: A History of Black Americans in the
Military'' (Aug. 23) stating that the forces ''were segregated in Korea,
desegregated in Vietnam.'' While segregation operated initially in Korea, by
1951 the combat infantry was essentially racially integrated.

Such studies as ''The Crucial Decade and After'' by Eric F. Goldman (pages
184-187) will confirm my recollection.

WILLIAM B. STONE
  Chicago, Aug. 29, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 11, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK;
CONGRESS MONITORS ITS MEDAL

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 10


In its early years, the Congressional gold medal, the highest award Congress can
bestow, went most often to military leaders like George Washington.

Later it evolved into a more general achievement award, not to be confused with
the Medal of Honor, which is presented by the military services for heroism. For
example, Congress has awarded the gold medal to Charles A. Lindbergh, the Wright
brothers and Dr. Jonas E. Salk in honor of their achievements, and only this
week approved a medal for the composer Aaron Copland.

But lately some members of Congress have begun to worry that, in its unending
zeal to do favors for constituents, Congress has become too generous with its
prize, in the process trivializing its highest distinction by lowering the
standards. As a result, legislation is before Congress that would tighten things
up. #53 Awarded in the First Century In the nation's first century, Congress
gave out 53 medals, the first going to Washington in March 1776 for laying siege
to Boston and driving out the British occupiers. In the next 110 years 68 medals
have been awarded, and 27 are clustered in the past decade alone.

What is more, Representative John Hiler, Republican of Indiana, says the last
three Congresses have given out 11 medals, some ''of questionable merit.''

In 1980, one staff member on the House Subcommittee on Consumer Affairs and
Coinage notes, Congress debated long and hard before deciding to deny a medal to
Gerald F. Spiess, who had sailed his small boat across the Atlantic. The members
decided they could not place Mr. Spiess in a pantheon that included Washington,
Hubert H. Humphrey and Robert Frost.

More recently Congress turned back a request for a medal for the three creators
of the Vietnam Memorial. That debate, earlier this summer, again dredged up
concerns that medal nominees were not of the same caliber as earlier recipients.


Not Like 'Lottery Tickets'

''I think there is genuine concern that the number of people and the reasons
they are being nominated are tending to trivialize the award,'' said a member of
the staff of Senator William Proxmire, a Wisconsin Democrat. ''After all, this
isn't supposed to be like giving out lottery tickets.''

While Senator Proxmire has pushed the Senate Banking Committee to hold down the
number of nominations it considers, Mr. Hiler and Representative Frank Annunzio,
an Illinois Democrat, have led the charge in the House. They have introduced
legislation to standarize the medal and to establish criteria.

Earlier this week, just minutes after members voted a medal for Mr. Copland, the
House easily passed the new restrictions, and they now go to the Senate, where
staff members of the Banking Committee say action will probably not come until
next Congress. This would require a new effort on the House bill.

Testament of Others in Field

The House bill would require that the nominee - it would bar groups from
receiving the prize - have recorded achievements that are ''so significant that
the recipient is recognized and acclaimed by others in the same field, as
evidenced by the recipient's having received the highest honors in the field.''

Although the House has tried to get hold of its proliferating medal nominees
before, it has had only limited success, according to Mr. Annunzio. As chairman
of the House Subcommittee on Consumer Affairs and Coinage, Mr. Annunzio told the
House on July 29 that the subcommittee would require that any nomination to have
as co-sponsors a majority of the House members and at least 40 percent of the
members of both parties.

But the requests continue to come in, Mr. Hiler said, adding, ''Additional
constraints on the Congressional gold medal are absolutely necessary.''

The new legislation, although less restrictive than Mr. Hiler's suggestion to
cap the number of medals awarded, nonetheless satisfies him. It will limit the
awards to those who have made a ''substantial and extraordinary contribution,''
he said.

And, added the aide to Senator Proxmire, it will hold down the favors Congress
can dole out. He asserted: ''It keeps a member from responding to a constituent
by saying: 'Thanks for your letter. I've introduced a bill on behalf of that
group, just as you asked.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 11, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CREDIT MARKETS;
Prices of Bonds Are Weaker

BYLINE: By MICHAEL QUINT

SECTION: Section D; Page 15, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 620 words


Bond prices weakened in lethargic trading yesterday with little demand from
investors or speculators.

While many market participants waited for fresh economic data, Treasury note and
bond prices seemed to be immune to reports that West German officials were
prepared to lower interest rates in the near future. Predictions that Japan and
West Germany will reduce their interest rates have been so frequent - and
unfounded - that traders have become wary of reacting to each new report.

''The reports of foreign discount rate cuts have become a bit like the 'peace is
at hand' reports in the days of Vietnam,'' said one government securities
trader. Instead of trading on speculation about rate reductions by foreign
central banks, he said, the debt market is more focused on domestic economic
indicators, such as the retail sales and Producer Price Index to be published
tomorrow.

According to many traders, the anticipation of a one-and-a-half-percentage-point
rise in retail sales for August and a one-half-percentage-point rise in producer
prices for the same month is already built into current prices. The stronger
data - which some economists said could discourage moves by the Fed to quickly
reduce short-term interest rates - is an important reason why interest rates on
short- and long-term Treasury issues have increased this month.

For example, the bellwether 7 1/4 percent Treasury bonds due in 2016 ended
yesterday's New York trading at 96 18/32, down 7/8 point, to yield 7.54 percent.
As recently as Aug. 29, the 7 1/4 percent issue was at 100 21/32, to yield 7.20
percent, before falling sharply to a low last Monday of 95 31/ 32, to yield 7.59
percent.

In the short-term market, rates were slightly lower to unchanged. The rate for
three-month Treasury bills, for example, fell to 5.17 percent from 5.21 percent,
but remains higher than the recent low of about 5 1/8 percent set at auction on
Sept. 2.

Despite the stronger sales data and rise in producer prices expected for August,
Lyle Gramley, chief economist at the Mortgage Bankers Association, estimated
that the Federal Reserve would still move to stimulate a sluggish economy by
reducing the discount rate again. In an interview with The Washington Post, he
said the cut could come in four or six weeks if it is coordinated with similar
action overseas, or might be delayed slightly if the United States acts alone.

Other analysts, while not predicting a cut in the discount rate, noted that
prices of gold and oil have subsided in recent days, helping to reduce fears of
inflation. The October oil futures contract traded at the New York Mercantile
Exchange fell 39 cents yesterday, to $14.88, and is well below last Friday's
peak of $16.37. The spot gold price fell $4.40 yesterday, to $404.70 an ounce,
and is down from $422.80 last Friday.

While the drop in oil prices the last few days has allayed some fears, oil is
still well above the low levels of earlier this summer, and likely to cause a
noticeable increase in inflation indexes over the next few months. Allen Sinai,
chief economist at Shearson Lehman Brothers, said higher energy prices would be
countered by modest economic growth, ample supplies and unused capacity, and low
increases in labor costs. He estimated that ''the underlying perception on
inflation still seems to be 3 percent to 4 percent.''

The Shearson Lehman economist concluded that big changes in interest rates were
not likely, but that the difference between short-term rates and long-term rates
might increase. He added that Treasury bond yields were not likely to decline
again to 7 percent, ''unless the news on the economy turns very bad again or
West Germany and Japan lower interest rates.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 13, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Typhoon on Vietnam's Coast Kills 400 and Injures 2,500

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 88 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 12


A typhoon killed nearly 400 people and injured more than 2,500 when it battered
Vietnam's northern coastal provinces, the official Vietnam News Agency reported
today.

The agency, monitored in Bangkok, said the typhoon, which struck Vietnam a week
ago, damaged 650,000 homes, hundreds of schools and scores of hospitals. The
storm sank more than 200 boats in five provinces, according to the agency.

The agency, quoting a communique issued by the Central Flood and Storm
Prevention Commission, reported 30 people missing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 13, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

'ALL THE PEOPLE ARE WITH ME,' CHILEAN LEADER SAYS

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 961 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, Sept. 12


President Augusto Pinochet, speaking in an interview less than a week after he
survived an assassination attempt, asserted today that ''all the people are with
me.''

The 70-year-old general, who appeared calm and in good health, said he had
received a great outpouring of support since his motorcade was ambushed last
Sunday night and five of his bodyguards were slain. The Government reacted by
imposing a state of siege, rounding up political opponents and closing six
opposition magazines.

In the interview, which was conducted in Spanish, General Pinochet was critical
of the United States, saying Washington would be displaying ''political and
economic myopia'' if it opposed continued international loans to Chile to try to
force him from power.

The President also rejected any idea of opening the scheduled 1989 presidential
election to more than one candidate but declined to say specifically whether he
would be the one.

Turns 71 in November

General Pinochet, who will be 71 in November, has kept up a virtual nonstop
round of meetings and ceremonial appearances this week.

Questions for the interview today were requested in advance by Government
officials a month ago. The General said at the outset today that he intended
only to hand over written answers.

But he relented slightly and said he would take a few questions. The interview
that followed lasted about 10 minutes. It ended when he stood up and started for
the door, remarking as he went that the United States was in no position to
advise him on dealing with Marxism-Leninism in Chile because, ''they have never
won a war.''

Says Soviet Won All Wars

Stopping to amplify, he said, ''The Second World War was won by the Russians,
then the Korean War was won by the Russians, in Vietnam the Russians won, in
Nicaragua, Russia won. And in Iran, who won?''

Then he said, ''Goodbye'' in English and walked out the door.

There was no chance to ask him how far he intended to go in applying the state
of siege he declared hours after the attempt on his life. It has been used so
far to halt transmissions from Chile by two international news agencies, detain
more than 40 people linked to the political left and expel three French priests.

At least four people, including the foreign editor of one of the six banned
magazines, were killed this week after being taken from their homes by armed men
in civilian clothing. The fourth victim was Abraham Mustkablie, an accountant,
whose bullet-riddled body was found in a ditch near Santiago, Roman Catholic
Church officials said today.

The Journalists Federation and the Chilean Human Rights Commission also said
some of their members were still being harassed and threatened.

Palace Appears Normal

While three of the damaged cars from the President's motorcade remained on
display in Constitution Plaza outside the Moneda presidential palace, all
appeared to be normal inside.

A steady stream of Cabinet ministers and military officers went in and out of
the President's second floor office before the interview. One army officer
carried a bulletproof vest.

In one of his written answers, General Pinochet said that if the United States
tried to block new loans or credits to Chile by the World Bank and the
Inter-American Development Bank it would be ''an ominous precedent of
politization of the multilateral financial organizations, which the United
States would not hesitate in lamenting, as it laments today the politization of
so many other international organisms, such as Unesco and the International
Labor Organization.'' Unesco is the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization. $19 Billion Foreign Debt He pointed out that Chile pays
its quota to the international lending agencies and has not sought to avoid
responsibility for its $19 billion foreign debt, then added:

''At times, I wonder if a country has to have problems with drugs, unrestrained
terrorism, uncontrolled Marxist movements, a unilateral debt moratorium and an
anti-American attitude in order to improve its relations with the United States
and even receive assistance.''

Francisco Javier Cuadra, the Secretary General of Government, who sat in on the
interview, said later that the basic answers to the written questions had been
drafted by lower officials, but that the President had done the ''final
editing.''

Asked whether he intended to be the presidential candidate in 1989, when his
eight-year constitutional term ends, General Pinochet avoided a direct answer,
saying, ''I neither had nor have personal ambitions.''

Refers to 1980 Vote

''If I reached the presidency it was because of the reaction of Chile to the
Marxist Government and I am continuing to the end of this period of eight years
at the will of 67 percent of Chileans, who so decided in 1980.''

He said that allowing more than one candidate in 1989, which has been mentioned
by some Government and military officials as a way of countering criticism,
''would suppose a constitutional reform.''

While the commanders of the navy, the air force and the national police have
indicated they favor some kind of constitutional changes to speed up the
democratic transition, General Pinochet said today that that would require long
analysis by study commissions and would merely delay any changes.

''The Constitution contemplates just one candidate,'' he said, adding later that
the option for those who oppose that one candidate would be to try to persuade
people to vote against him.

The Constitution says that if a majority of voters reject the single candidate,
who is to be nominated by the four military commanders, of which General
Pinochet is one, then President Pinochet remains in power one more year and
calls open elections.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 13, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANSWERS TO QUIZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 50, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 415 words


1. The General Electric Company plans to sell 75 percent of its stake in the RCA
Corporation's RCA/Ariola record unit to Bertelsmann A. G., a West German concern
that owns the remaining 25 percent. The dog has been a symbol on phonograph
records since 1901 when the Victor Talking Machine Company was founded. 2. After
the first Egyptian-Israeli summit meeting in five years, President Hosni Mubarak
announced that Egypt would return its Ambassador to Israel. Taba is a 700-yard
stretch of beach on the border between Egypt and Israel 3. It is the second race
between two women for a seat in the Senate. 4. Mayor Koch referred of any one of
three informers who brought allegations of corruption at the Parking Violations
Bureau to the City Department of Investigation in 1982 and 1983, which botched
the investigations. 5. Mementos left at the Vietnam Memorial in Washington. 6.
Pakistan. Poland. 7. Fifth. 8. Boston. Leading businesses have organized a $6
million program that will guarantee financial aid to all graduates of the city's
public high schools who get into college and then provide them with jobs when
they finish their education. 9. 240. 10. Mark Green, a consumer advocate and
writer, was referring to his victory over John S. Dyson, who spent $6 million on
the campaign for the Democratic nomination for the United States Senate. The
Mayor said he would not endorse Mr. Green. 11. The statue of Hadrian is being
vacuumed for the opening of an upcoming exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of
Art. 12. Coretta Scott King, the civil rights leader, attended the installation
of Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu as the first black to lead the Anglican Church in
southern Africa and canceled a meeting with President P. W. Botha of South
Africa. 13. Senator Jake Garn, a Utah Republican, donated a kidney to his
27-year-old daughter, Susan Horne, a diabetic who had suffered kidney failure.
14. In his tenure as CBS Inc.'s chairman and chief executive officer, Thomas H.
Wyman squeezed out William S. Paley, who in 1980 chose him to run the company,
and welcomed Lawrence A. Tisch to sit on the board. In the realignment, Mr.
Wyman was forced out by Mr. Paley and Mr. Tisch, the respective acting chairman
and acting chief executive. 15. Ethel Redner Scull and Robert C. Scull. 16. The
100-acre Truman Annex in Key West, with 19 historic structures, including
President Truman's ''Little White House.'' 17. Discover 18. Aleph accounts for
almost all the vowel sounds in Yiddish.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS PIN MUCH HOPE FOR SENATE CONTROL ON UPHILL RACE IN IDAHO

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 30, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1164 words

DATELINE: BOISE, Idaho, Sept. 12


''Ah, Idaho,'' said Peter D. Hart, a leading Washington pollster who works
mostly for Democratic candidates. ''There isn't a state anywhere where it's any
harder for the likes of us to win.''

His point is well taken; The Republicans have carried Idaho in the last five
Presidential elections, and in 1984 Ronald Reagan won more easily here than
anywhere except the indefatigably Republican state of Utah.

Yet this is one of the handful of states on which the Democrats are counting
this fall to return them to power in the Senate. They need a net gain of four
seats, and, given the lay of the political land elsewhere, it is not easy to see
how they can do it if they do not win in Idaho, which they have considered a
prime target for the last six years.

Why, one might ask, would they even dream of triumph in this bastion of
conservatism? Flip back through history, and it is hard to come up with more
than two great radical names here: William E. Borah, the Republican iconoclast
of the 20's, comes to mind, as does Frank Church, the Democrat who all through
the 60's helped lead the fight against the war in Vietnam. But even Senator
Church failed to hold his seat in 1980, going down to defeat amid a storm of
charges that he was too liberal and, worse, too cosmopolitan for the people of
Idaho.

Democrats' 2 Main Hopes

The main reasons the Democrats entertain hopes of winning here are two: first,
the style of the man who beat Senator Church six years ago, Sen. Steven D.
Symms, and second, the perilous condition of almost every economic activity in
the state, from farming and ranching to mining and construction.

Mr. Symms is a 48-year-old apple-grower and wine-producer whose Ste. Chapelle
chardonnays are much esteemed by connoisseurs. His politics is conservative, but
his style is flamboyant. Not for him is the strait-laced probity of some of his
ideological brethren, including his Idaho colleague, Senator James A. McClure;
Mr. Symms boldly allied himself with the Hunt family of Texas when the Hunts
were trying to corner the silver market; he set out (vainly) to soften the Clean
Air Act, in a state whose clean air is one of its prime resources, and, in a
typically unconventional comment, he suggested after the nuclear disaster at
Chernobyl that it was a pity that it had not ''happened much closer to the
Kremlin.''

Mr. Symms's opponent is Gov. John V. Evans, heir to a curious Democratic
subtradition in this state. Beginning with the victory of Cecil D. Andrus in
1970, the Democrats have controlled the governorship for 16 years.

Issue of the Economy

Governor Evans, a somber, 61-year-old former rancher who has won 14 consecutive
elections, thinks he can win again by blaming Mr. Symms for the state's economic
troubles. He notes that in Shoshone County, a silver-mining region in the
Panhandle, not far from the Canadian border, 43 percent of the work force is
unemployed, and he argues that Mr. Symms ''has to share in the blame, because he
either voted for the policies and programs that brought this about or failed to
find solutions.''

Many business executives in Boise - a city, despite its rustic reputation, where
such major enterprises as Boise Cascade (lumber and paper), Morrison-Knudsen
(heavy construction) and Albertson's (supermarkets) have headquarters - disagree
with the Governor's diagnosis. One of them said the other day that unlike most
of the country, Idaho ''never really recovered from the Carter recession, so
there's no point blaming President Reagan for this mess.''

In that sense, the Senate race here is typical of many in states where the
general prosperity of recent years has not penetrated. Some Republican
incumbents, like Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, have so skillfully
distanced themsleves from the Reagan Administration and its policies that they
seem invulnerable; some, like Senator James Abdnor of South Dakota, seem likely
to lose their seats because of local economic unrest, and others, like Mr.
Symms, find themselves staring into the chasm of uncertainty when they would
otherwise be assured of re-election.

Mr. Evans is a man of unthreatening style, all rimless glasses and dark suits
and pro-business utterances, so totally different, as he said in an interview
this week, from ''the kind of behavior you people in the East associate with
Democratic governors.'' The polls show Mr. Evans narrowly ahead; still, the
professional politicians here, not surprisingly, considering recent political
events, expect Mr. Symms to eke out a victory.

Public Seems Indifferent

Here, as in other states that constitute the focus of so much tactical endeavor
in Washington this fall, there is a sense of vast public indifference. The
weather, the fortunes of the local football teams, the decision of a Hollywood
producer not to film part of his next movie in Craters of the Moon National
Monument - all of those things attracted more television time and more headlines
this week than the local Senate race that could have big national consequences.

Maybe that is because almost everyone has made up his or her mind in this little
state where most voters know the candidates personally, or at least know someone
who knows them personally. All the polls and canvasses show only a tiny fraction
of the electorate undecided. So few people remain on the fence, one local
political worker said, that ''we ought to forget about media campaigns and take
all four of the undecideds out to dinner every night.''

He was joshing, of course; Mr. Evans intends to spend about $2 million, Mr.
Symms about $3 million. Those are boggling sums in a state where only about
400,000 people vote in a Presidential election and where fewer than that can be
expected to vote this year, despite hotly contested races for Senator, for
Governor and for United States Representative in the Second District, to say
nothing of a bitterly fought referendum on labor laws.

Little Political Upheaval

Curiously, there seems to be no real stirring of the political waters, even
though everyone is trying. The Democrats talked a lot, early this summer, about
an allegation in a book by an aide to former Senator Howard H. Baker Jr.,
Republican of Tennessee, to the effect that Mr. Symms had been drunk during a
debate on a farm labor bill in 1983. The Republicans have been whispering that
Mr. Evans, a Mormon, is insufficiently rigorous in his opposition to drinking,
smoking and abortion. The governor has raised money from out-of-state Jewish
groups - there are only 1,000 Jews in Idaho - by suggesting that Mr. Symms
supports Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya; Blake Hall, the Republican state
chairman, characterizes Mr. Evans as ''a Calvin Coolidge look-alike, a man who
forever says nothing and does nothing.''

It all seems a very long way from Washington, from the debates on taxes and the
Nicaraguan guerrillas and sanctions against South Africa. They talk little about
such questions here in Idaho.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM TRIAL WITNESS TELLS OF WORRIES

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 38, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 753 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Sept. 13


The first prosecution witness in the manslaughter trial of John Landis, director
of ''Twilight Zone: The Movie,'' has testified that he and another defendant
indicated they feared legal repercussions for filming children near explosives
used for special effects.

The explosives caused a helicopter crash July 23, 1982, that killed the actor
Vic Morrow, 53 years old, and two children, Myca Dinh Le, 7, and Renee Shinn
Chen, 6.

The witness, Donna Schuman, a production secretary working on the film.
testified in Los Angeles Superior Court that Mr. Landis had told his colleagues,
''I want it huge,'' in projecting the special effects explosives he wanted to be
employed in filming a mock Vietnam War scene.

''Then he threw his arms up and said, 'Arghh! We're all going to jail,' '' Mrs.
Schuman testified, describing Mr. Landis's comments made in his office before
shooting on the fatal sequence began.

'A Slap on the Wrist'

Mrs. Schuman, who left the witness stand Tuesday after three days of testimony,
also said that she had asked the movie's associate producer, George Folsey Jr.,
what the penalty would be for on-location filming of the children after dark
without work permits, a violation of California's child labor laws.

''He said, 'A slap on the wrist and a little fine, unless they find out about
the explosives - then they'll throw my butt in jail,' '' Mrs. Schuman testified.

Mr. Landis, Mr. Folsey and three other defendants are charged with involuntary
manslaughter.

In other testimony this week, a Hollywood casting director said that Mr. Landis
angrily told her he would hire the children himself, ''off the streets,'' after
she told him it would be illegal and dangerous to use them in the Vietnam War
scene he described to her.

The casting director, Marci Liroff, testified that Mr. Landis wanted the
character portrayed by Mr. Morrow to rescue two children in a village under
attack. ''He wanted him to run across a river, being pursued by an American
helicopter with explosions going off all around,'' she testified.

''I explained that to hire children for this scene would be illegal due to the
hours they were shooting the scene,'' she testified. ''And I also mentioned that
it sounded kind of dangerous.''

She said Mr. Landis ''was a little gruff because we wouldn't be involved with
this.'' She added, ''He said, 'To hell with you guys. We'll get them off the
streets ourselves.' ''

Argument of Defense Attorneys

Mr. Landis and Mr. Folsey have admitted that they circumvented the child labor
regulations. But their attorneys maintained that their clients could not foresee
the danger that arose in the ultimately fatal scene.

Mrs. Schuman also testified that she believed she and others had been
''blackballed'' by the Hollywood motion picture industry for cooperation with
the authorities in the ''Twilight Zone'' investigation.

''I'm afraid I've been put out of business permanently,'' she testified. The
comment was ordered stricken from the record by Judge Roger Boren.

Mrs. Schuman's testimony came under harsh attack by defense attorneys, who were
not informed of the incriminating remarks she attributed to Mr. Landis and Mr.
Folsey until last July 24.

The attorneys contended in interviews this week with reporters that Mrs. Schuman
had committed perjury. In a hearing on the issue, they called on the former
prosecutor in the case, Deputy District Attorney Gary P. Kesselman, to rebut
her.

Contradicting Mrs. Schuman, who said she told Mr. Kesselman in an interview four
years ago about the purported statements of Mr. Landis and Mr. Folsey, the
former prosecutor denied that the comments were ever related to him.

But Deputy District Attorney Lea Purwin D'Agostino, who assumed the prosecution
from Mr. Kesselman last October, told reporters she backed Mrs. Schuman's
testimony ''100 million percent.''

Mrs. D'Agostino then volunteered to testify in the hearing and implied from the
witness stand that somebody in the Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office
had attempted to sabotage her case.

''I realized there was a problem,'' Mrs. D'Agostino said, when asked why she had
never conferred with Mr. Kesselman about the film makers' purported comments.
''I thought somebody was withholding information from me so I wouldn't be
prepared.''

The three other defendants on trial are the unit production manager, Dan
Allingham; the special effects coordinator, Paul Stewart, and the helicopter
pilot, Dorcey Wingo. Testimony resumes Sept. 22.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR BROOKLYN DIOCESAN PAPER, A SHIFT

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 52, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 959 words


In the year that Ed Wilkinson has been editor of The Tablet, the weekly
newspaper of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn, he has shifted the
newspaper's tone to reflect what he says are the theological views of the 1.3
million members of the diocese.

''No doubt, the paper is more conservative than it once was,'' Mr. Wilkinson
said in an interview, ''but we are reflecting where the church in this diocese
is, and as long as we do that, I've done my job.''

How the 38-year-old Mr. Wilkinson does his job matters beyond the Brooklyn
diocese, experts on the religious press say, because The Tablet, as one of the
oldest and most respected of the 156 diocesan newspapers in the United States,
is widely viewed as a barometer of the Catholic press. And, these experts say,
more and more diocesan newspapers are leaning toward more traditional views.

''As a general rule, papers are more interested in representing the views of
their community than in crusading,'' said James A. Doyle, the executive director
of the Catholic Press Association, an organization of church journalists.

'Flagship of the Catholic Press'

Although it is difficult to gauge, he said, The Tablet is most likely
influencing the change. ''The Tablet is and has long been a flagship of the
Catholic press,'' he said. ''What they do, other papers watch and follow.''

Mr. Wilkinson studied theology at Immaculate Conception Seminary in Huntington,
L.I. He began working for The Tablet in 1970 and was sports editor for 11 years.
In June 1985 he succeeded Don Zirkel, who left after 17 years as editor to
become director of public information for the State Division of Human Rights.

His job as editor might be a more sensitive one, Mr. Wilkinson said, were it not
for his publisher, Bishop Francis J. Mugavero, who allows editors a free hand.

''I believe in freedom of the press,'' Bishop Mugavero said. ''The only thing I
say to my editors is that we are the church, and after that, you are free.''

For 17 years, Bishop Mugavero has been the leader of the most densely populated
diocese in the country, which comprises Brooklyn and Queens. He was one of the
first American bishops to condemn the Vietnam War. Almost 10 years ago, he
implored the church to treat homosexuals as individuals who need counseling,
rather than as outcasts.

Housing Plan

More recently, the Bishop supported with not only his endorsement, but also $3
million from the diocese, the Nehemiah Housing Plan, a project to build 5,000
single-family homes in an economically depressed area of eastern Brooklyn.
Stands such as these, he said, have given him and the diocese a liberal label.

The Tablet, with its circulation of 90,000, has contributed to that reputation.
After Vatican II, the newspaper often presented views contrary to those of the
church on issues ranging from birth control to the ordination of women, from
celibacy to divorce.

Also during that time, the newspaper angered many Catholics, lay and clergy
alike, and from time to time editorials prompted the church hierarchy to
question Bishop Mugavero.

But lately, The Tablet has been less likely to cause controversy. In the last
year, for example, its weekly column, ''As The Tablet Sees It,'' has condemned
New York's gay rights law - a public stand that Mr. Wilkinson said the paper
would not have taken in the past.

''On a major church issue, there is no way I would embarrass the publisher and
owner of my newspaper,'' Mr. Wilkinson said. ''We also don't want to take a
stand that would be divisive in the church.''

Supplement Dropped

While the paper has come out in the last year in support of furthering women's
rights in the church, it has stopped printing a supplement, the Ms. Tablet,
which, among other things, had called for ordaining women. The supplement had
appeared each year since 1972 during the week of the Feast of the Immaculate
Conception. Mr. Wilkinson said he felt that the majority of Catholics in the
diocese would be opposed to ordaining women.

Mr. Wilkinson said he believed the newspaper should reflect the consensus of the
diocese.

Many religious leaders say the diocese has become more conservative. They say
tension over issues once at the forefront of debate for American Catholics has
relaxed, partly because the Roman Catholic Church has a conservative Pope as its
leader, and partly from frustration.

''Issues like birth control and the ordination of women are ones that have never
been solved, that probably needed a rest anyway,'' said Sister Angela Gannon,
the associate superintendent for religious education of the Brooklyn diocese.

Change in Parishes

Some pastors of the diocese also cited the changing nature of their parishes.
They said many parishes consisted of enclaves of devout immigrants, primarily
Hispanic Americans, who were generally unwilling to challenge church tenets.

''Also, many of the parishes are in economically depressed areas,'' said the
Rev. Walter C. Murphy, the pastor of Sacred Heart in the Fort Greene section of
Brooklyn. ''Parishioners tend to be less concerned about church issues than
about keeping food on their tables.''

The Tablet's readers at home, especially those fond of The Tablet of old, have
noticed the editorial change.

''I think The Tablet has taken a more conciliatory than conservative turn, one
that might have its own impact,'' said the Rev. George T. Deas, the pastor of
Our Lady of the Blessed Sacrament in Bayside, Queens. ''The difficulty with a
crusade is that it tends to focus so narrowly on the issue at hand, others
suffer in the long run.

''But,'' he continued, ''I would certainly not like to see The Tablet move away
from the spirit of Vatican II. And I haven't seen that, at least, not yet.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ed Wilkinson (NYT/Dith Pran)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ATTEMPT TO KILL PINOCHET MAY SIGNAL A STRONGER LEFT

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 826 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile


LAST week's attempt to kill President Augusto Pinochet and the recent discovery
of hidden arsenals in the Chilean countryside suggest that this nation's violent
left is more organized and determined than was previously thought.

Until now, the country's two Marxist-Leninist guerrilla groups were considered
capable of mounting only isolated attacks, not an armed insurrection. The
Leftist Revolutionary Movement and the Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front were
considered small - consisting of a thousand people at most - compared with the
100,000 members of Chile's military and police.

But the discovery since early August of 3,500 Vietnam-era M-16 rifles, two
million rounds of ammunition, a hundred RPG-7 rocket launchers and tons of other
armaments, much of them buried in sites at the edge of the Atacama Desert,
raises the possibility that the leftists are a force to be reckoned with. The
Government says the materiel was unloaded from fishing boats along Chile's
2,600-mile coast and intended for the Patriotic Front. It also contends that at
least 200 Chilean exiles have recently completed military training in Nicaragua.

The ambush of General Pinochet's motorcade last Sunday by what was reported to
be a dozen or more well-armed people makes the left seem even more formidable,
as does the apparently well-organized nature of the attack. These signs of a
stronger left may hinder efforts by center and center-right parties to bring
about a democratic transition of power from the Pinochet regime. The moderates
have previously been willing to collaborate occasionally with Communists and
other leftists who renounce the use of violence and to defend their right to
participate in a future political system. Now many moderates feel betrayed, and
General Pinochet has new fuel for his charges that centrist overtures are
providing the leftists with a facade of respectability.

Chile has largely been spared the leftist violence that has plagued much of
Latin America since the 1960's. Before military rule began 13 years ago, the
country was a haven of political tolerance. Communists and Socialists were free
to advocate Marxist-Leninist views at the polls, and, in 1970, a Socialist
leader, Salvador Allende Gossens, was elected President. The Leftist
Revolutionary Movement, known here by its Spanish acronym, M.I.R., emerged in
the 1960's, but for years it did little more than occasionally rob banks and
seize farms to speed agrarian reform. After the coup against Mr. Allende in
1973, the M.I.R. was thought to have been largely eliminated, but recently it
has been revived. And in the last few years, a new armed group, the Patriotic
Front, also has emerged. In addition, the Chilean Communist Party has expressed
support for insurrection and admits an ''affiliation'' with the more radical
group. But the Communists have continued to maintain a public posture demanding
a place among Chile's political parties. Recent events appear to have helped
General Pinochet by providing a justification for repression.

Last week, six opposition magazines were closed and more than 40 people were
detained. Jose Carrasco Tapia, the editor of one of the publications, was found
shot to death at the edge of a cemetery after he was taken from his home by
armed plainclothesmen.

But opposition leaders and other analysts said General Pinochet could be hurt by
the appearance of a more credible leftist threat. Until the ambush, many
Chileans did not believe that the arms discoveries were real. Although most
foreign diplomats and Chilean opposition leaders took the matter seriously, many
people openly laughed at Government revelations of secret arsenals.

The Patriotic Front and the Communist Party would neither acknowledge nor deny
that leftist arms had been found. But they admitted that at least some of the 21
people arrested in connection with the discoveries belonged to their
organizations and had recently returned to Chile from abroad. Shortly before the
attack on General Pinochet's motorcade, the Christian Democratic leader, Gabriel
Valdes, said the arms discoveries had left the country both ''incredulous and
frightened.'' He also said the issue was working against the Government.

''Pinochet has had total control for 13 years,'' he said. ''He took power to
eradicate Communism.'' The discovery of the arsenals demonstrated that the
Government had failed, Mr. Valdes said. Ironically, these events occurred just
as most of the opposition parties, with the notable exception of the Communists,
had agreed to principles intended to reassure military leaders about the nature
of any proposed new government. The so-called ''bases of governability,'' signed
by parties ranging from Conservative to Socialist, were supposed to lead to
discussions with military leaders who would like to see General Pinochet step
down. But with the fear of insurrection and Chile in a state of seige, these are
not days for reason and moderation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of President Augusto Pinochet, mourners at funeral of Jose
Carrasco Tapia, a young demonstrator during Government parade and a presidential
escort car after the assassination attempt (Agence France-Presse; Special
Features/Sipa Press/Torregano; Reuters)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By Karen Ray

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 223 words


TO BE FREE! By Ron Martin. (Vanguard, $14.95.) In this novel about ''the bloody
maw'' of the Vietnam War, the protagonist, Jack Ramsey, is a prisoner of war
saturated in symbolism. The story of his capture, imprisonment and escape is
composed of equal parts luck, desperation and determination. Through time and
torture, Ramsey understands that ''any man could be broken.'' Having lost 30
pounds, ''covered with oozing sores from which his strength seemed to drain,''
he determines to escape. Ramsey, who had volunteered for a second tour in
Vietnam rather than face less violent uncertainties at home, relishes testing
himself. The real enemy here is not the North Vietnamese but the war itself,
which ''the enemy chose not to fight . . . as the grunts wanted'' - no fair
fights on open battlefields. Both the larger war and Ramsey's personal battle
with a cruel, intelligent captor are drawn-out psychological affairs filled with
mental maneuvering. There is nothing surprising in Ron Martin's characters or
plot, but the story is a desperate act stripped to its essentials, just like
Ramsey's escape. The final scenes at the black granite memorial are heavy-handed
and predictable. ''To Be Free!'' is a raw but elegant first novel that would
have been even better if the author had remembered that a little symbolism goes
a long way.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A GENE FOR FLAWED COMPETENCE

BYLINE: BY MEREDITH SUE WILLIS; Meredith Sue Willis is working on the third
novel in a trilogy. The first two parts, already published, are ''Higher
Ground'' and ''Only Great Changes.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 487 words


ONLY THE LITTLE BONE By David Huddle. 217 pp. Boston: David R. Godine. $15.95.

DAVID HUDDLE'S excellent new book of linked short stories, ''Only the Little
Bone,'' is not just another tale of growing up south of the Mason-Dixon line.
Its real interest, even when the narrator is still a young boy, lies in the
depiction of the lines of power within the family, the community, the industries
that support the community - and of the kind of men these institutions produce.

The stories show men watching, coveting, spying on and underhandedly or openly
attacking women who attract them. In the very first story, ''Poison Oak,'' a
threat blooms around the mother of the narrator. In ''The Undesirable'' the same
boy, Reed Bryant, now an adolescent, finds himself both the threatened and the
threatener. In this splendid novella Reed's father hires as a secretary at the
Carbide plant a young woman who becomes the catalyst for the boy's loss of
innocence -not, however, through a conventional sexual initiation but through
his realization that he can use her to gain a moment of mastery over his father.

The writing here and throughout is multilayered and always controlled. Moreover,
there is an interplay among the stories that enriches the book as a whole. Only
rarely does Mr. Huddle misstep, and I suspect that the flaws seem greater than
they are in contrast to the accomplishments of the rest of the book. One story,
''Dirge Notes,'' is marked by a taint of sentimentality over the death of a
beloved grandfather, and another, ''Save One for Mainz,'' about a soldier in the
period of the Vietnam War, hinders the reader's engagement by a certain lack of
generosity toward the characters. (Incidentally, this is the only story not set
primarily in the town of Rosemary, Va.) Otherwise, there is one solid success
after another. The last piece, the title story, is a reprise of themes and
techniques. Told in the present tense, ''Only the Little Bone'' appears at first
to be a boy's vivid impressions of day-to-day life during a polio epidemic, when
he is kept within his own house and yard. The atmosphere is close with the
child's observations of nature and family discord. Then, smoothly, skillfully
and with complete authority, the author widens his field of view to include that
of the adult Reed will become. This stunning shift allows Mr. Huddle (who is
also a poet) to have this story resonate with scenes from earlier pieces. An
automobile breaks Reed's leg, becoming once more the metaphor for dangerous
rites of passage. And the grandfather reappears as the chief carrier of the
family trait of ''flawed competence.''

This quality, of course, is emblematic of more than the Bryant family. The final
lines of of the book extend the field of view as far as possible. This boy, this
man, his family, his town and his nation represent human history writ small,
writ large, written by a gifted artist.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FARE OF THE COUNTRY;
FALL IN SHANGHAI: TIME FOR CRAB RUSH

BYLINE: BY EILEEN YIN-FEI LO; Eileen Yin-Fei Lo teaches Chinese cooking and is
the author of ''The Dim Sum Book: Classic Recipes from the Chinese Teahouse''
and ''The Chinese Banquet Cookbook,'' (both Crown Publishers).

SECTION: Section 10; Page 6, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1078 words


Shanghai's annual crab rush begins with a frenzy in mid-September, continues
unabated through October, and then subsides for another year. But during those
six weeks virtually everyone in Shanghai, it seems, wants to eat nothing but the
freshwater da zhai xie, or hairy crabs.

People line up at markets for the crabs, which are sold in the hand-woven bamboo
baskets in which they are kept after being pulled from the water. Local people
have been known to pay merchants to tell them when the first shipments of da
zhai xie are to arrive. And after the crabs are bought, they are brought home to
be steamed and eaten with shaoxing wine, the sherry-like beverage of Shanghai.
Throughout the Shanghai region, late September and all of October are times for
crab parties, time to have friends over for a feast of hairy crabs and wine.

Shanghai's crab craze is similar to the mussel madness each fall in Brussels and
across Belgium, the quests for shad roe and soft-shell crabs each spring in the
eastern United States, the need for crayfish each September in Finland. It is
fascinating to watch people, mostly women, line up impatiently in Shanghai's
many morning markets just to buy the crabs.

Nor will just any crabs do. Only the gray-blue crabs of Jiangsu Province, from
the lake known as Yangcheng (west of Shanghai) are acceptable. And people will
pay enormous prices, as much as 45 yuan (about $15) a pound for them.

Because of the demand, unscrupulous merchants have been known to place other
crabs, such as those from the Yangtze River where it passes close to Anhui
Province, in among the da zhai xie. Careful shoppers can be seen sorting through
the baskets, to examine each crab individually. The distinguishing feature of
the da zhai xie are hairlike bristles along their legs - thus their name - and
the people of Shanghai know that.

So intense is the demand for the hairy crabs each fall that markets have
developed in places other than Shanghai. In Hong Kong and the United States,
immigrants from Shanghai await air shipments of the crabs, and in New York's
Chinatown people will pay as much as $20 a pound for live da zhai xie.

For the markets the Chinese Government has printed brightly colored posters that
show the crabs, red after being cooked, hairy legs sticking out. When I was in
Shanghai during the crab craze last year I saw posters that read, ''Autumn is
here, the chrysanthemums are blooming and the crabs are fat.'' Others read,
''This is the season to eat the crabs.'' Still others described the roe in the
female crabs as ''fat and thick,'' and the meat as ''soft and tender, full of
vitamins.''

It is difficult to trace historically the annual demand for da zhai xie; the
three characters translate as ''big gate crab.'' The people of Shanghai say
there is no religious or mythological significance to the hairy crab. Some
suggest that it is an extreme manifestation of the appetite for crabs throughout
Asia, where crustaceans are generally held in higher esteem than in other parts
of the world.

In the waters of and around Thailand, Malaysia and Vietnam many species of crab
exist: The so-called zebra crabs and blue swimming crabs of Thailand, the
mangrove crab of Malaysia and the monkey-god crab of Vietnam are all highly
prized as food.

Attention is given the hairy crab not for its history, but for its consumption,
the traditions that concern how and when they should be eaten.

The body of the perfect hairy crab is ''the size of a rice bowl,'' according to
the people of Shanghai, three and a half to four inches in diameter. The male
crab has bigger claws and more bristles along its legs, and weighs about 11
ounces; the female, with smaller claws and little bristle, is about 8 ounces.

Early in the season the female crabs are much higher in demand, for they are fat
with roe, their shells are softer and their meat sweeter. Later, as the males
grow, their bodies become plump and their meat sweeter. The crabs are never
seasoned when cooked. Occasionally a traditional Shanghai dipping sauce of
vinegar, soy sauce and ginger will accompany them, but most often they are eaten
just steamed.

The only exception to simple steaming is toward the end of October when the
crabs are smaller and harder and their meat is not as tender or as sweet. Then
they may be eaten as ''drunken crabs,'' steamed after being marinated in
shaoxing wine.

Part of the art of the Shanghai table, after the crab has been consumed and all
its meat plucked out, is to reconstitute the body so that it looks whole.

So much a part of Shanghai life is the hairy crab that it transcends the table.
The way the crabs are marketed, their legs and claws bound tightly against their
bodies, has meaning in the financial markets.

In Shanghai and in Hong Kong, when business dealings are most difficult, when
money supplies are tight, when property transactions are moving slowly, the
condition is said to be ''da zhai xie.'' I have eaten hairy crabs in the Ru Yi,
a fairly new restaurant in Shanghai atop the Shanghai Friendship Store on
Nanjing Road (these were steamed and accompanied by a bottle of cold Seagull
Beer), and in the Lubolang Restaurant inside the mid-city enclave known as
Shanghai's Old Town.

Neither of these restaurants has a listed telephone number. It is best to book
tables through the Shanghai branch of the China International Travel Service,
telephone 217200. The office is quite close to both restaurants. In both cases,
the cost was about $15 to $16 each, the price of one crab the same as the normal
price of a full meal for two or three people. But that is an indication of how
greatly they are prized.

In Hong Kong, where the desire for hairy crabs increases each autumn - and where
copies of the Shanghai posters are to be found in virtually every one of its
Shanghai-style restaurants - the Wu Kong (27 Nathan Road, Kowloon; telephone
3-667244) is famous for da zhai xie. ''We cook them the way they do in
Shanghai,'' said the restaurant's manager, Bill Kong. And so they do.

Last fall, my husband and I paid about $18 each for four da zhai xie in Wu Kong,
a small basement-level white marble restaurant entered from Peking Road. The
crabs had been steamed to redness, and with them we drank glasses of shaoxing
wine.

As we ate, more hairy crabs were inching about in a nearby holding tank
illuminated with bright, emerald green lighting, waiting like the precious
creatures they are, to give enjoyment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of steamed gray-blue freshwater crabs; Map of Shanghai showing
location of Yangcheng Lake (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GLASS AND STEEL GILD THE HEART OF HONG KONG

BYLINE: BY MARY LEE SETTLE; Mary Lee Settle went to Hong Kong to work on her
newest novel, ''Celebration,'' which will be published next month by Farrar,
Straus & Giroux.

SECTION: Section 10; Page 15, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2720 words


Even the sound of it is like a gong:

Hong Kong, city of spy novels, old movies, Kung Fu, far-flung Empire, refugees,
a place to pass through on your way east or west. This was not what I was
looking for. I went to find a past and a future in some 400 square miles of
territory that in 1997 will be turned over to China under a treaty made by the
British Government over the heads of the five and a half million people who live
there. It was, to me, not a way station but a destination.

In nervous, booming Hong Kong the 1950's and the 1960's seemed to be as far away
at first as if I had sought clues to 200 years ago. I first saw Hong Kong island
from the Kowloon side of one of the busiest ports in the world. It rose out of
the bright water across a harbor so huge that the ships seemed small and
vulnerable under a tropic-blue sky where great clouds rode the wind and made
dark shadows like islands in the sea. As far as I could see, there were junks
with patched sails, junks painted for tourists in the red and gold of the last
imperial dynasty, cargo ships with the Red Star of China, a few ships of the
British Navy, container ships from all over the world, pleasure boats with
colored sails, and hydrofoils that buzzed like insects around the ponderous
ferries.

Hong Kong that morning seemed to have no past, only a glistening present of
skyscrapers of bright glass and chrome and steel. They gleamed in the sun, a
lower Manhattan set against a background of the famous mountain, Victoria Peak.
I knew that clinging to its steep slopes was some of the most expensive real
estate in the world, but like a forbidden place (and for many years it was
forbidden to the Chinese) the mountain was aloof, shrouded in a cloud that cut
it off from the lower city.

This is the city that most visitors see. Its windows are filled with gold
ornaments, with pearls and all the glittering gem colors of an Aladdin's cave,
with leather and suede and handmade shoes, with fashionable clothes made by
fast, expensive, fine tailors or fast cheap tailors whose clothes fall off your
back. Instead of one Trump Tower, it has at least a half-dozen huge elegant
follies, equally grand, with fountains and crystal chandeliers and escalators
that go up story after story of open space, connected by skywalks far from the
heat and crowds of the lowly streets.

This is the city you see at evening, and it is one of the most dramatic views
anywhere in the world. After a 45-degree tram ride that seems even more
vertical, you watch from the top of the Peak as the lights of Hong Kong and
Kowloon grow brighter in the lowering darkness, outlining the skyscrapers far
below and the harbor water like showers of fallen stars.

Hong Kong is the great bargain counter for the rich. The person I found there
with the most luxurious job was Helen Giss, who pilots visitors through the maze
of luxury shops to the best place to buy pearls that would cost twice as much
anywhere else, the finest antiques, the rarest jade, the most dependable fine
tailors, furs that are cheap -that is, if you happen to be looking for sable or
mink. There are lesser bargains within the means of most tourists, but searching
for them can take so much time that the city is missed, and the only memory is
of shop after shop after shop.

There was no hint of Empire in that first rich sight; then I began to recognize
the stolid spacious buildings of the British Empire that the sun never set on.
Government House is resplendent, as are the parks, and vestiges of 19th-century
public buildings, but there was about them already a sad echo of loss. Imperial
domes are dwarfed behind great Chinese high-rises. The cathedral that once
dominated the skyline survives, but it is hidden behind the new Hongkong and
Shanghai Bank, which is said to be the most expensive building in the world, a
high-tech triumph in exposed steel struts.

I had a sense of having arrived in Hong Kong in the nick of time to see what was
left of the old city under the wild building, the detritus of the British Empire
that is rubble filling the harbor where every year land is reclaimed from the
sea as modern Hong Kong builds higher and higher toward some golden pie in the
sky.

The Repulse Bay Hotel is gone, the old waterfront buildings gone. The great
houses of once-fashionable Bonham Road are going. You smell the dust of them in
the air as you pass, and hear the bulldozers knocking down doors that once the
Chinese could not enter except as servants. Behind the piles of rubble that were
drawing rooms, you can see the remains of towers that have not yet fallen. I
walked through the neglected gardens of Eucliff Castle, once one of Hong Kong's
grandest houses. The grass had invaded the tennis courts, and the time-dulled
marble halls echoed as empty places do. Eucliff Castle, too, is being torn down.

I had begun to think I was looking for an already lost world. Then I moved to
that beautiful bastion of Empire, luxury and pragmatic survival, the Peninsula
Hotel in Kowloon, one of the few great hotels to survive with all its regal
services into the postwar world. I had a fleeting feeling that I should arrive
with a cabin trunk. It is a place where you can live for a little while as the
very rich live, and understand why their feet never touch the ground.

The Peninsula opened in 1928 and is one of the oldest private buildings to
survive the tearing down of old Hong Kong by the modern Chinese, even though an
artsy public building that looks like a concrete egg has been built in front to
obscure its time-honored view of the harbor. Like Raffles, surviving in
Singapore, it is more than a hotel. It is history, an institution, a legend. It
has survived depression, the Sino-Japanese War, invasion by the Japanese. It has
even survived the future. Already the Peninsula Group has opened one of the
first luxury hotels in Peking.

In the great gilded lobby of the Peninsula, nymphs and goddesses once floated
across the high plaster ceiling above the British who insisted on having the
right side of the lobby to themselves. The rest of the world was allowed to sit
on the left. Once in the secret language of haute whoredom, if you were
available you sat in one place, if you were already engaged you sat in another.
The plaster deities looked down on the high-ranking officers of the Japanese
Army who lived there through World War II. Now the past, present and future meet
in the lobby as they have since the hotel was opened. A Japanese princess, a
movie star, a diplomat, tired tourist shoppers and visiting official delegations
from the People's Republic now sit at teatime under the lofty classic ceiling.

Predictions are risky in Hong Kong, but I can see the Peninsula lobby after the
takeover in 1997, looking just as it does now, filled with rich foreigners. Few
of them will notice if, as in the early days of British rule, the Chinese will
not be allowed to go there. The luxury hotels, like those in China, will be
strictly for foreign tourists, a full-circle irony.

But I was to find out later the deep self-deception in this Western vision of a
Chinese city. Only 2 percent of its people are foreigners of any kind. If the
British culture is being erased the Chinese culture remains, and it may reflect
more of Chinese traditional life, both peasant and mandarin, than anyplace else
in the East. It was not destroyed when the British occupied Hong Kong island in
the mid-19th century, and then leased the New Territories. It simply went
unnoticed. The streets that were renamed Wellington, Peel and Shelley remained
as Chinese as they ever were, and still do. The people who live on them ignore
the English names. The British overlaid what they found with their own colonial
customs. As they always have, the Hong Kong Chinese will retain some traces of
these passing colonists that they find useful, or amusing, if the People's
Republic allows it - the Happy Valley race track, the administrative genius of
the British, and, they hope, the legal system. After the Japanese occupation
ended in 1945, there were only about 500,000 people in the Crown Colony. With
the tidal waves of immigration its population has grown to five and a half
million, and they keep coming, singly and in great waves. Sometimes they swim
the several shark-infested miles from the nearby islands that belong to China.
Once, by the weight of desperate numbers, they trampled down the steel mesh
fence on the border, not for political reasons but for something to eat.
Sometimes they are smuggled in by the boat people, the Tanka, whose own name
means refugee, who legend says came a thousand years ago to escape the tyranny
of Genghis Khan, and who have been living on their boats ever since, still
poised for flight.

The first modern wave came at the time of the revolution in 1949. Mandarins,
intellectuals, manufacturers and entrepreneurs, craftsmen and cabinet makers,
carvers of jade, thieves and vice lords were among them. The best of them make
up most of the talent and financial brains of the city, the worst elements run
the underground of vice.

Hong Kong is more than a city. It is a small state, spread over islands in the
South China Sea and clinging to the tip of the mainland on Kowloon Peninsula and
the New Territories behind it. Most of it is not British, not commercial, not
modern. Even its names are usually translations of traditional Chinese images.
Kowloon means Nine Dragons, after the high hills that frame it. The television
channels are called Jade and Pearl. Hong Kong itself means Fragrant Harbor.

Much of the New Territories is mountainous. In the valleys there are truck farms
and fishponds, and villages where the Hakka women in their black clothes and
their shaded hats seem a holdover from ancient China. Some of the villages are
so old that they are still walled against some fear of invasion. Like the boat
people, the Hakka, too, were refugees. (Hakka means visiting people.) They came
down from the north to escape war and famine centuries ago. Some of their
villages are pressed against the steel fence of the People's Republic, where on
a hill at the border you can stare down at the mainland Chinese who farm the
same way as their Hakka relatives, look the same and still, from time to time,
escape across the border. It is hard not to be preoccupied, even as a visitor,
with the future. It pulls so strongly that it obscures memory, stifles any
nostalgia. A part of modern Hong Kong - the rich, and a new aware, educated and
poor middle class - looks forward to the takeover in 11 years with a mixture of
fatalistic acceptance and fear. It is not some reflection of our conservative
fear of Communism as a political system. It is far more knowledgeable than that.
They know China. They have relatives there, and they visit it as easily and as
often as we go to another state. Although they see many changes in the living
standards of the new, ''open'' China, they say they know how poor the people
are, how little chance they have to change their lives, how out of balance in
wages, in services, and above all, in hope, the two cultures still are. This is
especially true since the terrible depredations of the Cultural Revolution, when
more of the Chinese cultural past was destroyed than we in the West can
understand.

Now Hong Kong is a museum to the Chinese. So many of the fine craftsmen were
killed in the Cultural Revolution - the wood carvers, the embroiderers, the
artists - that China has looked to Hong Kong for a relearning of its ancient
arts and crafts. There is hope that the present trend toward openness and freer
enterprise continues within the socialist state. There are signs that it will,
and that Hong Kong will remain, as promised, a free port. Not the least of these
signs is the huge investment in building the new Bank of China, whose architect
is I. M. Pei.

No one quite knows how great a financial investment China has made in the new
Hong Kong, but there are estimates that it is in the billions; the country is
Hong Kong's biggest trading partner, followed by the United States.

But the fear is that there are strong elements of the Cultural Revolution left
and that they can seize power again. No one knows. As one young Chinese woman
finally said to me after much questioning, ''We hope for the best and expect the
worst.'' She was not a rich tai tai - once the word for wife, now used as a
pejorative term for the idle mah-jongg-playing wife of a rich man. She did not
drive one of the many Rolls-Royces you see there. She is the daughter of
refugees, and she and her sister live with their parents in a Le
Corbusier-inspired new town in public housing, in a tiny apartment 20 floors up.

The Chinese Communists are puritans. For the rich, for the huge entertainment
industry (which provides not only Kung Fu films, but child pornography, mostly
to the American market), for the world of Suzie Wong, the Wanchai district that
American G.I.'s remember from R & R during the Vietnam War, for the drug pushers
and the luxury trades, it is much as if New York had to accept looking forward
to a takeover by religious puritans. So Hong Kong is preparing for a possible
future by building an ideal city of commerce that they hope will be too grand,
too famous, too beautiful, too lucrative for China to want to dismantle when it
takes over.

After the heady pleasures of life at the Peninsula, and the noise, the heat and
the crowds on Hong Kong island, when excitement began to turn into fatigue, I
decided to go to Cheung Chau, once a pirate stronghold, the island of the hungry
ghosts, who are placated every year with huge towers of buns carried through the
streets. It was there that I found the Chinese past, even more than in the
hidden streets of the Western district of Hong Kong island. Cheung Chau is 50
minutes and 100 years by ferry across the South China Sea from Hong Kong, on a
peaceful, quiet voyage among the green islands under a sky that is seldom
without a wildness of clouds.

There are no cars. There are street-corner altars, temples, open markets where
you can buy snake oil, bronze-colored roast piglets, and red and blue iridescent
live crabs. On weekends the beaches are crowded. The dragon dancers wind through
the narrow alleys and along the waterfront. But during the week there are only
the sounds of bargaining in the market, the perpetual clatter of mah-jongg
tiles, and once in a while a faint boom of guns from the islands belonging to
China.

Hidden in the narrow streets are old Portuguese-style stone houses, with arched
and columned verandas that overlook the street from the second story. Rooms,
once cool and elegantly simple, are now full of Chinese families. Europeans have
moved to the hills above the market town for quiet after the hurly-burly of Hong
Kong island.

I stayed for a week, and I walked the island, to the peaks where from the
dragon-shaped rocks pirate sentinels once watched out to sea, along the hill
paths where the wild lantana cascaded down to the shores, past quiet small
temples, beautifully carved and painted, with their outdoor altars to the sea
goddess.

On the morning when I took the ferry back to Hong Kong island, the Peak was
obscured as it had been when I first saw it. The futuristic city seemed to rise
out of mist in the distance. There were shadows of skyscrapers, small under the
vast sea sky. As I came nearer, the waterfront grew larger, less misty, and
caught the new sun in a million windows. I could see the buildings reflecting
each other, a kaleidoscope of glass and sun. The ferry passed into the shadow of
the buildings and docked. The heat and pace of the city was overwhelming.

I went back to the Peninsula Hotel, and was chauffeured by Rolls-Royce to the
airport the following morning. A Peninsula representative saw to madam's luggage
and her seat on the plane. It all seemed frantic and glorious and luxurious and
unreal after the quiet of Cheung Chau. The greater reality I carried away with
me was the memory of the hungry ghosts in a world fast disappearing, whose quiet
and walking pace I had shared on Cheung Chau for a little while, and of the city
of refugees who have survived since the days of Genghis Khan, poised there on
the edge of politics, typhoons, luck and the South China Sea.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of woman in traditional dress, city lights, Peninsula Hotel
lobby, city street, tram and Hongkong bank (Ray Cranbourne/Black Star; Harvey
LLoyd/The Stock Market; Chad Ehlers/International Stock Photography; Norman Owen
Tomalin/Bruce Coleman; Ed Grazda/Magnum); Map of Hongkong (NYT); Photo of
double-decker tram (Ed Grazda/Magnum)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ASIA THE SECOND TIME AROUND

BYLINE: BY R. W. APPLE Jr.; R.W. Apple is the chief Washington correspondent of
The New York Times and the author of ''Apple's Europe'' (Atheneum).

SECTION: Section 10; Page 41, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1134 words


The Asia I left in 1968 was a bit of a backwater (except, of course, in the
strategic sense). I had lived in Saigon for three years, and during that time
visited most of the countries of east and southeast Asia. Japan was exporting
cameras, but not many cars; modern hotels were few and far between; tourism was
just developing; international telephone and telex service was episodic or
nonexistent. One felt far removed from the scene of the great decisions,
political and economic, that were reshaping the world.

I hadn't been back for 18 years, and my wife had never been there, so last
spring, when the annual economic summit conference was held in Tokyo, we decided
to spend three weeks or so traveling. A sense of isolation still prevails in
parts of that vast area, but most of the places I visited in Japan, Taiwan,
Singapore, Bali, Java and Thailand felt not much more remote than Western
Europe. A lot has happened along the Pacific Rim since 1968, and much of it
makes the life of the American traveler far easier in 1986 than it was two
decades ago. A price, of course, has been paid - in return for the blessing of a
hotel like the Ambarrukmo Palace in Jogjakarta, Indonesia, which makes it
possible to visit the great temples of Borobudur and Prambanan in relative
comfort, you have to put up with the solecism of a McDonald's at the edge of a
lovely Tokyo temple precinct.

That said, it seems remarkable how much has stayed the same beneath all the
evident change. In Singapore, the food stalls that used to spring up every night
in the parking lots, with woks set atop oil barrels filled with charcoal, have
completely disappeared, along with most of the parking lots; but their
successors are to be found grouped together inside vast sheds or even in glitzy
shopping centers. The satay and the incendiary noodle dishes taste just as good.
In Thailand, the girlie bars and the brothels that once catered to hordes of
G.I.'s are still there, sadly, but so are the joyous temples with their
startlingly brilliant mosaics of glass and their sweetly tinkling bells.

''You will be horrified by what has happened to Bali,'' an old friend from Asia
advised before we left. Well, not really; there are a lot more hotels, but they
are concentrated in one tiny corner of the island, and all the innocent beauty
of the surprisingly robust Hindu culture is still there to be enjoyed. Young
women walk along the inland roads, balancing on their heads elaborate offerings
of flowers and fruits destined for some local temple, and in the seamiest part
of Kuta, the island's seamiest tourist village, we saw shopkeepers piously
placing small floral offerings to the gods in their dusty doorways.

Traditional dress for women, once a common sight, has all but disappeared from
the streets of the Ginza and other smart sections of downtown Tokyo, to be
replaced by frocks from Paris and New York and also by the designs of Hanae Mori
and Issey Miyake and the two Yamamotos. But wander into the beauty salon of the
Hotel Okura, as I did one morning in search of my wife, and you encounter the
old Japan in all its rich tradition: a bride with her face powdered white, her
hair in an elaborate coif pierced by needles, looking like a living Utamaro and
surrounded by clucking women preparing her, coaching her for the ceremony. Even
in the simplest places, we saw no precut sushi and no nasty plastic plates; it
costs money to make things to order and to serve them on handsome china or wood,
but the Japanese are still willing to pay to do it right.

Nor, to our surprise, do the waves of tourists who now arrive on these shores
each year seem to have spoiled the innate good manners of the Asians. The
charming clerk in the Japanese travel agency who stayed an hour late to
straighten out a snafu she had discovered in our itinerary, the kindly Balinese
tour guide - he doubles as an undertaker - who proudly showed us parts of his
enchanted island, the Taiwanese taxi driver who found my sunglasses in his cab a
few moments after we left it and took them immediately back to the hotel - they
and a hundred others made us feel like state visitors instead of garden-variety
tourists. The graciousness of their staffs is one reason why carriers like Thai
International and Cathay Pacific make most of their Occidental counterparts look
feeble and why such hotels as the Mandarin in Jakarta, the new Ritz in Taipei
and the sumptuous Oriental in Bangkok are among the world's best.

Tokyo held more surprises than any other stop on our itinerary: pastry shops as
good as any I know in Paris or Vienna, department stores like Parco with the
kind of high-tech panache that we consider the exclusive province of Manhattan,
little-known art collections like the Nezu and Ota museums (the latter devoted
wholly to woodblock prints). Nothing I had read had quite prepared me for the
grandeur of the Horyuji temple complex outside Nara, which most visitors to the
old capital miss even though it is the single most important artistic and
architectural site in the country. The food everywhere, whether Japanese or
Hunanese, Thai or Malay, Indian or Javanese, was a constant delight. Fukuzushi
in Tokyo served the best sushi and sashimi either of us has ever tasted, the
Oasis in Jakarta produced a peerless rijsttafel, served on Ming export plates,
and Chitr Pochana in Bangkok demonstrated that not all Thai restaurants have
tamed their fiery yet subtle cuisine to suit tourist palates. Even some of the
Western-style places are worth visiting: Spago in Tokyo is more than a
reasonable facsimile of Wolfgang Puck's Hollywood original, and Rinaldo
Malakiano's da Marco in Bali could stand comparison with the better trattorias
of Rome or Florence.

The greatest delight of our journey was the gardens of Kyoto, about which a word
or two of advice may be useful. One of the most evocative is Saihoji, also known
as the Moss Temple; it should not be missed, but you must write a month or two
in advance, telling them when you want to visit and mentioning what hotel you
will be staying at so they can send your ticket there. Ryoanji, which has the
most famous of the rock and sand Zen gardens, is overrun most of the time with
noisy Japanese schoolchildren, which destroys the serenity the place is meant to
induce; arrive at 8:30 A.M. and you will have the place to yourself for at least
a few minutes.

For us, however, the jewel of Kyoto was the garden that surrounds the abbot's
residence at the vast Ninnaji temple; it is rather hard to find amid the welter
of buildings, but keep asking and persevere. Which, come to think of it, is not
bad advice for Asia as a whole; sooner or later, you will find someone who
speaks a bit of English, and he or she will go to any ends to help solve your
difficulties.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of pedestrian and elephant crossing road in Bangkok (Ed
Grazda/Magnum)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By Debbie Nathan

SECTION: Section 7; Page 31, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 251 words


THE DISSENTERS: Voices From Contemporary America. By John Langston Gwaltney.
(Random House, $19.95.) John Langston Gwaltney's interviews with nearly three
dozen self-proclaimed ''principled dissenters'' span America's regions, classes,
races and ethnic groups. They range from the white Quaker grandmother touting
alternatives to selective service at her New England town hall to the black
Chicago Buddhist who was one of the first to suspect a tie between Agent Orange
exposure and cancer and was fired from her job with the Veterans Administration
in 1984. Most of these protesters fit a left-liberal, often populist mold
generally accepted as the American body politic's loyal opposition. Mr.
Gwaltney, the author of ''Drylongso: A Self-Portrait of Black America,''
includes those often labeled eccentrics - such as the woman who rails against
doctors for dismissing health food cures and also speculates on the existence of
the Lost Continent of Mu; and four imprisoned women convicted of conspiring to
explode bombs in the name of Puerto Rican independence. Those interviewed here
are still concerned about third world nationalism, United States foreign policy,
Vietnam's aftermath, racism and war - issues that have fueled dissent at least
since New Left days. But if earlier dissenters attributed their energies to
''the Movement,'' today's nonconformists credit their passions mainly to
parental influence and childhood memories of being outcasts themselves or
refusing to shun other misfits.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT WILL KEEP THE U.N. AFLOAT?;
An End To U.S. Narcissism

BYLINE: By Theodore C. Sorensen: Theodore C. Sorensen practices law in New York
City.

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 828 words


The overwhelming majority of United Nations members, whose 41st annual General
Assembly opens this week, may well have been misguided in not voting with the
United States on most issues over the past several years.

The Zimbabwe Minister of Youth, Sport and Culture may well have been
discourteous in denouncing United States inaction on sanctions against South
Africa at a diplomatic function last July 4.

The Government of New Zealand may well have been foolish in not finding some
compromise solution permitting American warships to call at its ports without
revealing whether they were nuclear-armed.

The Philippine President, Corazon C. Aquino, may well have been naive in calling
for a peaceful solution to her country's Communist insurgency.

The Government of Honduras may well have been ungrateful in rejecting United
States efforts to use Honduran territory as an open training ground for contra
guerrillas battling neighboring Nicaragua.

But the Reagan Administration's angry reaction to these and similar positions,
implying that they are all motivated in whole or in part by deep-seated
anti-Americanism, is dangerous nonsense, reflecting a fit of either personal
petulance or governmental paranoia. A less fretful, more confident, more
tolerant world leader would not have reacted to these vexations by undermining
our own long-term interests - by peremptorily cutting off all assistance to
Zimbabwe's production of food for Africa's hungry, for example, or abandoning
all security guarantees to the New Zealand forces that bravely fought alongside
Americans in battles from World War I to Vietnam, or incurring ill will that we
can ill afford in key countries such as the Philippines and Honduras.

Like the emperors of the ancient Chin Dynasty, we act as though our country is
the center of the earth, that all who are not with us are against us and that
every global or regional issue should be viewed by all in a purely pro-United
States or anti-United States light. But, in the real world, our friends as well
as neutrals will from time to time inevitably find it necessary to place ahead
of our requirements their own domestic politics, regional pressures, historical
perspectives, geographic considerations and economic interests.

Their leaders, like ours, must contend with local elections, factions and
fanatics. Their leaders, like ours, are entitled occasionally to employ dramatic
rhetoric drastically different from the course of action they actually pursue.
Many young countries, like ours during its first 100 years and longer, prefer,
in Jefferson's words, ''peace, commerce and honest friendship with all nations,
entangling alliances with none.'' That is not anti-American.

Nothing better illustrates our narcissistic displeasure with other nations
prescribing their own medicine than the Administration's report to Congress each
year that most members of the General Assembly vote most of the time ''against''
the United States. The introductory comments by the United States' chief
delegate to the United Nations, Vernon Walters, to this summer's report
attempted to place these roll call votes in perspective, noting that the United
States gained some important victories in the General Assembly by unrecorded
consensus, that many roll calls are comparatively insignificant and that United
Nations votes are ''but one dimension of a country's relations with the United
States.''

But, according to President Reagan, the report measures ''the degree of support
of United States foreign policy in the United Nations context.'' If that were
true, then, judging from the report on the 40th General Assembly, Poland is more
supportive than Mexico of the United States, the Soviet Union is more agreeable
than Cyprus, Grenada ranks well above Britain, and Iran is a better friend than
India!

But voting differences in the United Nations are not a reliable indication of a
country's values, interests, importance or even attitude toward the United
States - no more than Farm Belt Congressmen voting for higher feed grain
supports opposed by New York Congressmen should thereby be stamped ''anti-New
York.'' The United Nations has enough strikes against it without the
Administration and Congress brandishing this virtually irrelevant scorecard in
order to reduce still further the level of American financial and diplomatic
participation in that disappointing but still indispensable world body.

Petty complaints and reprisals against smaller nations venting their fears and
frustrations are not becoming to a great power. Trying to place ourselves in
their shoes and to understand their motives may not often alter their speeches
and votes - or ours. But it might better enable us, as Robert Burns wrote 200
years ago, ''to see ourselves as others see us . . . [which would] from many a
blunder free us, and foolish notion.'' Fewer foolish notions of American
omniscience could add both strength and luster to our leadership.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Ex-General to Join The Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 171 words


Lieut. Gen. Bernard E. Trainor, who retired from the Marine Corps in July 1985,
will join The New York Times on Oct. 6 as its military correspondent. His
appointment was announced yesterday by A. M. Rosenthal, executive editor.

General Trainor was born in New York on Sept. 2, 1928, and grew up in the Bronx.
He enlisted in the Marine Corps in 1946 as a private and was commissioned in
1951 after graduation with a B.S. in history from the College of the Holy Cross
in Worcester, Mass. He did graduate study in history at the University of
Colorado in Boulder, earning a master's degree in 1963.

He served as an infantry platoon leader in the Korean War and did two tours of
duty in Vietnam in 1970 and 1971, the second as a reconnaissance battalion
commander near Da Nang. He became a general in 1976, and his last assignment was
at Marine Corps headquarters as Deputy Chief of Staff for Plans, Policies and
Operations from 1983 to 1985.

He lives with his wife, Margaret, in Annandale, Va. They have four daughters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lieut Gen. Bernard Trainor (NYT/Marilynn K. Yee)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 17, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

YOUNG GERMANS HEAR THE SANDINISTAS' DRUMMER

BYLINE: By JAMES M. MARKHAM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words

DATELINE: WUPPERTAL, West Germany, Sept. 15


Four days before Christmas in 1983, an Aeroflot jet lifted off from Luxembourg
carrying 150 young West Germans to Nicaragua to support the Sandinista
revolution.

Alarmed by the American invasion of Grenada, the Sandinistas had put out a call
for volunteers from Europe, and the Germans were the first to respond. ''The
goal was to have as many Europeans as possible in Nicaragua and to increase the
danger of an American intervention,'' said Michael Ruder, a 28-year-old
activist. ''We offered something like protection.''

Since then, more than 1,000 German leftists have trooped off to Nicaragua,
volunteering to harvest coffee and build houses, schools and hospitals, acting
as a reserve force in the struggle against what they call ''U.S. imperialism.''

They style themselves ''brigadistas'' - consciously inviting a comparison
between the Sandinista cause and the banner of republican Spain during the
1936-39 civil war - and back home have become effective grass-roots lobbyists
for the embattled Central American nation.

Headquarters in the Ruhr

The nerve center for this outburst of overseas engagement is the Nicaragua
Information Bureau, situated in a loft in the Ruhr Valley industrial center of
Wuppertal. From it, Mr. Ruder and a 13-member staff coordinate fresh contingents
of volunteers, who seem to find in Central America challenges and excitment not
available in their comfortable West European welfare state.

Aside from Nicaragua's gentler climate, the brigadistas' two-month stints hardly
amount to a holiday. The volunteers pay their own way, work hard and are exposed
to the dangers of a land caught up in civil strife. Since 1983, two Germans have
been killed in Nicaragua - it appears by American-supported rebels - two women
have been raped, and 10 have been kidnapped and subsequently freed.

Last spring, the kidnapping of eight brigadistas by guerrillas known as contras
in southern Nicaragua turned into an awkward confrontation between Bonn and
Washington. As the kidnapping dragged into its third week, legislators from
several parties in Bonn began to say that American-subsidized ''terrorists''
were holding Germans at a time when the Reagan Administration was demanding a
crackdown on terrorists supported by Libya.

Finally, after 25 days, the eight West Germans were freed by guerrillas from the
Nicaraguan Democratic Front, apparently after decisive intervention by the
United States Embassy in Honduras. Even within Chancellor Helmut Kohl's
Government, which broadly supports the Reagan Administration in Central America,
officials bitterly complained that the eight could have been freed much sooner
if Washington had given the orders.

Question of Bearing Arms

The kidnapping was a propaganda coup for the Marxist-oriented activists in the
Nicaragua Information Bureau, and, if anything, it added to the luster of
becoming a brigadista. ''The contra chiefs told us during our interrogation that
the kidnapping was planned as a deterrent to others,'' said Reingart Zimmer, a
20-year-old Hamburg student who was one of the hostages. ''So their violence
took on a new quality.''

The eight Germans repeatedly denied accusations by their rebel captors and the
State Department in Washington that they had been armed. Yet the question of the
brigadistas' combatant status was revived last month when three German men from
another group of volunteers admitted on a West German television program that
they had carried AK-47 rifles as members of a Nicaraguan militia unit.

Like many brigadistas, the three men had been conscientious objectors in West
Germany, which seemed to pose questions about the consistency of their
convictions. The Information Bureau here weighed in with a three-page press
release denying that it was exporting Germans to fight abroad but arguing that
even conscientious objectors had the right to defend themselves when attacked.

The Aura of Danger

As a result of the kidnapping episode, the Nicaraguan Government gave in to
urgings from the Kohl Government and withdrew West German brigadistas from
projects that had been consciously placed in areas where rebel bands are active.
But an aura of danger still clings to the young Germans' enterprise.

''My parents were shocked when I told them,'' said Stefan Franke, a 21-year-old
student in West Berlin, who was setting off the other day for Nicaragua. ''But
they had to run from war during the Third Reich, and now they understand that I
want to go Nicaragua and declare that I am against the war that is being fought
there.''

Mr. Franke was chatting in a cafe in West Berlin's rundown Kreuzberg district
with two women who wore the black clothes that are the unofficial uniforms of
the West German far left. The conversation was filled with denunciations of
American ''imperialism'' and justifications for the Sandinistas' crackdown on
their domestic foes and the newspaper La Prensa.

Rita Muckenhirn, a 22-year-old, said she wanted to go to Nicaragua so that she
could ''do better political work'' when she returned to West Berlin.

A Thorn in Kohl's Side

The brigadista phenomenon is an irritant to the Kohl Government, which has cut
off most development assistance to Nicaragua while allowing 29 experts to finish
projects in the Central American nation. Bonn officials express dismay that the
West German Protestant churches and the Green Party subsidize development
projects proposed by the Wuppertal Information Bureau, which says it has an
annual budget of $100,000.

Volkmar Kohler, state secretary in the ministry for aid to developing countries,
said West Germany's tiny Communist Party played a relatively minor role in the
export of brigadista to Nicaragua, which he characterized as an undertaking
mainly of ''the radical left.''

''Unfortunately,'' Mr. Kohler said, ''for 20 years there has been constant
criticism of the United States and its foreign interventions that goes back to
Vietnam. Since Vietnam turned out to be a disappointment for these 'idealists,'
Nicaragua is the perfect place to go.''

''But,'' he added, ''this isn't just pro-Nicaragua sentiment. This is
anti-American sentiment.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of West Germans helping Nicaraguans with coffee harvest

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 17, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

OBSERVER;
The Misjudged Judge

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 754 words


All discussion of William Rehnquist, Chief-Justice-to-be, starts with a bow to
his ''brilliance.'' Even his most vigorous opponents are unable to start
flailing away without first remarking that he is ''brilliant'' or conceding that
his ''brilliance'' is undeniable.

''Brilliant'' is one of Washington's most freely bestowed compliments, probably
because it has so many meanings in that inscrutable culture that it may mean
almost anything, which is the same as meaning almost nothing at all.

Consider its application to Justice Rehnquist. Obviously it is meant as a
judgment on his legal career, yet what is truly remarkable about that career is
its consistency. His judicial opinions are almost as predictable as the arrival
of solstice and equinox.

His mind seems to remain almost precisely where it was when he arrived on the
Court 15 years ago. He gives every impression of a man who settled upon a
philosophy as a youth in law school and has not altered it in any interesting
way since.

The mind that never changes is more likely to be calcified than brilliant, at
least in the conventional sense of what constitutes brilliance: that is, a showy
ability to improvise ingenious solutions when confronted by unforeseeable
difficulty.

In a society that cared about words, Justice Rehnquist's ''consistency,'' rather
than his ''brilliance,'' would be the word on every tongue. In Washington,
though, ''consistency'' is a word not much used, perhaps because it is a quality
not much admired in a city where people must trim their minds regularly to take
advantage of the prevailing wind.

In Justice Rehnquist's case, too much praise of his consistency would doubtless
prompt his critics to recall Emerson's observations that ''a foolish consistency
is the hobgoblin of little minds'' and that ''With consistency a great soul has
simply nothing to do.'' ''Brilliance'' has no such booby traps.

Its hollow praise, however, is not usually bestowed on a man as august as a
Chief-Justice-to-be. It is more commonly used for young men, up-and-comers or
unscrupulous careerists whose favors for Washington journalists are repaid in
published references to ''the brilliant young'' whomever. For journalists it is
a small price happily paid for the big scoop on who will be the next ambassador
to the Court of Zippity Zap.

The golden age of ''the brilliant young'' occurred during the Kennedy
Administration, when so many were designated ''the brilliant young'' that more
satisfying adjectives had to be piled on to distinguish special cases from the
humdrum. For this purpose Washington journalists began distributing
''hard-nosed,'' and we had a plague of ''the brilliant young hard-nosed''
whatzisnames.

Until then ''hard-nosed'' had usually been followed by a cussing noun. Dating
from the age before football linemen wore face guards and a player without a
broken nose was a rarity, it was reserved for the man who was a remarkably mean
piece of business.

The reason for this excess of ''brilliance'' in the Kennedy years in Washington
was the influx of Ivy League people. The reason for the excess of ''hard-nosed''
was the Ivy Leaguers' desire to disabuse humanity of the notion that college men
could not be hard as nails.

It was the huge publicity given to ''the brilliant young hard-nosed'' men of the
1960's that gave such acid bite to David Halberstam's title, ''The Best and the
Brightest,'' that memorable history of the men who made Vietnam synonymous with
disaster.

Afterward ''brightness,'' which is only an unliquid synonym for ''brilliance,''
lost its luster in the Washington vocabulary and faded into the gray, hollow
compliment that is now, oddly, applied to Justice Rehnquist.

I say ''oddly'' because it is rarely applied to men of stature and mature years.
''Brilliant'' would never be applied, for instance, to a President (even if one
were), to a Presidential candidate (because ''brilliant'' is too trivial a
compliment to satisfy a public persuaded that the poorest candidate for that
office must be capable of grandeur), to an important Congressman, or to anyone
of much stature.

Why then is Justice Rehnquist constantly lathered in ''brilliance''? I believe
it was because that famously hollow compliment was applied to him when he was
first nominated to the Court and young enough to bear it. Since he hasn't
changed noticeably since then, the press didn't get around to changing his
accompanying adjective. Thus his present ''brilliance'' results from his perfect
''consistency.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 17, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'TRIUMPH OF THE WEST,' A&E SERIES

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 604 words


''T HE Triumph of the West,'' a 13-part series that begins on the Arts &
Entertainment Network at 9 o'clock tonight, seems to be not so much about
triumph as about defeat. The price paid for the ascension of Western
civilization, apparently, was decline for everyone else. Credit the BBC series,
at least in its opening episode, with being clear about its position.

The series has a subtitle: ''A View of History by John Roberts.'' On tonight's
program, Mr. Roberts, a historian, appears in various places -Thailand, China,
Japan, India, even aboard a United States aircraft carrier - arguing his
proposition: Western ways, imposed one way or another, undermine traditional
cultures.

Mr. Roberts is provocative and often thoughtful, and much of the film is
beautiful. There is, after all, a good deal of scenery. At the same time, some
of his argument is idiosyncratic. Japan waged war in the 20th century, for
example, because its leaders were deluded by Western ideas; it attacked China
only to gain Western respect. Militarism and expansionism, it seems, do not
exist independently of the West.

Integral to Mr. Roberts's thesis is the idea that the Soviet Union is also a
Western nation. Perhaps it is, but Mr. Roberts does seem to stretch a point. He
argues that the West ''destroys the universe of stable expectations, and no
force does this more surely than capitalism.''

By stable expectations, he means the acceptance of things as they are. Thus,
people in poor countries find it easier to cope with poverty when they do not
expect poverty to be erased. Certainly this is true. A variety of support
systems - religious, cultural, familial - help to sustain the people in their
way of life.

Mr. Roberts is on shaky ground, however, when he asserts that no force destroys
this ''more surely than capitalism.'' Communism destroys it far more surely and
far more effectively. Capitalism may indeed bring ''Dallas'' and ''Dynasty'' to
third-world villages, and watching Joan Collins wear designer dresses may even
be spiritually corrosive. Obviously, Mr. Roberts thinks it is. On tonight's
program, capitalism appears to be only unbridled consumerism, sweeping all other
values away.

The view, though, does not stand much examination. Capitalism does not
purposefully try to alter religious and cultural traditions and support systems;
it is seldom in its interest to do so. Communism, however, does purposefully
try, and when it controls the state it is usually successful. The 20th century
is full of examples.

Consider, for example, the refugees who abandon their homelands in mass
emigrations. They do not do this because capitalism makes them restive or wipes
out their old way of life. The boat people did not flee Vietnam, and the Dalai
Lama and his followers did not abandon Tibet because of Joan Collins.

Designer dresses may whet a people's appetitite; capitalist technology may
pollute the air and make the water unpotable. They will not, however, close
schools and temples, lead to political re-education camps, or forcibly enlist
citizens in a militia. In the real world, as opposed to Mr. Roberts's
speculative one, capitalism, no matter how buccaneer, is never as disruptive to
traditional societies as is communism.

By lumping in the Soviet Union with the West, however, Mr. Roberts can slide
over the distinctions. Still, he does make you think, and there is something to
be said for that. Tonight's program concludes with Mr. Roberts walking by the
sea, wondering why no Arab dhows or Chinese junks have ever docked in the
British port of Southampton. At least it is a provocative question.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John Roberts

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 17, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE FAMILY;
CELEBRATING THE GROWTH OF EXPERT FAMILY HELP

BYLINE: By GLENN COLLINS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 4; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1363 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Sept. 14


''You're all heroes,'' said Bernice Weissbourd to her audience in the Grand
Ballroom of the Palmer House hotel. ''We're all here proclaiming and heralding
the advent of a new movement. The nation is talking about us - and we are being
heard.''

Her fervor was shared by many of the 800 people who gathered here during the
weekend at the first national conference of the family-resource movement, which
Mrs. Weissbourd helped pioneer. Many of those present had struggled in obscurity
- and alone - to help American families in distress. Here, their numbers and
enthusiasm attested to the movement's growing breadth and strength. The
conference brought together family-program administrators, community-resource
professionals, academicians, public policy makers, educators, corporate
executives, mental-health professionals and foundation officers from 49 states,
Canada, Australia and Bermuda.

Participants were also celebrating the fifth anniversary of the founding of the
Family Resource Coalition, the conference's sponsor. A national, nonprofit
federation of 2,000 organizations and individuals, the coalition is promoting
community-based programs that offer emotional support, advice, information and
education to the nation's 63 million families.

''Even as it grows daily, the family-resource movement is one of the country's
best-kept secrets,'' said Dr. Edward F. Zigler, Sterling Professor of Psychology
at Yale University. ''It is a typically American movement that reflects what is
best in our ethos - we don't sit idly by waiting for others to solve our
problems for us, but we roll upour sleeves and go to work.''

The movement's growth is in answer to a growing need: greater mobility has led
to increasing isolation of the nuclear family; more mothers are working outside
the home out of economic necessity; there is a heightened awareness of
children's needs at every stage of development, and an increased divorce rate
has helped produce more single-parent households.

The tenets of the family-resource movement are simply stated: a belief in
affordable prevention programs to keep family difficulties from becoming chronic
- and expensive - public problems such as crime; a belief in programs that
enhance families' strengths rather than focus on their shortcomings; the
encouragement of volunteerism and of partnerships between families and helping
professionals; an understanding that families exist as part of the larger
community.

The nation's family-resource programs are many and are offered in a range of
settings, from community centers and hospitals to military bases and prisons.
Represented here were parent-education classes; information and referral
services for families needing children's day care or home care for the elderly;
peer-support groups for everything from teen-age pregnancy to abuse of alcohol
and other drugs; telephone hot lines for crisis intervention, and ''warm lines''
for noncrisis telephone information and advice-giving.

Some programs are based in the work place, too, ''because employers are
beginning to realize that reducing the stresses on families helps worker
productivity,'' said Ellen Galinsky, project director of Work and Family Life
Studies at the Bank Street College of Education in Manhattan.

Family-resource experts have also tried to implement what Linda Lipton, the
coalition's executive director, calls a ''radical rethinking of how
professionals work with parents and families'' in which families, with some
coaching, can become a source of solutions to their own problems.

Such is the case with the nanny-training course in Florida. ''Our applicants get
280 hours of training in child development, sensitivity to parent-and-child
issues, health and nutrition,'' said Marilyn Finkelstein of the Parent Center at
Miami-Dade Community College. ''The training program helps mothers who want to
get back into the work force. It provides a wonderful resource for other parents
who need trained nannies, and it serves to raise the status and esteem of
child-care workers.''

Many experts believe these programs are crucial to the future of American
society. Dr. Alice Sterling Honig, a professor of child development at Syracuse
University, presented research showing, for example, that the first year of life
shapes children's ability to learn, be loving to others and respect themselves.
The cost to a society that does not foster such qualities - the cost in social
services, remedial education, criminal justice and human misery - is
''incalculable,'' Dr. Honig said.

Said Irving B. Harris, director of

Chicago's Pittway Corporation: ''If you wait until kids are dropping out of
school, it's too late. You have to give families support earlier, right when
those babies are born.'' Mr. Harris, of the diversified multinational
manufacturing company, was one of several business executives who addressed the
conference.

Few statistics are available to document membership in the family-resource
movement. One barometer of its strength, however, is the rapid growth of the
coalition, which had 50 member organizations in 1983 and now has more than 2,000
in all 50 states.

In addition, ''state after state is initiating programs that have strong
family-support components,'' said Mrs. Weissbourd, the coalition's president,
citing Arizona, Connecticut, Florida, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts,
Minnesota and Missouri.

Minnesota's comprehensive program has become the model for other states,
according to many experts.

The state's Early Childhood Family

Education program serves all families, regardless of income or needs.

Now, in the program's 12th year, 300 of the 430 Minnesota school districts are
operating family-support programs financed with more than $16 million from both
state and local governments.

In a sense, Minnesota stands witness to what many conference participants
understand - that some parents never stop needing help.

''One mother recently called us for advice about her 35-year-old son,'' said
GeorgeAnn Samuels, the coordinator of Bright Beginnings, a telephone
consultation service in Pittsburgh. Staffed by volunteers, Bright Beginnings has
handled 6,500 calls since it started four years ago.

''She had absolutely no one else in her life from whom to ask advice,''

Ms. Samuels said, referring to the caller, whose son was an unemployed Vietnam
veteran living at home. The warm line referred mother and son to counseling
programs at a local social agency.

So wide-ranging are the concerns of family resource experts that they extend to
other issues affecting the family, including health care, employment and public
policy. In particular, ''more policy makers are becoming aware of new
information on the importance of the first years of life,'' said Dr. Stanley
Greenspan, chief of the Infant and Child Clinical Development Program of the
Federal Department of Health and Human Services. ''That's going to be
influencing the kind of service programs we'll be having in the future.''

The role of government in financing family-resource programs, many of which have
been relatively self-sufficient, is a pressing issue. ''I don't need to tell you
how gloomy the government-funding picture is right now,'' said Margaret
Petruska, a program officer of the Howard Heinz Endowment, a private nonprofit
organization in Pittsburgh that gives grants to nonprofit community agencies.

''And in terms of dollars, well - foundations can't fill the gap.'' Dr. Zigler
of Yale, a founder of the Head Start program, challenged the Reagan
Administration during the conference ''to flesh out its private-sector-support
rhetoric by convening a national conference of private-funding sources'' for
family-based support programs.

Some people at the conference had already created alternative ways to strengthen
family life in America. Hector and Susan Badeau of Cabot, Vt., have two children
of their own, adopted eight others and have been foster parents to 23 more. Mr.
Badeau brought his eldest son, 10-year-old Abel, to the conference. On the
whole, Abel said, he found the meeting ''pretty interesting - but not as much
fun as going to the top of Sears Tower.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Bernice Weissbourd, Ellen Galinsky and participants at the
first national conference of the family-resource movement in Chicago (NYT/Steve
Kagan)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 17, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HARRIMAN IS HONORED AS A PATRIOT AND MENTOR AT MEMORIAL SERVICE

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 468 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 16


Official Washington, which W. Averell Harriman served for four decades,
remembered him today as a patriot, mentor and friend at a memorial service at
the Washington Cathedral.

An audience of 1,000 people attended the service, including 45 senators, 40
House members, 44 ambassadors, several governors and two Supreme Court justices.
Other guests were Mr. Harriman's widow, Pamela; Secretary of State George P.
Shultz, and Barbara Bush, wife of Vice President Bush.

Mr. Harriman, a former Governor of New York, died July 26 at the age of 94. He
had held key diplomatic posts in the administrations of Presidents Roosevelt,
Truman, Kennedy and Johnson, all Democrats.

''Working for Averell was not always easy,'' recalled Arthur Schlesinger Jr.,
the historian, who served him in Paris in the late 1940's when Mr. Harriman was
special representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration.
''He was a no-frills chief. He rarely slept, and expected associates to be on
call day and night.''

'Boldness of Mind'

Mr. Schlesinger said that anyone who had worked for Mr. Harriman emerged from
the experience with ''respect for his boldness of mind, and overwhelming
affection.'' He called Mr. Harriman ''a true democrat, scornful of judgments
made on extraneous considerations like age, race or sex.''

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, saying he was speaking for
his two slain brothers as well as himself, said, ''For us, he was like an older,
and yes wiser, brother.''

He recalled Mr. Harriman's ''toughness'' at the bargaining table. ''He was
practical but principled,'' Mr. Kennedy said. ''Averell Harriman proved Robert
Kennedy's belief that youth is not a stage of life but a state of mind.''

Cyrus R. Vance, a former Secretary of State, recalled Mr. Harriman's efforts to
end the Vietnam War. ''No one tried harder than Averell to resolve that
conflict,'' Mr. Vance said.

Recalling Roosevelt

Mr. Vance said that Mr. Harriman counseled ''competitive coexistence'' with the
Russians. ''His was a nonideological, down-to-earth approach,'' Mr. Vance
recalled.

Mr. Harriman's attitude toward the Soviet Union, Mr. Vance said, was: ''We must
live on the same planet, and find ways of avoiding nuclear war.''

Clark M. Clifford, special counsel to Truman and later Secretary of Defense,
recalled a four-hour conversation with Mr. Harriman in 1983. ''He spoke of the
impact Franklin D. Roosevelt had upon him, and how the direction of his life had
changed as a result of that friendship.''

Guests included Governor Cuomo of New York; David Rockefeller; Senator Daniel
Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, who served on Mr. Harriman's staff when
he was Governor; Justices Byron R. White and Thurgood Marshall of the Supreme
Court and Lady Bird Johnson.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Pamela Harriman being escorted from memorial service for her
husband, W. Averell Harriman (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 18, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

RESEARCHERS REPORT FINDING TELLTALE SIGN OF AGENT ORANGE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 450 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 17


A group of Vietnam veterans, scientists and members of Congress today announced
the results of a study they say may finally prove the deadly effects of the
wartime herbicide Agent Orange.

Scientists said the research, financed by the State of New Jersey, showed for
the first time a biological ''fingerprint'' left in veterans' blood by dioxin, a
key ingredient of Agent Orange.

Scientists and spokesmen for the New Jersey Agent Orange Commission, the sponsor
of the study, said the research showed that traces of dioxin could still be
successfully seen years after exposure. Furthermore, the tests found levels of
dioxin 10 times higher in exposed veterans than in other servicemen of the
Vietnam era.

The research on 10 highly exposed veterans stops short of linking their health
problems directly to the widely used defoliant, the scientists acknowledged.

Findings Termed Breakthrough

But they asserted at a Capitol Hill news conference that the study represented a
''breakthrough'' in efforts to learn the true effects of the herbicide.

They said the results of the study should prompt the Federal Government to drop
its longstanding contention that there was no way to prove a cause-and-effect
relationship between Agent Orange and poor health.

''The Vietnam veteran has been in a long, dark tunnel, and maybe now we see the
light,'' said Charles Krauss, a resident of Wayne, N.J., who handled Agent
Orange in Vietnam and volunteered to be tested.

Veterans and the Government have been deadlocked in the debate about the
defoliant used to clear Vietnam's dense jungles to deprive the enemy of cover.

The veterans say Agent Orange is the cause of health problems for them and their
families, ranging from serious acne to cancer. Government officials counter that
no such link has been proved, a position that prevents the veterans from
receiving benefits for the illnesses. $200 Million Settlement A lawsuit filed
against seven Agent Orange manufacturers by veterans from the United States,
Australia and New Zealand resulted in a $200 million settlement in 1984. The
litigation, now under appeal, included 245,000 claims of health damage.

Mr. Krauss and nine other Vietnam veterans with a history of handling the
defoliant served as patients in the study.

Levels of TCDD, a form of dioxin, averaged about 48 parts per trillion in
exposed veterans, as against about four or five parts per trillion in test
subjects who saw no Vietnam service, said Ralph Fogelman, a toxicologist.

The cost of the research, about $400,000, was paid for through legislation
passed by the New Jersey Legislature. The tests were begun last year at Barnert
Memorial Medical Center in Paterson, N.J.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 18, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Transfers Remains of Serviceman

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 94 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 17


Hanoi turned over to an American military delegation today what it said were the
remains and personal effects of a United States serviceman missing in action
since the Vietnam War.

The leader of the United States delegation, Lieut. Col. Paul Mather, said that
the family of the serviceman had been alerted but that formal notification would
await identification by the Army Central Identification Laboratory in Hawaii.

Colonel Mather is an official of the Joint Casualty Resolution that is leading
the search for Americans missing in action in Southeast Asia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 18, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Polaris Aircraft Founder Shifts Company to G.E.

BYLINE: By Daniel F. Cuff

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 328 words


In law school at Harvard, Peter G. Pfendler had a good job in his final year:
pilot for Eastern Air Lines flying 727's out of Boston's Logan International
Airport.

Mr. Pfendler easily qualified for the job. He is an Air Force Academy graduate
and an Air Force veteran of the Vietnam War. But when he graduated from Harvard
Law in 1972 he quit flying for a living and joined the Itel Corporation in San
Francisco to learn the leasing business.

He stayed with Itel for a year before starting his own business, the leasing of
planes to airlines, and this week agreed to sell 80 percent of the business to
the General Electric Credit Corporation, the financing unit of G.E.

Mr. Pfendler, 43, founded the Polaris Aircraft Leasing Corporation in 1974 and
started out doing one lease at a time, struggling for several years to get a
footing. But the business, based in San Francisco, has been profitable every
year, and today the company has 72 commercial jets leased to 15 airlines.

Polaris is one of the largest of the independent aircraft-leasing companies,
with a $768 million portfolio of aircraft. In latest fiscal year, it had a
pretax profit of $15.9 million.

Mr. Pfendler is president and chairman and will continue to head the company
under G.E. Credit. He said Polaris finances leases through investment programs
sold through Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. and Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
Now, G.E. Credit will be financing the major aircraft acquisitions, he said.
Polaris will own these planes outright and lease them to airlines.

The company was planning to go public with a listing on the New York Stock
Exchange when G.E. Credit came along with its offer, Mr. Pfendler said. Terms
were not disclosed.

Mr. Pfendler, who is married, holds an M.B.A. from the University of California
at Los Angeles in addition to his law degree. He still does some flying - of the
company's Piper six-seat propeller plane. He logs some 150 hours a year, he
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM FESTIVAL VIBRATES WITH MUSICAL ACCENTS

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1928 words


WHEN the 1986 New York Film Festival is remembered, it may well be counted as a
milestone in which movies began to take inspiration directly from the cutting
edges of the rock and jazz worlds. In four of the festival's most eagerly
awaited entries - ''Down by Law,'' ''Round Midnight,'' ''Sid and Nancy'' and
''True Stories'' - a bohemian musical sensibility saturates the very fabric of
the film. Pop music, of course, is more crucial an ingredient than ever in
mainstream movie making, but as often as not, its integration into Hollywood
films amounts to a noisy, meretricious captioning of teen-age emotion. These
four films, by contrast, are in their very different ways deeply inspirited by
musical imagination.

John Lurie and Tom Waits, two of the three co-stars in Jim Jarmusch's ''Down by
Law,'' which kicks off the festival this evening, are latter-day hipsters from
the smokier fringes of today's rock-jazz community. Mr. Lurie, the leader and
alto saxophonist of the New York band the Lounge Lizards, was a pioneer in what
has been labeled ''fake jazz,'' a shifting blend of free-form noise, be-bop and
big band music thrown together not entirely seriously. Playing an escaped
convict in ''Down by Law,'' the skinny, rubber-lipped musician, who also
composed the score for the movie, resembles a somewhat deglamorized Jean-Paul
Belmondo. Tom Waits, who exudes a similar aura of hip dishevelment, is one of
the most literary composer-performers of the rock era. He has cultivated the
image of a post-Jack Kerouac hobo-saint, who memorializes a mythical floating
street world of drifters and losers in his gravelly, heartfelt singing.

''Tom and I had been leaving each other messages with photographers in dressing
rooms around the world for years, before we finally met,'' Mr. Lurie said the
other day. ''We're sort of kindred souls whose music shares a lot of the same
jazz and blues influences and a down-on-the-street feeling. I introduced Tom to
Jim Jarmusch two years ago at a party. Jim is always looking for nonactor types
to use in his films, and I guess we both fit that bill.''

In ''Down by Law,'' Mr. Lurie and Mr. Waits play a pimp and a disk jockey who
break out of prison with a third cellmate, an Italian (Roberto Benigni) who
barely speaks English. Filmed in grainy black and white, the movie becomes a
post-punk fairy tale when they suddenly discover unexpected hospitality in the
wilds of Louisiana bayou country. The movie, Mr. Jarmusch's followup to his
critically acclaimed ''Stranger Than Paradise,'' has already provoked
comparisons ranging from the Marx Brothers to Samuel Beckett. It will begin a
commercial run at Cinema 2 and Cinema Studio tomorrow.

Jazz - specifically the dreamier side of late 50's be-bop - forms the center of
the French director Bertrand Tavernier's ''Round Midnight,'' which will be
presented Sept. 30 and Oct. 1. Filmed in Paris and New York, and starring the
tenor saxophonist Dexter Gordon, the movie takes the true stories of the final
days of the tenor saxophonist Lester Young and of the pianist Bud Powell and
links them to a single composite character.

While filled with realistic details of the Parisian expatriate jazz world of
1959, the movie is also an unabashedly romantic elegy to that era. Its score,
arranged by Herbie Hancock, concentrates on the moodier, melancholy side of
be-bop.

''Hollywood has largely ignored be-bop, which produced some of the greatest
musicians in America,'' Mr. Tavernier said recently. ''And even when it has
dealt with these musicians, they have usually been treated with contempt and
ignorance. I discovered jazz and cinema at the same time, when I was around 14.
Though be-bop music had its bright side, the sadness of the music in the film is
true to the spirit of the last recordings of Lester Young, which were mostly
ballads. I love that lyrical side of be-bop, and Dexter, who has a great melodic
sense, plays ballads with an eloquence that few other musicians still command.''

To Herbie Hancock, who arranged the music and who also plays the piano in the
scenes set in the Paris jazz club the Blue Note, it was important to avoid a
rote-like re-creation of the music of 1959.

''The essence of jazz is that it's not restricted,'' Mr. Hancock observed. ''You
can't play it well with a feeling of constraint. In 1959, the avant-garde had
already arrived. Ornette Coleman and Cecil Taylor had made important records.
Though I kept the feel of the period, I extended the music with harmonies that
were a little more modern. I felt a special trepidation about changing some of
the chords in Thelonious Monk's title song.''

London Punk-Rock Scene

Alex Cox's film ''Sid and Nancy,'' which will be shown Oct. 3 and 4, also
focuses on an alienated musical vanguard outside of the United States,
specifically the London punk-rock scene in the late 1970's. Mr. Cox, who made
his name as the director of the cult classic ''Repo Man,'' set out to write a
screenplay about the Sex Pistols, but halfway into the project he became
captivated by the story of Sid Vicious, the group's bassist, and his
heroin-addicted American girlfriend, Nancy Spungen. As followers of punk-rock
history may recall, the relationship made international headlines in October
1978, when Mr. Vicious was arrested for Miss Spungen's murder at the Chelsea
Hotel in New York. Four months later, while on bail awaiting trial, Mr. Vicious
died of a drug overdose.

''To me, the punk-rock movement was tremendously positive and rebellious - it
was everything rock-and-roll was supposed to be but had been forgotten in the
timid musical climate of the mid-70's,'' Mr. Cox said the other day. ''In
Britain, there was a general feeling that the worship of the Royal Family was
essentially corrupt, and the Sex Pistols provided a focus for all that
resentment and anger. But instead of being about punk-rock history, the film
became a love story. At first, I thought it was about a guy falling in love with
a madwoman. But by the end, I felt very sympathetic to both of them. Nancy's
biggest flaw was that she had absolutely no self-worth. The irony of their story
is that they came to represent what punk rock stood against. Sid became a
reclusive junkie rock star living off the remains of his fame. That's the
opposite of what the punk rebellion was all about.''

''True Stories,'' the oddest of the four movies, was the first film of several
in the festival to sell out at the box office. The directorial debut of the
Talking Heads leader David Byrne suggests an avant-garde extension of Robert
Altman's ''Nashville,'' with the setting shifted westward from the country-music
capital to the fictional town of Virgil, Tex. In the movie, Mr. Byrne, sporting
a black cowboy hat, plays tour guide for a surrealistic survey of Virgil's
citizenry, who range from a pious building entrepreneur (the New York
performance artist Spalding Gray) to a charmingly outrageous liar (the Texas
performance artist Jo Harvey Allen) who claims to have written ''Billie Jean and
all of Elvis's hits -well, someone had to do it.'' Mr. Byrne has written an
album's worth of songs for the characters who perform them in comically surreal
production numbers.

''I can't deny that 'Nashville' was an influence,'' Mr. Byrne said recently. ''I
liked that movie a lot, and Joan Tewkesbury, who wrote the script for
'Nashville,' was very supportive and helpful. I think 'True Stories' is more
generous toward the characters than 'Nashville.' ''

''True Stories,'' which will be shown twice on Oct. 4, was conceived during a
Talking Heads tour. ''Some of the characters were inspired by clippings from
tabloids I picked up on the road, and others came from overheard conversations
and cable-TV shows,'' Mr. Byrne said. ''I didn't make any of them up. That's why
it's called 'True Stories.' ''

Hollywood Musical From Brazil

This year's festival, which is sponsored, as in the past, by the Film Society of
Lincoln Center, also boasts an old-fashioned M-G-M-styled musical that happens
to come not from Hollywood but Brazil. Ruy Guerra's film ''Malandro,'' based
loosely on ''The Beggar's Opera,'' features a lush romantic score by the noted
bossa nova songwriter Chico Buarque and is set in the 1940's. The film will be
presented tomorrow and Sunday.

And ''International Sweethearts of Rhythm,'' on a double bill with ''Isaac in
America,'' will offer a retrospective portrait of the multiracial, all-woman
40's swing band that was billed as ''America's hottest all-girl band.'' It will
be shown Sept. 28.

''It was certainly not our intention to make musical connections a theme,''
Richard Roud, the festival director, commented the other day. ''But people tend
to look for themes. I remember when the fifth festival opened with 'The Battle
of Algiers' and closed with 'Far From Vietnam.' Everyone assumed we were making
a political statement, but we really weren't. It was an accident of
scheduling.''

The richness of the 24th New York Film Festival isn't, of course, limited to
films that make musical connections. This Sunday at 7 P.M., the festival will
present a once-only screening of ''Marlene,'' Maximilian Schell's recent
portrait of Marlene Dietrich. The 1984 documentary, in which the star is heard
but not seen because she refused to be filmed, interweaves old movie clips,
newsreel footage and memorabilia with excerpts from a 12-hour conversation
between the director and the star that was taped in her Paris apartment. The
interview becomes a ferocious, mordantly funny tug-of-war between the admiring
director and the cynical star who asserts, ''I never ever took my career
seriously,'' and dismisses any sentimental attachment to the past as ''kitsch.''
Asked about her legendary sex appeal, she explains, ''I wasn't erotic - I was
snotty.''.

In ''A Time to Live and a Time to Die,'' an autobiographical movie by one of
Taiwan's leading film makers, Hou Hsiao-hsien, the director recalls his life
growing up with a refugee family. The film, which will be shown Tuesday and
Wednesday, traces his own separtion from mainland ways and his gradual
acceptance of Western values.

Life of a Saint

Alain Cavalier's ''Therese,'' which will be screened Oct. 2 and 4, imagines the
life of the 19th-century saint who died of tuberculosis in a Carmelite convent.
Decidedly secular in outlook, the film poses disturbing questions about the
relationships between religious zeal and insanity, sexual desire and devotion to
Christ. Camille de Casabianca, who wrote the screenplay for her father's film,
commented, ''Marguerite Gauthier, who was immortalized as the legendary
courtesan Camille, was born in the same area of Normandy and came from the same
background as Therese. She also died in her 20's of tuberculosis. It's a
striking coincidence that says a lot about the choices passionate women could
make in that time and in that place.''

This year's festival, which features 26 films in all, closes on Oct. 5 with
Francis Coppola's ''Peggy Sue Got Married,'' which some are predicting will mark
the director's return to glory. In this new twist on ''Back to the Future,''
Kathleen Turner plays a woman who, just as she is crowned Prom Queen at her 25th
high school reunion, is hurtled back in time to relive her teen-age years with
all her adult knowledge. It is a fantasy most of us have entertained. Perhaps it
is fitting, in a festival that contains such musical excitement, for the film's
title to conjure up the Buddy Holly and the Crickets' classic rock-and-roll hit
''Peggy Sue.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of scenes from movies at 1986 New York Film Festival

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By John Gross

SECTION: Section C; Page 32, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 976 words


WHEN THE WAR WAS OVER: The Voices of Cambodia's Revolution and Its People. By
Elizabeth Becker. Illustrated. 502 pages. Simon & Schuster. $19.95.

FOR all the attention that was focused on it during the 1970's, Cambodia is
still a country about which little is known in the world at large. There are no
standard modern histories, Elizabeth Becker tells us, either of the country
itself or of the Khmer Rouge; old misconceptions linger on, and for most of us
the course of the Cambodian revolution remains easier to deplore than to
understand.

In ''When the War Was Over'' Ms. Becker goes a long way toward remedying our
ignorance. It is a job for which she is in many respects uniquely well
qualified; she has witnessed Cambodia, in her own words, ''in all of its recent
stages of misery'' - first as a correspondent covering the Cambodian war for The
Washington Post, then as one of the only two Western journalists allowed to
visit the country while the Khmer Rouge were in power, and finally pursuing the
research for her book after the present Government had been installed by the
Vietnamese.

She is far from limiting herself to her firsthand experience, however,
invaluable though that is. Blending narrative with analysis, bringing to bear
solid research and a broad historical perspective, she has succeeded in
producing a book that is as thoughtful as it is deeply felt - a work of the
first importance.

For a start, no one who has read her is ever again likely to make the mistake of
lumping Cambodia and Vietnam together. She gives a vivid account of the ways in
which the border between the two countries represents one of Asia's major
cultural divides, between the areas permeated by Indian and by Chinese
influence. Equally, she emphasizes the part that fears of Vietnamese domination
have played in Cambodian history, along with more general fears of national
extinction - and to set against them, the part played by memories of a
once-glorious past, memories powerfully revived during the colonial period by
French scholars who studied Cambodian traditions and helped to restore the
temple complex at Angkor Wat.

Having set the shaping of modern Cambodia in an intelligible context, Ms. Becker
threads her way with admirable dexterity through the maze of the country's
history during World War II and the years that followed. The Japanese
occupation, the origins of the Khmer Rouge, the slippery tactics of Prince
Sihanouk, the nationalistic Lon Nol regime that ousted him, the impact of
American bombing -all the reversals and betrayals are clearly charted, down to
the triumph of the Khmer Rouge in April 1975 under the leadership of Saloth Sar,
shortly to become better known under his assumed name of Pol Pot.

Even in a century spattered with atrocities, the Pol Pot regime has become a
byword for horror. More than a million Cambodians (out of a population of six or
seven million) are known to have died as a result of the Cambodian revolution,
quite possibly as many as two million. But statistics, however grim, will hardly
prepare you for the details that Ms. Becker provides, some of them taken from
survivors, others culled from Khmer Rouge documents that fell into the hands of
the Vietnamese after they invaded Cambodia in 1978.

In particular, she draws on the records stored at Tuol Sleng, the headquarters
of the special police. This so-called ''incarceration center'' was in fact a
hellhole for extracting confessions from prisoners while torturing them to
death, usually over a period of weeks or months. The most atrocious treatment
was inflicted on men, women and children alike, although the tortures reserved
for women seem to have been especially sadistic.

And not only were there many lesser Tuol Slengs; the bestialities practiced
there were a logical extension of the revolution as a whole, of everything that
became apparent as soon as the Khmer Rouge occupied the capital, Phnom Penh, and
began their compulsory evacuation of its inhabitants. (One of the first things
they did was to drive out 20,000 hospital patients in the course of an
afternoon, leaving the disabled to walk or crawl as best they could.) In the end
the Khmer Rouge were forced to blame the problems tearing apart the country on a
foreign threat - in Cambodian terms, the obvious one. They began a border war
with Vietnam, miscalculated, and triggered the chain of events that culminated
in the Vietnamese occupation.

If Pol Pot, with the support of the Chinese, is still waging guerrilla war, and
still hopes to regain control of the country he devastated, at this hour in the
day few people in the West, even among his former apologists, are likely to have
a good word for him. But that still leaves the question of where and how the
monster was hatched.

Clearly he was able to draw heavily on traditions of xenophobia and wounded
pride. The policies of the Khmer Rouge embodied a virulent form of nationalism,
with their obsessive emphasis on ''purity'' and their unrestrained racial
pogroms. (Ethnic minorities suffered appallingly under Pol Pot - something like
half the Chinese living in Cambodian cities were murdered, and half the Muslim
group known as Chams.) But nationalism by itself isn't enough to explain the
destructive social policies that the Khmer Rouge enforced in the name of class
warfare, or their blind pseudo-scientific dogmatism. For a full understanding of
their outlook you have to go back to the years around 1950 when many of their
future leaders were in Paris, learning the lessons of Stalinism as preached by
the French Communist Party and its sympathizers. The legacy of Stalinism may not
be quite enough to account for what happened in Cambodia, either; but you are
left in no doubt after reading Ms. Becker that in conjunction with Cambodian
nationalism it formed a peculiarly toxic combination.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Elizabeth Becker (Sigrid Estrada)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 20, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Vigil on Missing Soldiers Ends in Wisconsin

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 131 words

DATELINE: MILWAUKEE, Sept. 19


Veterans of three wars and their supporters today ended a 37-day vigil in a
bamboo cage to call attention to American soldiers missing in action.

About 40 people spent time in the cage at some point in the vigil, which which
began Aug. 13 and ended on National P.O.W.-M.I.A. Recognition Day.

Gary Wetzel, a Medal of Honor winner in Vietnam who was the last person in the
cage, called on President Reagan and Congress to continue the fight to bring
home those who died and any who may still be held in Southeast Asia.

Mr. Wetzel said Wisconsin Vietnam Vets Chapter 1, the sponsoring organization,
had collected more than 3,000 signatures on a petition to Hanoi urging the
return of any servicemen or civilians still in Vietnam and information on the
remains of those still missing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 20, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING;
Canadians in Vietnam

BYLINE: By Irvin Molotsky and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 209 words


In the Vietnam War some Americans went to Canada to avoid being drafted. At the
same time there was a little-noticed traffic in the opposite direction:
Canadians who entered the United States to enlist in the armed services and
fight in Vietnam. They numbered 40,000 to 50,000, and at least 57 were killed.

This afternoon a contingent of Canadians, both veterans of the war and survivors
of some who were killed, will lay wreaths at the Vietnam Memorial, honoring the
57 whose names are engraved on the wall as dead and the two missing in action.
James Johnson, one of the Canadian veterans, said the number of those lost was
probably higher because many recruiters give the temporary United States
addresses of the Canadian volunteers instead of their actual home towns.

Mr. Johnson, who is from Vancouver, British Columbia, served under fire with an
artillery battalion in the Ashau Valley in 1968-69. Asked why the Canadians had
volunteered to fight a United States war, Mr. Johnson said: ''A lot of it was
the Kennedy era, the idea of a North American Camelot, the attempt to make a
better world. The United States was our friend and needed our help. And some of
our people were disgusted with Americans going to Canada to avoid the draft.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS FASHION CENTRIST IMAGE IN NEW STATEMENT OF PARTY POLICY

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1346 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 20


The Democratic Policy Commission, seeking to create a new image of the party,
has produced a statement of principles that includes strikingly tough criticism
of the Soviet Union and strongly asserts the importance Democrats accord family
life.

''Democrats harbor no illusions about the Soviet Union,'' the document declares.
''Theirs is a totalitarian society that remains an empire in the classical
sense.''

The 71-page statement, which was prepared under the auspices of the Democratic
National Committee and is to be issued officially next week, criticizes aspects
of President Reagan's military buildup as ''a wild spending spree with no
strategic rationale and no overall defense plan.''

Stronger Defense Needed

But it effectively endorses the principles behind the buildup and says a desire
for a stronger military is widespread among the American people. ''After the
brutal Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the Iranian hostage crisis and the signs
of unrest in Central America, they knew America's defenses had to be repaired,''
the statement says.

The document lists ''a commitment to stronger families'' as a top Democratic
goal. While reaffirming a governmental role in promoting educational
opportunities, job training and economic growth, its statements on domestic
policy are generally moderate and lay heavy stress on private investment and
''entrepreneurship.''

Panel Set Up After '84 Vote

Entitled ''New Choices in a Changing America,'' the document is designed in part
to fashion a more centrist image for the party and to make it more acceptable to
voters, especially in the South and West, who have strayed to the Republicans in
recent elections. It is certain to run into criticism from some Democratic
liberals.

Paul G. Kirk Jr., chairman of the Democratic National Committee, who set up the
Policy Commission after the landslide loss in the 1984 Presidential race, said
in an interview that the statement was not ''a platform,'' and it is in no way
binding on Democratic officials.

Rather, Mr. Kirk said, it is meant to help forge a consensus acceptable to broad
segments of the party and to assist candidates running in this year's elections.

The document avoids such divisive social issues as abortion and homosexual
rights, and one Democratic Party official, who asked not to be named, said it
should be seen as an effort by the party ''to get out from under the false image
that Democrats are weak on defense, have weird life styles and are big taxers
and spenders.''

Mr. Kirk noted that the panel, led by former Gov. Scott M. Matheson of Utah, was
made up of politicians who had won elections instead of representatives of
''think tanks'' and ''interest groups,'' and he said its report had therefore
avoided ''narrow agendas.''

Broad Themes With Few Specifics

Party leaders noted that the document clearly bore Mr. Matheson's centrist stamp
and to some degree reflected the distance between the party's liberal wing and
its elected officials in the South and West.

The document contains few specific proposals and is revealing mainly in its
selection of themes, many of which have already become keynotes of Democratic
campaigns and have been cited by polltakers as appealing.

For example, the commission's ''pro-family'' policy lays heavy stress on the
growth in the number of families in which both parents work. ''Where will the
initiatives come to relieve some of the pressure on the two wage-earner
family?'' the report asks, and it proposes flexible working hours and better day
care as part of the answer.

The paper warns that changes in the economy have led to a ''shrinking middle
class,'' with young families finding it more and more difficult to buy homes and
send children to college.

It uses the term ''Swiss cheese'' to describe an American economy in which some
sectors and regions enjoy prosperity while others suffer from recession, and it
sharply attacks ''the trade surrender policies of the Republican
Administration.''

Mr. Kirk said the themes were chosen in part to appeal to younger voters,
particularly a group that he and others have referred to as ''new collar''
workers: 25-to-45-year-olds with jobs in the service field who earn less than
either professionals and managers or workers in heavy industry.

Effectively acknowledging that the statement included few bold policy proposals,
Mr. Kirk said, ''It is not designed as a legislative item checklist.''

Effort to Alter Image

He said the document was seeking to dismantle a ''scarecrow image'' of the
Democratic Party that Republicans had put forward. It repeatedly seeks to cast
Republicans as ideologues tied to the past and Democrats as pragmatists who look
to the future.

''Democrats have always been at their best,'' the report declares in a typical
passage, ''when moving forward, dealing with conditions as they find them, not
force-fitting circumstances to outmoded theories.''

Mr. Kirk said he hoped the document would help make the national party ''more an
asset than a burden'' to local Democrats.

The document, earlier drafts of which were criticized by liberals, hews close to
policy lines associated with what has come to be known as the party's
''neo-liberal'' wing, represented by such figures as Senator Gary Hart of
Colorado and Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey.

One Democratic Party official said it resembled in many ways the statements that
have been issued by the moderate-to-conservative Democratic Leadership Council,
a group led by Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia and Charles S. Robb, a former
Governor of Virginia.

Criticism From the Left

Michael Harrington, a leader of Democratic Alternatives, a coalition of liberal
and labor groups, said his group would offer a critique of the report. Mr.
Harrington was especially critical of the paper's economic proposals, which he
called ''either vague or vacuous'' and which, he said, avoided proposals for
full employment. ''It doesn't even support the Great Society programs that
actually worked,'' he said.

Responding in advance to expected liberal criticism, Mr. Kirk denied that the
statement took stands to the right of the party's mainstream. He said the paper
was true to ''traditional Democratic beliefs'' and was seeking to serve as a
''bridge'' between those principles and the new issues the party confronts.

Mr. Kirk said a debate over foreign policy, essentially a continuation of a
battle that has racked the party since the Vietnam War over military spending
levels and American intervention abroad, delayed the document for months.

An early proposal by Representative Stephen J. Solarz, a Brooklyn Democrat,
sought to bridge the gap by strongly condemning the Soviet system and supporting
a strong military while also sharply criticizing Administration policy in
Nicaragua and other areas.

No Criticism on Nicaragua

But more conservative Democrats criticized that draft as still insufficiently
outspoken in supporting the use of American power, and the final document's
chapter on foreign policy -closely reflecting the thinking of Representative Les
Aspin of Wisconsin, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee -
contains no criticism of the Administration's Nicaragua policy.

The document does strongly endorse arms control and criticizes the Reagan
Administration for saying that the United States intends to abandon the limits
on weapons set in the never-ratified second strategic arms limitation treaty.
But it also declares, ''Democrats harbor no illusions about arms control.''

It criticizes Mr. Reagan's arms buildup as appearing ''more and more like a
bureaucratic spend-up'' and supports alternatives to weapons systems the
Adminstration backs.

On domestic policy, the statement defends spending on education, job training,
health care and scientific research and argues that the government need not be
just a coercive force, but also an instrument for expanding opportunity.

''The essence of freedom is not just freedom to choose,'' it says at one point,
''but to widen the circle of choices.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Paul G. Kirk Jr. (NYT); Photo of Scott M. Matheson (AP) (Page
28)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Army Admirals, Navy Generals

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 461 words


When President Reagan decided to invade Grenada in 1983, the Pentagon could have
sent in the Marines, who specialize in such operations. But that would have
denied other services a piece of the action. So the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a
horse-trading committee of service leaders, patched together an Army, Navy and
Marine force which shambled to the inevitable victory.

To prevent such planning in the future, Congress last week passed a landmark
military reorganization law. The act shifts influence from the service
bureaucracies by transferring some powers to commanders in the field, some to a
strengthened chairman of the Joint Chiefs.

In Grenada, Army and Navy officers failed to attend each other's planning
sessions. Their units carried incompatible radios and at least once attacked
each other's positions. When Army helicopters were unloading wounded on the
U.S.S. Guam, the Navy commander was ordered not to refuel them; funding plans
had not been worked out. The 7,000 men, almost the size of the British force
that defeated 11,000 Argentines in the Falklands, took three days to overwhelm
50 Cuban soldiers and a few hundred lightly armed construction workers.

The errors in Grenada were similar to those experienced in Vietnam and the
hostage rescue mission to Iran. The disunity in combat reflects peacetime
arrangements. Theater commanders, known as commanders in chief or Cincs
(pronounced ''Sinks''), are nominally in charge of all units assigned to them
but have had little real control. Officers look to their own services for
promotion and the services discourage activities that usurp their traditionally
separate roles.

In budgeting, the services favor their own interests. The commander of America's
forces in Europe might prefer more transport planes, the commander in the
Pacific more landing craft. Each of the Joint Chiefs tends to be reluctant to
support strategic plans or interservice needs that conflict with his own. As
Gen. David Jones, a former chairman of the Joint Chiefs, has noted, the group's
advice ''is often watered down and issues are papered over in the interest of
achieving unanimity.''

The bill that President Reagan is expected to sign soon gives the Cincs new
powers over personnel and budgets. It strengthens the chairman of the Joint
Chiefs, making him alone the chief military adviser to the President and
Secretary of Defense. The chairman is also charged with developing strategy and
plans in the national interest.

The next time the President orders a military operation, a single commander will
select and deploy his forces according to battlefield needs, not service
politics. At least, that's the revolution the new bill promises and it may one
day make the difference between defeat and victory.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The March of Folly in the War on Drugs

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 417 words


To the Editor:

''Folly,'' as Barbara W. Tuchman told us about the Vietnam War, ''is the pursuit
by governments of policies contrary to their own interests,'' and ''Policy
founded on error multiplies, never retreats.''

The strategies being employed in the ''war on drugs'' are a precise example of
the folly she describes. The omnibus antidrug bill voted by Congress will cost
$1.4 billion in 1987 alone. While $350 million is earmarked for treatment and
education, the bulk of funds is directed toward expanding the model of the south
Florida drug task force nationwide.

The task force was designed to bring all our expertise, technology and personnel
together to interdict drug smugglers off the coast of Florida. As you reported
(front page, Sept. 4), the South Florida Task Force has been a very expensive
mistake.

Drug trafficking has actually increased through south Florida, despite millions
spent on hardware and enforcement. Drug Enforcement Administration officials in
south Florida say that what they've learned there is that ''law enforcement
can't stop drugs from coming in.''

Unfortunately, political leadership in New York City is heavily involved in
supporting the omnibus antidrug bill, which provides $650 million for increased
enforcement and additional money for items like aerostat radar balloons, which
didn't work in Florida, but will cost taxpayers $180 million. At the same time,
treatment centers for drug addiction in the city have three- to six-month
waiting lists.

The same folly is evident in a statewide proposal to impose a mandatory minimum
for street sales of crack, an action that expands the Rockefeller drug laws of
1973. Those drug laws, some of the toughest in the country, have swelled courts
and prisons and cost New York taxpayers billions, but have failed to reduce drug
sales or drug use. As in south Florida, things have gotten worse.

Judge Irving R. Kaufman, chairman of the President's Commission on Organized
Crime, said, with regard to drugs, ''Law enforcement has been tested to the
utmost, but let's face it, it just hasn't worked.''

If New York leaders would accept Judge Kaufman's conclusion and face the facts,
taxpayers could save billions. We could also then begin the work of planning an
antidrug campaign that would succeed, instead of investing more in a policy
founded on error.

SHERRY SYLVESTER
   New York, Sept. 12, 1986

The writer heads the Correctional Association of New York's public policy
advocacy project.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
The Peace Corps

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 25, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 740 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Peace Corps celebrated its 25th anniversary here this month, reminding us
that American foreign policy is not all missiles and Stealth bombers but has a
gentler side.

It was just a week before he was elected as the 35th President of the United
States that John F. Kennedy summoned the youth of America to get this country
moving again, and dramatized the idea of a volunteer Peace Corps.

''There is not enough money in all America to relieve the misery of the
underdeveloped world in a giant and endless soup kitchen,'' he said. ''But there
is enough know-how and enough knowledgeable people to help those nations help
themselves.

''I therefore propose that our inadequate efforts in this area be supplemented
by a Peace Corps of talented young men willing and able to serve their country
in this fashion for three years as an alternative to peacetime selective service
. . .''

It was not, of course, a new idea. It had its roots in the biblical injunction
''From those to whom much is given much is required,'' and in the missionary
tradition of volunteer service among the poor and hungry people of the world.

It is interesting to recall that once the Peace Corps was established, President
Kennedy made two conflicting decisions in the first year of his Administration.

He sent 500 additional ''advisers'' to South Vietnam, raising the total to
17,000 in l963; and he sent 500 new Peace Corps volunteers to work in the fields
and villages of eight developing countries.

As Gerard T. Rice, a young volunteer now working at the World Bank, notes in
''The Bold Experiment,'' his excellent history of the Peace Corps: ''Vietnam
scarred the American psyche [58,000 dead] leaving memories of pain and defeat.
But Kennedy's other initiative inspired, and continues to inspire, hope and
understanding among Americans and the rest of the world. In that sense, the
Peace Corps was his most affirmative and enduring legacy.''

We hear little of the Peace Corps now, though over 100,000 young Americans have
served in its ranks in this last quarter-century, and almost 10,000 are still in
the field.

Was this merely a ''bold experiment,'' serviceable for a time but now a
forgotten triumph, irrelevant to the present day?

Much is said these days about the failure of freedom and affluence in the
pursuit of happiness, and people of different political persuasions -from Gary
Hart to Bill Buckley -turn repeatedly to the remedy of volunteer national
service for the waywardness and permissiveness of the so-called Me Generation.

This is not new either. In l904, William James, in an address to the Universal
Peace Conference in Boston, suggested that the Government should enlist young
men to work among the poor and rejected people of the nation.

Later, in his famous essay on ''The Moral Equivalent of War,'' he added: ''The
war against war is going to be no holiday excursion or camping party . . . Our
Gilded Youths should be packed off to coal and iron mines, to freight trains, to
fishing fleets in December, to dishwashing and clothes-washing, to road building
and tunnel making, according to their choice, to get the childishness knocked
out of them, and to come back into society with healthier sympathies and soberer
ideas . . .''

Well, they were tougher and they wrote better in those days, and James made the
mistake of urging that this work be compulsory, but the search for ''The Moral
Equivalent of War'' goes on and the need for volunteer service clearly exists.

We see it in the plight of our aging population, many of whom cannot afford to
be sick. We see it in every city slum and town where the facilities for
transportation, housing and recreation are in urgent need of repair.

And we see it most dramatically in the plight of our farms, whose abundant
production is driving people off the land and into the overcrowded cities, while
half the human race goes to bed hungry every night.

In l951, 14 percent of our people, or over 22 million, worked the fertile
American land; now only 2 percent, or 2.3 million, raise more food than we can
use. Though the farmers collected over $25 billion in Government subsidies this
fiscal year, the rate of farm bankruptcies is the highest since the Great
Depression.

Can we do better than this? Apply the idealism and labor and generosity of the
Peace Corps to contemporary problems. Many people here think we can, and some of
them even work for the Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Agent Orange And a Family's Ordeal

SECTION: Section 6; Page 134, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 148 words


Much has been written about the Vietnam War, but its ultimate tragedy has rarely
been revealed more graphically than in ''Agent Orange and the Anguish of an
American Family,'' the Aug. 24 story by Elmo Zumwalt Jr. and Elmo Zumwalt 3d,
with John Pekkanen.

The pain and suffering of Admiral Zumwalt and his stricken son and grandson is a
moving testimonial to compassion, love and, above all, courage. One can only
hope and pray that their mutual devotion and struggle to survive their ordeal
will triumph.

I have read and reread their moving testimony, hoping to find also some small
indication of compassion for the many others - Americans and, yes, even
Vietnamese - who are also battling to survive the horrors of Agent Orange Some
day, perhaps, Admiral Zumwalt may find the ultimate courage to admit that
releasing Agent Orange was a mistake.

SI £EWEN
  New Paltz, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Agent Orange and a Family's Ordeal

SECTION: Section 6; Page 134, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 114 words


If American veterans are feeling the effects of Agent Orange, imagine what is
going on in North Vietnam. After reading the Zumwalts' story, one realizes that
the effect on the Vietnamese and their children must be truly devastating.

I cried when I read about Admiral Zumwalt and his son. I shudder when I think
about American veterans and their families suffering because of Agent Orange.
I'm ashamed and outraged when I think about what we did by dumping thousands of
pounds of that chemical on a whole country. But I'm furious when I read Admiral
Zumwalt's statement, ''Knowing what I now know, I still would have ordered the
defoliation.''

GENE £IGHT
  San Francisco

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 5; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1089 words


Professionalism marks every page of TROPICAL HEAT by John Lutz (Holt, $14.95).
This is a private eye novel very much in line with the new approach to the
genre. The classic private eye school paid more attention to plotting and action
than to Dr. Freud. The new school continues to provide action and, at the hands
of its best practitioners, impeccable plotting. But considerable attention is
also being paid to what people are and what makes them tick. This produces a lot
of self-analysis, together with sympathy for the emotional predicaments in which
people find themselves.

So it is with Fred Carver, the hero of ''Tropical Heat.'' A former policeman, he
had his knee shot away by a hoodlum. He spends a good deal of time thinking
about his troubles and the irony of being a crippled private investigator. When
he meets a woman who is emotionally crippled, a rapport is soon established
between the two. He understands what she is going through. This book has an
awful lot of Sensitivity, with a capital ''S.'' Mr. Lutz appears to have majored
in Sensitivity.

The locale is Florida. Carver is hired by a woman to find her lover. Apparently
he is a suicide. Certainly the police believe so. She insists otherwise. She
says he is a good man, a very gentle man, the last one in the world who would
take his own life. Perhaps he has faked a suicide because he is in bad trouble
and in fear of his life? This is what she tells Carver.

All of a sudden Carver's own life is in danger. Marielito killers are after him.
Marielitos are Cubans who left the port of Mariel for the United States in 1980;
they included released criminals and mental patients. Handicapped as he is,
Carver nevertheless manages to take care of the two thugs who come after him.
Police and Government agents enter the picture; there may be a drug connection.
The plotting is tight, the characterizations are sharp, the police work has an
authentic feeling, and there is an ending that may make the reader gulp once or
twice.

MURDER STRAIGHT UP by Edward Gorman (St. Martin's, $14.95) takes us into
television country. An anchorman dies on camera after drinking water spiked with
cyanide. It is up to the security officer of the station to deal with the
situation. His boss, a whimsical type, fires him and then says he will be
rehired if he finds information leading to a solution of the case. The security
man, another former policeman, encounters some gamy types and many suspects. He
finally copes, of course.

Among the elements of ''Murder Straight Up'' are rebellious teen-agers, the drug
scene, a pair of identical twins who enjoy killing and the security officer's
girlfriend. She is a mixed-up woman who is seeing a psychiatrist, is eternally
defensive and is prone to interminable self-analysis. ''I have absolutely no
right to any claim on you,'' she keeps saying, tightening the noose. We know the
type.

Throughout the book there are barbed comments on the amorality of televison. The
ending brings it all to a boil, and it is hard to believe. Amorality is one
thing, blind stupidity another. But the book is well written, easygoing and
leavened with a bit of humor. It's fun in its way.

Michael Butterworth has written some wacky, farcical novels about crime, and THE
FIVE MILLION DOLLAR PRINCE (Doubleday, $12.95) is up to his best standard. Here
is an ex-Oxbridge type, a failure in everything, who has developed into an
alcoholic and has ended up as a London tour guide. Here is an Irish charmer, a
confidence man just out of jail. Here is a Texas billionaire who thinks the
Albert Memorial is the most beyootiful artifact ever constructed by mortal man.
He would dearly like to buy it and have it placed on his ranch.

So the con man recruits the Oxbridge type and devises a lovely plan to sell the
Albert Memorial to the Texan. Everything is worked out to the last detail, and
the Texan swallows it. What the conspirators could not take into account is a
mobster's hatred for the con man, the presence of a lovelorn lass, the
contributions of the wife of the Texan and other factors that make farce what it
is. Among those is the difficulty of getting rid of a valid but hot check for $5
million. A check for a few thousand you can cash anywhere. But $5 million?

Things get out of hand. The harried, desperate conspirators try to shore up
their tottering structure. But the action gets wilder and wilder, funnier and
funnier. Mr. Butterworth has the authentic light touch. Too bad British film
makers no longer make comedies like they did in the glory days of ''Genevieve,''
''Tight Little Island'' and the other masterpieces of the postwar period. ''The
Five Million Dollar Prince'' would have them queuing up for the rights.

Rick Boyer's ''Billingsgate Shoal'' (1982) won an Edgar, and it has been
downhill for this author ever since. His new book, THE DAISY DUCKS (Houghton
Mifflin, $15.95), is an ambitious, sprawling, rather messy and thoroughly
unbelievable piece of work.

It features Doc Adams, the dental surgeon who has been the central character in
the previous Boyer books. Doc is feeling a little itchy and restless, and he is
having trouble with his marriage. All this is a classic middle-age syndrome.
Into his life comes an old friend, a soldier of fortune who asks for his help in
getting back some Vietnam loot - a golden statue that has been in a bank vault
for many years. The friend co-signed the vault admission with another soldier
who has now disappeared. Doc has to find the missing man.

Whenever Doc's friend talks, Mr. Boyer is in trouble. He wants to establish the
rough, uneducated character of the man, but his ear is not good enough to handle
dialect. He has the man talking with an accent at one moment (''Dat's what I
think'') and in perfectly good English the next. Sometimes the author tries -
rather self-consciously - for soldier slang, and a paragraph or two later his
soldier is talking with the concision and logic of an expert trial lawyer. At
the end all concerned get together for an A-Team sort of caper, the good guys
against the bad, and Doc Adams pulls off some heroic feats. It's hard to believe
anything in this pretentious collection of nonsense.

If helicopter flying is your thing, don't miss LYNX by Julian Jay Savarin
(Walker, $15.95). The plot, in which an ace British pilot has to get a man out
of China, is preposterous. It starts well enough but bogs down in the middle,
where the flier and a superwoman get their lives entangled. But the flying
sequences are terrific.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of actor John Getz (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DINING OUT;
PIQUANCY OF VIETNAM IN HARTFORD

BYLINE: By PATRICIA BROOKS

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 27, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 890 words


VIETNAMESE cuisine is slowly making itself known in this country - and high
time, too. Using many of the by now familiar ingredients of its Chinese
neighbor, Vietnamese cooking has its own special distinction, a refreshingly
sharp clarity that is unique.

The Truc Orient Express in Hartford summarizes the fresh piquancy of Vietnamese
cooking exceptionally well. Although it is one of a mere four Vietnamese
restaurants in Connecticut, the name is better known in Massachusetts, where
members of the Duong family have established a Truc Orient Express in West
Stockbridge and in Springfield.

With minimal decor, the restaurant manages to convey in its four compact dining
rooms a fragile sense of the Far East. This is accomplished through the rattan
chairs and glass-topped rattan tables, cool green cloths that suggest bamboo and
a few lacquer and mother-of-pearl pictures on the walls. Genial, accommodating
service contributes to a pleasant experience.

The attractive menu, with a rendering of bamboo on a cream-colored background,
gives careful and accurate explanations of the Vietnamese dishes, which range
from 6 soups and 6 appetizers to 20 entrees, as well as a vegetarian menu with 6
entrees. The major components range from shrimp, squid and fish to beef,
chicken, duck and pork. There is surely something for almost every taste.

What pleased and surprised us on our visits to the Truc Orient Express were the
subtle but assertive seasonings, the skillful use of hot pepper, pepper oil and
garlic to underscore, but not overpower, a dish. Cha gio truc dac biet, for
instance, consisted of two jumbo shrimp rolled in a generous filling of chopped
crabmeat, pork and black mushrooms. It was wrapped inside a crisply deep-fried
rice batter. An accompanying dip was nuoc mam, an essential companion to
Vietnamese food. Clear and pungent, it was a distilled mix of vinegar, chili
peppers, garlic, fish sauce, lemon grass, onion and vinegar.

Another appetizer was the unusual goi ga, a platter of shredded cabbage, carrots
and onions tossed with chicken bits, grapefruit segments and sesame seeds in a
delicate vinegar sauce. Try also canh ga don thit, boneless chicken wings
stuffed with chicken and black mushrooms and served with nuoc mam as a light
dip. In each case, the fresh ingredients speak for themselves, with emphasis
added by a peppery undercurrent.

Among the many satisfying entrees, canh chua tom was particularly winsome.
Described as hot-and- sour shrimp soup, it was that, but much more at the same
time. Three jumbo shrimp shared a peppery clear broth with plump straw mushrooms
and shreds and leaves of lemon grass. The lemon-accented broth also spoke softly
of chili pepper.

Equally appealing was nam chua ngot, a vegetarian dish consisting of crisply
deep-fried whole straw mushrooms in a thin, delightfully sharp, well-balanced
sweet and sour sauce. This garlic, tomato, onion and vinegar sauce was light,
with nuances of spicing - not even a distant relative of the more familiar
glutinous version.

All the vegetarian dishes were winners: tau hu kho, ''red cooked caramelized
tofu,'' served with bamboo-shoot slivers and tomato; banh xeo, ''happy
pancake,'' a rice wrapper around fresh mushrooms, onions and bean sprouts with
nuoc mam sauce, and ta hu xao chay, sauteed bean curd with straw mushrooms and
vegetables.

Appealing nonvegetarian dishes are almost too numerous to mention. Note
especially ga xoi mo, five-spice Cornish hen in a blend of saucing; ga sot chua
ngot, sweet and sour chicken, and lau thap cam-chap pin loo, a Vietnamese
version of Mongolian hot pot, made with chicken, all kinds of seafood and
veggies in a hot broth. Only muc xao mang -squid strips with bamboo shoots,
tomato, carrots and onion - disappointed in its blandness.

Desserts are Western and minimal. The caramelized flan was exceptionally good,
but the lemon mousse, despite welcome slivers of zest, had a prefabricated
flavor. At meal's end, try the refreshing, earthy ginseng tea.

Not the least of the surprises at the Truc Orient Express are the prices. A
three-course dinner for two cost us $30, with tax, tip and beverages extra. For
diners anywhere in the Hartford vicinity who want something different, this
small sleeper of a restaurant can be a delightful surprise. Truc Orient Express
** 735 Wethersfield Avenue, Hartford. 249-2818.

Atmosphere: Four small rooms simply furnished. But rattan furniture, greenery
and lacquer scenes on the walls convey a sense of the Orient. Cheerful,
good-natured and efficient service.

Recommended dishes: Truc special shrimp rolls, chicken with grapefruit, stuffed
chicken wings, five-spice Cornish hen, hot and sour shrimp soup, sweet and sour
chicken, Vietnamese-style Mongolian hot pot, sweet and sour mushrooms, happy
pancake, red-cooked caramelized tofu, tau hu xao chay, flan.

Prices: Lunch entrees $3.95-$15. Dinner entrees $7.50-$15. Hours: Lunch 11:30
A.M.-2 P.M. Tuesday-Saturday. Dinner 4:30-9 P.M. Monday-Thursday and 4-10
Friday, Saturday, Sunday.

Credit cards accepted: American Express, Mastercard, Visa. Reservations:
Accepted. What the stars mean: (None) Poor to satisfactory; * Good; ** Very
good; *** Excellent; **** Extraordinary.

These ratings are based on the reviewer's reaction to food and price in relation
to comparable establishments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POSTPARTUM MANIA

BYLINE: BY LISA LIEBMAN; Lisa Liebmann, a writer and art critic, contributes
regularly to Artforum.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 788 words


MAUD GONE By Kathleen Rockwell Lawrence. 249 pp. New York: Atheneum. $16.95.

THE title of this first novel, ''Maud Gone,'' is a triple-entendre. Maud Malone
Devlin, the heroine, is nine months pregnant at the beginning of the story - is,
in other words, nine months ''gone.'' When Maud suddenly finds her husband,
Jack, irrefutably guilty of having lapsed into a one-night stand with Xenia
Olssen, their Swedish dish of a ''painless birth'' instructor - a day or so
before Maud goes into emphatically painful labor - Maud derails, takes off on a
several-months-long nervous breakdown, and is thus doubly ''gone.'' Finally,
there is the invocation to another, vastly different Irish-Catholic heroine,
Maud Gonne, romantic patriot and muse to Yeats, through whose shining spirit the
author implicitly - though without pretensions - hopes to obtain some measure of
affiliation with an illustrious literary confederation. If not directly with
Yeats, Synge and Joyce, Ms. Lawrence clearly wishes to be in league with their
American nieces - writers such as Mary McCarthy, and especially Mary Gordon, who
have turned the stuff of Catholic girlhoods into a home-grown, full-blown genre.

Maud Devlin, however, while thoroughly self-involved, is not a very
self-examined or subtle creature. On the occasion, for instance, of her
nocturnal discovery, on Jack's drunken person, of a ''Chuckle Bag'' (one of
Xenia Olssen's complimentary prepartum kits, containing, among other things, a
supposedly pain-erasing tape of ocean sounds), Maud kicks her husband in the
groin and wobbles out into the Manhattan night.

Then she promptly accepts a ride offered to her by the driver of what appears to
be ''a Pimpmobile, a Ho Hauler, a Drug Abuse Center, a Perpetrator's Palace.''
The car is, in fact, a pink Lincoln whose owner, Serge, proves to be not only an
upright citizen, but a veritable hero of aboveboard black capitalism, a
freelance philanthropist and true gentleman, and, shortly, the fiance of Maud's
best friend, Johanna DiRobertis. Johanna's small West Village apartment is
Maud's next stop, conveniently close to the much-mentioned PATH - the train that
transports her to the Hoboken office of Daisy Santiago, her kindly Cuban emigre
psychiatrist.

The texture of this book is made up of Maud's many moments of retrospect, her
frequent diatribes and passing thoughts on subjects ranging from tranquilizers
and various common consumer goods to Vietnam and the victory of trendiness over
Manhattan. Most important, of course, it is made up of the quality of language
that is used. Wine and beer are always referred to by label. Tranquilizers are
the endlessly deployed ''Stressaways,'' and infant formula is ever ''Enfamil.''
Real New York restaurants are mentioned by name, and the author usually provides
detailed directions on how to get to them. Much of the dialogue and many
descriptions in this book are not quotable. Maud Devlin is the kind of character
who, in real life, might be described as having something of a garbage mouth,
but her verbal compulsions are merely realistically coarse. After Maud kicks
Jack in the groin, for example, much is made of his passing and cliched injury,
though it never manages, within the confines of this novel, to transcend the
literal and become either a theme or even a call to arms. Dialogue runs like a
transcript of conversations among people with low expectations - of themselves,
of the world, of speech. No mention of Yeats dispels the intellectual vulgarity
that we find throughout this book. MAUD'S evocations of her Catholic girlhood,
of growing up in a big extended family during the 60's, are more intriguing than
her adult rambles, but they are not very vivid emotionally. The aromas of
overcooked food and myrrh can easily be summoned, are staples of the genre, and
the sound of Irish names can help set up an entire world, but the emotions of
these characters, not least Maud's, seem to have been digested long ago.

Maud, or Ms. Lawrence, does have a down-to-earth, rambunctious sense of humor,
and this may save some readers from sinking. Ms. Lawrence, a contributor to the
New York Times ''Hers'' column, is, to her credit, a facile and unfussy writer.
She is best at the quick sketch; for example, the romantic subplot of the
oddly-paired Johanna and Serge, though undeveloped, even unbelievable, has
charm. ''Maud Gone'' seems a kind of bricolage, the composite of several
imaginable magazine pieces. Maud Devlin is topical. She is statistically
relevant, and her story is bound to hold interest for many of those currently
having babies ''late,'' while juggling work, friendship, family, marriage and
disillusion, and who need something to read on the PATH.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Kathleen Rockwell Lawrence (Fran Vogel)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AFTER 6 YEARS, IRAN-IRAQ WAR IS DEADLOCKED AS TACTICS SHIFT

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1821 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, Sept. 21


When illumination flares begin popping and shells falling along the 733-mile
border Monday morning, Iraq and Iran will have been at war for six years.

No quick or conclusive end is in sight, and the safest prediction may be a
prolongation of the costly conflict.

But there are a few signs that the deadlock might end or, at least, that the
Persian Gulf war might dwindle into a sort of undeclared peace, according to
several military analysts and foreign experts.

Since July 23 the Iraqi Air Force, which has almost total air superiority and
freedom of action, has used more aggressive tactics against Iran's oil industry,
these analysts say. While in previous years efforts to block Iranian oil exports
had been largely ineffective, such ''low and slow'' bombing could tighten the
economic screws on Iran if it persists.

Iraq Keeps to the Defensive

There seems to be little chance that the war can be won by ground combat, and
Iraq is not even trying to do so. It has adopted an almost entirely defensive
posture since 1982 and seldom even tries offensive ground operations.

President Saddam Hussein of Iraq ''seems to have an unwritten contract with the
Iraqi people,'' a Western expert said. ''He will try to limit casualties, and
they will continue with a war of which they are very tired.''

The Iranians, on the other hand, have shown a dogged willingness to undertake
offensive thrusts, although their lack of both equipment and sophisticated staff
planning forces them to call long breathers in the fighting.

For several months the fundamentalist Islamic clerics in Iran have been
promising their people and threatening Iraq with a ''final offensive.''

Almost no one doubts that the Iranian forces, which are an unorthodox mixture of
volunteer militiamen and the remnants of the regular army, will stage a sizable
attack, possibly beforethe annual rains begin in November. ''We take it
seriously, and I think the Iraqis are convinced they will be hit,'' a Washington
official said. Moreover, Iran showed an unexpected ability to reinforce success
and to gain a tactical victory in February, when it surprised the Iraqis by
pushing troops across the Shatt al Arab, the broad shipping channel leading from
the Gulf. It captured the nearly abandoned town of Fao and then consolidated,
holding the bridgehead against counterattack and heavy artillery fire.

The usual military opinion, however, is that a sustained attack and extensive
advances and manueuver are probably beyond the ability of the Iranian forces,
which have limited armor, even more limited spare parts and no demonstrated
aptitude for handling the supply logisitics needed for a sustained offensive.

Khomeini Wants Hussein Out

So the common opinion remains that the war can only be concluded politically, as
most wars are. But this does not simplify or clarify the outlook.

Iran's religious leader, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, has not wavered from his
insistence that Iran will not make peace until President Hussein and his
''clique,'' which apparently means his entire top leadership, are overthrown.

That seems to be a nonnegotiable demand. And because Iraq is one of the most
controlled societies in the Middle East, diplomats think it very unlikely that
President Hussein will be overthrown.

Iraq is hoping for the death of the 86-year-old Ayatollah Khomeini, and it is
thought likely by many in the West that his successors might be less relentless
in prosecuting the war. But the evidence is not persuasive. The other
conservative religious leaders in Iran tend to say that continuation of the war
is a vital to maintaining the Islamic revolution.

Despite its sporadic and at times eccentric conduct, the war has been a
cataclysmic event.

A Grim Human Toll

In previous wars of this type, the combatants have tended to run out of gas,
both metaphorically and literally, but Iraq and Iran have not. Even though there
are long periods of relative quiet, the human toll is very grim.

Although casualty figures of one million have been published, the best informed
sources are very dubious about so large a total. One military expert said an
estimate of 100,000 Iraqis and more than 200,000 Iranians dead ''is probably a
safe figure.'' Because so many Iranian wounded die as a result of rudimentary
evacuation and medical treatment, the ratio of wounded to dead is believed to be
smaller than in most wars.

The economic cost of the war has been enormous, particulary for Iran, where
revolutionary fervor and social upheaval had already badly disrupted the
economy.

But partly because both nations are major oil exporters and beause Iraq has
received large monetary subsidies from other Arab nations fearful of Iran's
religious revolution, neither nation has been hurt enough financially to force
an end.

Early Stages of the War

The war began when Iraq crossed the international frontier in force on Sept. 22,
1980, although Baghdad argues it began with frontier shelling by Iran on Sept.
4.

Iraqi forces made quick but shallow progress, occupying the city of
Khurramshahr. They failed to take Abadan and did not reach the important cities
of Dizful and Ahwaz.

Although it a common belief now is that Iraq, which has mostly Soviet military
equipment and some French planes and arms, is much better armed than Iran, this
was not true at the start of the war. Iran had been the largest single buyer of
American weapons under the Shah, and it had good stocks of aircraft and armor.
In the first year of the war Iranian pilots did a notable job of giving air
support to ground forces and in closing the Gulf to Iraqi oil shipments.

Most specialists in the region believe that Iraq had assumed that the political,
social and economic turmoil of Iran's revolution and the purge of some of the
professional officer corps would prevent effective resistance. This was a
serious miscalculation.

Most regular army officers and men rallied to the cause. Iran also developed a
three-tiered military structure made up of regulars, Revolutionary Guards - who
are full-time militiamen controlled by the clerics and who act as both soldiers
and security police - and young short-service volunteers known as ''baseej.''

Iran Begins Counterattacks

After a period of sometimes heavy but usually deadlocked combat, Iran began a
series of counterattacks in 1982 that in a few months drove the Iraqi Army from
Iranian soil in the south. In the central sector of the front, Iraq withdrew to
the international frontier.

This represented a marked change in strategy and political policy. Iraq now
wanted out of the war and still does. It has supported and encouraged every
international peace initiative since and appears to have dropped its original
demands for border adjustments and for Iranian evacuation of three islands in
the Persian Gulf seized by the Shah in the 1970's.

Iran has had the initiative in the ground war ever since this change. But by
then Iran was beginning to suffer from a severe shortage of parts for its planes
and tanks and even items such as tires for fighter aircraft. Unlike Iraq, which
has a reliable source of resupply from the Soviet Union and France, Iran has had
to make do with a trickle, rather than a predictable flow, of equipment from
such sources as North Korea, Libya, some Eastern European nations and even
Israel.

This year American officials in Washington revealed that China had concluded an
agreement to supply some arms to Iran. Some officials said the agreement
included a Chinese copy and modification of the Soviet-designed MIG-21 jet
fighter. Artillery, ammunition and assorted other materiel has apparently
already begun to arrive in Iran, some sources said.

None of Jets Seen in Combat

There is disagreement whether the fighter planes have arrived, but in any case
none have been seen in combat.

In early spring of both 1984 and 1985, Iran staged major offensives in the
Huwaizah marshes in Iraq, part of which Iran had seized earlier. The goal
clearly was to cross the Tigris River and the Baghdad-to-Basra highway, thus
isolating Iraq's second-largest city and, more important, dividing the Iraqi
Army. The offensives failed.

In February of this year, the Iranian Revolutionary Guardsmen and baseej
volunteers managed to cross the mouth of the Shatt al Arab at the head of the
Persian Gulf and make a landing on the most southerly tip of Iraq. Iran quickly
pushed more men and resupplies across the river before Iraq could effectively
counterattack.

Iran has held a bridgehead around the town of Fao ever since, and Iraqi
officials who at first said Fao would be retaken now call it a ''killing
ground'' in which Iranians will be contained.

Iraq Dominant in Air War

But in the air Iraq holds almost all the cards. Although the two nations were
roughly equivalent in air power in 1980, attrition, lack of parts, purges of
pilots and poor maintenance have greatly reduced the number of airworthy combat
aircraft in the Iranian Air Force. Many analysts think Iran has no more than 60
to 65 usable fighters and only a handful of flyable American F-4's and F-14's.
One expert thinks the fleet is now under 40 aircraft.

Iraq is estimated to have between 450 and 600 combat aircraft, including about
50 French Mirage F-1's that have performed well in combat.

Until recently the Iraqi numerical superiority was not decisive because pilots
were using very conservative tactics, apparently because of a political decision
to hold down attrition of aircraft and pilots.

But after Iraqi troops captured and then lost the abandoned Iranian border town
of Mehran earlier this year, the air force command was given greater freedom of
action, diplomats here believe. In recent days the Iraqis have staged low-level
attacks on Kharg Island in the northern Gulf, from which most of Iran's oil has
been shipped. They have also hit refineries and a power station in the northern
city of Tabriz.

''They are doing much, much better,'' a Western official said. ''Apparently
those raids did a great deal of damage.''

That would be in contrast to the 100 previous raids on Kharg, which had never
quite cut off Iranian oil shipments. #650-Mile Bombing Mission In August, Iraqi
pilots also flew 650 miles to bomb and rocket an alternative Iranian shipping
point at Sirri Island farther down the Gulf.

Such air superiority has failed before to win a war, as in Vietnam. But Iran's
oil export revenue was cut roughly in half by the fall of world oil prices and
by earlier Iraqi air harassment. Iran must also pay about $4 billion a year to
import food.

Iraq is clearly counting on its air force to cause enough economic damage to
force an end to the war.

Whether this will work is unclear. Iraq is now fighting a limited war. The
Ayatollah is still fighting a total war, in which political and religious
objectives eclipse economic considerations or huge casualties.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map showing location of Baghdad; Map shows Iran-Iraq boundary, area
seized by Iraquis, and areas still held by Iranians (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LONDON RECLAIMS A HERITAGE

BYLINE: By STEVE LOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2875 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Sept. 21


West Germany's Deutsche Bank has moved the base of its international bond
business here because ''it's the crossroads of global finance,'' said Ronald
Lemke, director of the bank's capital markets group.

New York-based Salomon Brothers Inc. has doubled the size of its London office
to 560 people in the last year and established it as ''the flagship of our
international operations,'' said Charles S. McVeigh 3d, managing director of
Salomon Brothers International Ltd.

These are but two of the world's heavyweights in finance that are making London
the scene of hectic expansion these days. Not since the Victorian era, when
Britain was the world's leading industrial nation, with a vast colonial empire,
has London's claim as a center of international finance been as strong.

And now, bowing to pressure to adjust to the new order of global finance,
London's clubby, tradition-bound domestic securities industry is jumping toward
the future with a burst of deregulation on Oct. 27, dubbed the ''Big Bang.''

London's role as an international financial center will be enhanced by the Big
Bang because it is bringing the staid British stock and bond markets into the
larger global arena. Even though much of this international business is
conducted with computers and telephones that could be situated anywhere, London
has become the latter-day equivalent of a medieval market town for the global
money merchants - the site where the key participants meet, compete and exchange
ideas.

''London is the place to be,'' said Robert M. Conway, managing director of
Goldman, Sachs International Ltd., which has more than tripled the size of its
London office, to 500 employees, in the last two years.

Everywhere, it seems, the din from construction work vies with the shouts of
financial traders, as banks and brokerage houses, literally swollen to bursting,
enlarge their quarters or move into new ones. The biggest is yet to come: Canary
Wharf, a sprawling $2.1 billion development of office towers, cavernous trading
floors, apartment buildings and stores planned for a deserted docklands in East
London.

Backed by a consortium that includes the investment banks Morgan Stanley &
Company and Credit Suisse First Boston Ltd., Canary Wharf, is slated to open in
1989 and will be the largest real estate development in Western Europe.

Yet, the City of London, the square-mile financial district here, remains home
to two financial worlds. One is the largely unregulated international arena, led
by the booming markets for Eurobonds and foreign exchange. These markets are
growing at astronomical rates because of new technology, increasingly
sophisticated investors and financiers, and a global shift to more open and
competitive capital markets - all factors that speed the flow of money across
borders.

One indicator of those international flows is foreign-exchange trading. A survey
last month by central banks in Britain, the United States and Japan found that
the average daily volume of foreign-currency trading in London was $90 billion,
about double an estimate made by a private research group in 1984. The survey
also underscored London's leading role in the foreign-exchange market - the
average volume in New York was placed at $50 billion a day, while the Tokyo
estimate was $48 billion.

The international business has also been fueled by the tendency of corporate and
government borrowers to seek lower financing costs through bypassing their
traditional lenders, the commercial banks, and selling debt securities in the
global marketplace. New issues of Eurobonds, securities sold outside the home
country of the borrower, jumped from $26.7 billion in 1981 to $133.2 billion
last year. This year, Eurobond volume reached $135 billion by mid-September,
with estimates of $200 billion for all of 1986.

And there is still another factor. ''The increased global capital flows are
partly a byproduct of the extraordinary decline of America's economic
hegemony,'' said Michael Von Clemm, a founder of the Eurobond market who is now
chairman of Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.

Beginning in the 1960's, accelerated by the Vietnam War and advancing in the
1980's with the loss of American manufacturing markets to more-competitive East
Asian imports, the United States' trade and fiscal deficits have climbed
relentlessly for two decades - and jumped at alarming rates in the last few
years. That has produced a swelling pool of dollars held abroad, seeking
investment opportunities. For the bankers that serve as intermediaries, handling
the flood of dollars from the United States has been a lucrative business.

The international financial arena here is the province of a breed of
cosmopolitan, risk-taking trader. The industry is a freewheeling meritocracy
oblivious to class, social connections or nationality. The hours are long, the
competitive pressure is grinding, but the rewards for top performers are high,
with salaries well into six figures and occasionally seven figures. The
multilingual traders fly the Concorde, ski the Alps, party at Annabel's, attend
the races at Royal Ascot and the opera at Covent Garden.

The other world within the City of London is the market for domestic stocks and
bonds, which until recently has been a realm of cosy but uncompetitive cartels.
It amounted to a Government-protected club that was profitable for the British
members and excluded outsiders. Its traditional tone and style were summed up by
Lord Poole of the merchant bank Lazard Brothers, who was asked in the mid-1970's
about the secret to his banking success. ''Quite simple,'' he replied, ''I only
lent money to people who had been at Eton.''

But in recent years, it became clear that the old British club could not resist
the worldwide movement toward more open and competitive capital markets, in
which money moves with greater ease across borders and securities trading is
increasingly conducted on computerized systems away from central exchanges.

Breaking Up The Old Club Indeed, some of the business traditionally handled on
the London Stock Exchange has already been slipping away. On some days, for
instance, trading in the stock of blue-chip British companies, including
Imperial Chemical Industries, Glaxo and Jaguar, has been more active in New York
than in London.

The free-enterprise Government of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher decided to
open up the domestic club in an effort to make the financial services industry
more competitive. The Thatcher Government's deregulation drive, begun three
years ago, is fast coming to fruition. Earlier this year, the 184-year-old
London Stock Exchange opened its doors to newcomers, including foreigners.

But the culmination comes on Oct. 27 with Big Bang. On that day, fixed
commissions, which have kept dealing costs high but also enriched a handful of
firms, will be abolished -a step taken on Wall Street in 1975. In addition, the
restrictive barriers that kept brokers, traders, merchant banks and commercial
banks in separate bailiwicks are also being dropped. For example, the barrier
dividing brokers, who sell stock, and jobbers, who trade stock, will be wiped
out.

Though a catch-up move, the deregulation in London will be more sweeping than
Wall Street's ''May Day'' of 11 years ago. In the United States, commercial
banks are still kept out of the securities business by the Glass-Steagall Act,
enacted in 1933. But in London, even that barrier is being tossed aside.

''No major financial community has ever been picked up and shaken to its
foundations the way we're seeing in London now,'' said Stanislas Yassukovich,
chairman of Merrill Lynch Europe Ltd. Need for Capital Expected to Soar In the
more competitive environment, size and deep pockets are expected to be
advantages, as they were in the shake-out on Wall Street that came after fixed
commissions were dropped. Once a series of cottage industries populated by
relatively small firms, London's domestic-securities business is now becoming
dominated by financial conglomerates, often controlled by well-heeled foreign
institutions.

These big groupings are now in place, thanks to a controlled shopping spree that
the Government permitted to begin two years ago. By now, more than 100 firms
have been involved in acquisitions with an estimated total value of more than $2
billion.

The meaning and importance of the Big Bang varies according to the perspective
of the participants. So, too, do their business strategies for capitalizing on
the changes. For the big British commercial banks, such as National Westminster
and Barclays, or merchant banks, such as Kleinwort Benson and S. G. Warburg, the
Big Bang represents a fight for survival and an opportunity to get into the
securities business. They have spent heavily to buy stockbrokers and trading
houses.

''Any bank that decides not to go into the securities business is taking one
hell of a punt,'' said Oliver Stocken, a managing director of Barclays de Zoete
Wedd, one of the new conglomerates. It has 1,400 employees and has just moved
into a new building with a two-story, 65,000-square-foot trading floor.

For the American commercial banks, such as Citibank and Chase Manhattan,
deregulation affords a chance to get into the securities industry in London and
serves as a warmup for the day when the Glass-Steagall barrier is eventually
removed in America.

''This is our ticket to the business,'' explained Glen Moreno, group executive
in charge of Europe, the Middle East and Africa for Citicorp Investment Bank,
which spent an estimated $75 million to buy two British brokers, Scrimgeour
Kemp-Gee and Vickers da Costa.

Other multinational commercial banks, including Union Bank of Switzerland and
the HongKong and Shanghai Bank, have also bought leading British brokerage
houses. For their part, the major British brokers have almost all decided to
link up with a larger corporation to gain access to the large amounts of capital
they expect to need in the new era, when firms become risk-taking traders rather
than mere sales agents.

The traditional American brokerage houses, such as Merrill Lynch and Shearson
Lehman Brothers, will also have a solid presence in selling and trading British
stocks and Government bonds, called gilts. But they have generally eschewed
costly acquisitions, preferring instead to recruit and train in-house. Some Not
Excited About 'Big Bang'

To the major investment banks, including Salomon Brothers, Morgan Stanley and
Goldman, Sachs, the Big Bang is no big thing. They tend to deal in British stock
and Government-bond markets, but only selectively -as part of the global mix of
products and services offered to institutional clients. They trade in some
blue-chip British stocks, for example, because they are among the 500 or so
corporate issues that have become part of the fast-growing market for
international equities that are traded globally almost round-the-clock.

For the investment banks, the truly big bang has been the virtual explosion of
international business in recent years, not the deregulation of the domestic
market. Their new trading floors and burgeoning payrolls are intended to shore
up their stake in fast-growing international arenas such as the market for
Eurobonds. By their lights, Oct. 27 will be just another Monday.

''From an international viewpoint, Big Bang is pretty much of a yawn,'' stated
A. Gary Klesch, chairman of Quadrex Securities Ltd., a specialist investment
bank based in London.

John M. Hennessy, chairman of Credit Suisse First Boston, the leading
underwriter of Eurobonds, dismisses the London domestic securities market as
''peanut-sized.'' But, Mr. Hennessy added: ''The significance of the Big Bang is
that it will internationalize the domestic market. Finance has gone global, and
the Big Bang is part of this globalization.''

Already, this process of bringing London's hidebound domestic markets into the
global era has brought striking changes in business practices, habits and
attitudes. The most obvious adjustment is the faster pace in the City of London,
the equivalent of New York's Wall Street.

Now that the gentlemen's rules are being replaced by hand-to-hand combat, the
workdays are longer. Of the early-bird habits adopted by his suburban banker
friends, Robin Walker, a London businessman, said, ''These guys are taking
trains they never knew existed before.''

The leisurely, two-hour lunch topped off with rounds of port is a dying
tradition. The trendy new eateries in the City are high-class sandwich shops
such as the Croissant Express, where the line of brokers and bankers spills onto
the sidewalk at lunchtime.

''Fewer and fewer people take lunch,'' said David Lough, chief executive of
County NatWest Capital Markets Ltd., the investment bank arm of Britain's
largest bank, National Westminster. ''It's mostly sandwiches at the desk now.''

For people in demand, particularly stock and bond traders, salaries have soared
to near-Wall Street levels, considered astronomical by British standards. The
idea of someone aged 30 or thereabouts making $300,000 a year or more is hard
for many British to accept, even ones committed to free markets. Mrs. Thatcher
has observed that the pay scales in the City ''make one gasp.''

By all accounts, the new wealth has helped push up London apartment prices, as
well as stimulated the purchase of luxury goods ranging from Jaguars to fine
wines. ''The standard of living in this industry has skyrocketed,'' noted
Somerset Gibbs, whose executive-search company, Directorship Appointments Ltd.,
has placed some of the new rich.

Yet, there have also been more fundamental adjustments in British business
practices as the financial markets have begun to open up, and these should
accelerate after Big Bang. In this more competitive atmosphere, performance
determines success. Prices and measurable results become more important, while
long-standing relationships tend to mean less. For example, corporate clients
meeting with their merchant banks today will be bickering over the price of a
financing, not inquiring about the schools and social connections of the people
involved.

''Banking in London is changing entirely from a relationship market to a
transaction market,'' said Robin T. Fox, vice chairman of Kleinwort Benson, a
leading merchant bank.

Institutional investors, too, are feeling the pressure to improve performance.
Big investors now trade in and out of stocks more often to try to take advantage
of short-term swings in the market. Fast-disappearing are fund managers who buy
and hold a stock for years, often based on personal friendships with a company's
top executives.

Today, large investors are interested in a company's stock price, not who runs
the enterprise. One byproduct is the surge in takeover activity in London. Last
year, 139 bids were made in Britain with a record total value of $11.8 billion,
reports Acquisitions Monthly, a trade journal. This year, 165 bids have been
announced so far, totaling $37 billion.

The British takeover binge pales next to the volume of acquisitions in America.
But some in Britain express doubts about having their financial markets take on
a global character if it means importing American-style dealmaking, which they
believe undermines industrial competitiveness.

''Even before Big Bang, there is a lot of concern here about all these
takeovers,'' said Charles John Constable, director general of the British
Institute of Management. ''The system is being driven for short-term gain. It is
not concerned with products and markets, but merely a financial exercise.''
Global Trends Expected to Last But such unsettling changes are probably
inevitable as London's domestic-securities market moves to get in step with the
thriving international enclave within its midst. And the trends fueling the
global capital movements appear to have years to run yet, promising to
strengthen London's role as the hub of international finance.

History, geography and an accommodative Government policy all help explain
London's success in international finance. Once the main port and seat of power
for a globe-spanning colonial network, London has long experience in
international trading. Today, it is a great metropolis that lies smack between
the world's two largest capital markets, the United States and Japan. In the
morning, a London trader can deal with Tokyo and in the afternoon with New York.
For international bankers, London's airports, with flight connections considered
the best in Europe, are another advantage.

Moreover, the Bank of England had the foresight to allow the sprawling
international financial market, an unregulated entrepot bourse, to flower
alongside Britain's tightly controlled domestic securities market. Such
flexibility contrasts sharply with the attitudes of officials in Paris and
Frankfurt, for example.

Another factor, though impossible to measure, is the sheer appeal of living in
London, a cosmopolitan center with culture, history and commerce in abundance.
''At the end of the day, a major reason it happened in London is the personal
preferences of the key participants,'' said Merrill Lynch's Mr. Von Clemm, who
for more than two decades has been one of them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: THE BIG BANG: A NEW ERA FOR THE CITY OF LONDON - FIRST OF A SERIES TO
APPEAR PERIODICALLY

GRAPHIC: map of the City of London; photos of the City of London (NYT/Paul
Hosefros)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

INTERNATIONAL REPORT: A YEAR AFTER PLAZA ACCORD, CURRENCY ISSUES REMAIN
DIVISIVE;
U.S. IS APPLYING PRESSURE, BUT EUROPEANS STELL BALKING

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 6, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1435 words

DATELINE: PARIS


A year after Britain, France and West Germany joined with Japan to help the
United States devalue the dollar to improve its trade performance, America's
persistent payments deficit is again souring relations between Washington and
its principal European allies.

With the trade deficit widening despite a sharp drop in the dollar's value, the
United States is confronting West Germany and the rest of Europe with a stark
choice: Either adopt more expansionary economic policies that Washington hopes
will result in the purchase of more American goods or the dollar will be forced
down even further.

While Japan has just announced a package of measures designed to stimulate its
flagging economy, Germany and other European countries are standing pat, fearful
that too much economic stimulation could result in a new round of inflation.
[European Community central bankers agreed to intervene jointly in currency
markets starting Monday, the Reuters news agency quoted a senior Community
official as saying Sunday. The move was intended to halt the slide of the dollar
against the mark, the official said.] Spurred by Inflow of Capital Europe's
fixed-exchange-rate monetary system has been put under stress by the plunge of
the dollar, which has fallen 40 percent against the mark in the last year. The
mark has been pushed up in value by an inflow of speculative capital.

The surge of the mark is of special significance to France's Conservative
Government, which wants to guard against an outflow of capital into the German
currency when it ends the remaining French exchange controls later this year.

German elections in January and a possible British election in the spring may
also bring some easing of economic policy in these countries. But European
governments remain resolutely opposed to any general budget relaxation that
would widen their deficits as the United States reduces its own.

Tensions sharpened perceptibly last week after West German central bankers
reiterated that they did not expect to cut interest rates. Treasury Secretary
James A. Baker 3d responded with a public warning that the dollar might need to
fall even further, which promptly sent it into a tailspin on currency markets.

In Bonn, as well as in other European capitals, officials say America's latest
exhibition of strong-armed financial diplomacy is causing concern for a number
of reasons.

European officials and economists increasingly feel that, after a slow start,
their economies are picking up and that further stimulation would be dangerous,
jeopardizing painful progress in strengthening public finances and reducing
inflation.

''The artificial fueling of demand would lead to another cycle of inflation
instability,'' Gerhard Stoltenberg, the Finance Minister of West Germany, told
the German Parliament earlier this month.

There is resentment, too, at America's failure so far to tackle its huge budget
deficit, which is widely seen as a major cause of its poor trade performance and
a threat to international economic stability.

In particular there are fears that Secretary Baker's attempts to talk the dollar
down further while the budget deficit remains large will do little to improve
the United States's trade performance and may send the dollar into a free fall.

The result could be the kind of ''stabilization crisis'' foreseen by Stephen
Marris of the Institute of International Economics in Washington. In his book
''Deficits and the Dollar,'' he writes of a situation in which the United States
is forced to raise interest rates to halt the slide, pushing the rest of the
world into a recession.

A 1960's Analogy

Many European officials and economists see similarities between Washington's
financial diplomacy today and in the 1960's when the United States was forced
into a chronic trade-payments deficit because it was spending heavily on the
Great Society domestic programs while also financing the Vietnam War.

The United States then forced its allies to accommodate the deficit either by
revaluing their currencies and accepting a loss of export competitiveness or by
accepting an inflationary flood of dollars into their economies.

Only Charles de Gaulle, the leader of France, resisted the United States by
changing France's excess dollars into American gold. But that option is no
longer open since the dollar ceased to be convertible. The final result of
Washington's policy then was an international monetary crisis that destroyed the
postwar Bretton Woods monetary system.

Evidence that key European economies are now performing more strongly than
widely perceived has been building in recent weeks.

After contracting in the first quarter, the German economy rebounded strongly,
chalking up a 3.3 percent rise in output in the second quarter. More important,
internal demand -the measure of Germany's ability to generate self-sustaining
growth instead of living off exports - is rising at a 4.5 percent annual rate
compared with a paltry 1.7 percent increase in 1984 and 1985. Germany's trade
surplus continues to grow, however, reaching a record $5.3 billion in July.

But the Government argues that this is the result of a fall in the value of
imports brought about by the declining dollar and weak prices for oil and other
commodities. After allowing for such price changes, Germany's central bank, the
Bundesbank, calculates German imports grew by 7.5 percent in the first half
while exports were up only 2 percent.

Germany thus argues that it is doing as much as can be expected to sustain world
growth and create a trading environment with room for the United States to step
up its exports and reduce its trade deficit.

''In so far as we can act as a locomotive for the rest of the world, we already
are,'' said Martin Bangleman, the Economics Minister.

Growth Elsewhere

In France, Britain and Italy, economic activity is also picking up after a weak
start this year. And in all these countries, too, growth comes increasingly from
strengthening domestic demand as falling inflation increases purchasing power.

''In the major European countries the domestic-demand component of growth is now
compensating for lost exports as the dollar falls,'' says J. Paul Horne,
European analyst with Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Company, the American
brokerage house.

Meanwhile, raw material prices appear to be turning around after a long decline
that aroused fears the world might be drifting into a commodity-led recession.
In the last month, The Economist's general commodities index is up 3 percent
while the metal sector has climbed 6 percent. This leads analysts such as Larry
Kudlow of Bear, Stearns & Company to soften earlier warnings of an imminent
recession.

America's trade performance is proving slow to respond to the lower dollar,
however. Creeping protectionism and agricultural subsidies are playing a role
here as well as the so-called J-curve effect in which a devaluation produces an
increase in imports before it stimulates overseas sales.

In the search for solutions, though, many economists doubt that the answer lies
in further dollar devaluations against major currencies.

As Robert D. Hormatz of Goldman, Sachs & Company points out in his survey of the
world economy published in Foreign Affairs, about 40 percent of America's trade
deficit is with developing countries. In many cases, the currencies of these
countries have scarcely appreciated against the dollar. But a more serious
problem is that the deeply indebted third world lacks the means to buy American
tools and machinery it needs for development.

The so-called Baker debt initiative and plans for new World Bank lending are
designed to remedy that, but both are making slow progress. Yet as Mr. Hormatz
wrote, ''In the final analysis, it is increased domestic demand abroad, more
than exchange-rate changes, that would give the greatest boost to U.S.
exports.''

Many economists also argue that America's trade deficit is inevitable so long as
domestic savings are too low to finance the budget deficit, forcing the
Government to rely on inflows of foreign capital to cover its spending. This is
because the deficit itself provides the funds that the United States then
imports from overseas.

David Hale of Kemper Economic Services in Chicago maintains that the United
States, with a relatively young and growing population, can afford to maintain a
trade deficit financed by capital inflows for the foreseeable future. But if the
loss of export industries is to be reversed, he contends, the nation must either
increase private savings or cut its budget deficit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graphs of number of marks to dollar, quarterly percent change in real
G.N.P. from last year and U.S. trade balance with W. Germany(Source: U.S.
Commerce Dept.)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

COMECON COURTING WESTERN EUROPE

BYLINE: By PETER MAASS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 9, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: BRUSSELS


A European Community official recently received a telephone call from a Soviet
diplomat who wanted to know whether the Common Market would be interested in
buying some barley from Moscow. After a few minutes of cordial discussion in
Russian, the community official promised to give a formal response as soon as
possible.

Until a year or two ago, such a conversation would have been a rare event. Since
its founding in 1957, the European Community has faced varying degrees of
hostility from the Soviet bloc, which regarded the community as an economic
adjunct of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization or a tool of the Western
multinational companies.

The Soviet Union and its East European allies have refused to officially
recognize the European Community, and the Soviet-bloc trade organization - the
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, known as Comecon - has never established
diplomatic relations with its West European counterpart.

But under the more-flexible policy of Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev, a thaw
in relations between the two economic groups has turned into a flash-flood of
activity, as both sides move toward the establishment of formal ties.

Talks Set for Geneva

On Sept. 22 and 23, Comecon and officials of the community are to hold talks in
Geneva - their first face-to-face encounter since 1980 - to lay the groundwork
for a top-level meeting by early 1987, when it is hoped that a common
declaration can be signed inaugurating mutual diplomatic recognition.

Although negotiations between the European Community and Comecon have fallen
apart in the past, some Western diplomats here give the current round of
delicate talks a good chance of succeeding.

The initiation of Comecon ties with the community could improve the long-term
prospects for increased political and economic dialogue between Eastern and
Western Europe, according to the diplomats, but they also warn that this could
upset Washington's relations with the 12-nation community.

'A Modest Aim'

''All we want out of this exercise is a normal situation,'' said a senior
Europen Community official involved in the negotiations. ''This is a modest aim,
and it's a mark of the abnormally bad relations between the Community and the
East.''

Western diplomats here doubt that a ''normal situation'' would immediately
translate into increased trade between the two sides. The community, which
annually runs as much as an $11 billion trade deficit with the Soviet Union and
the six East European members of Comecon, does not want to increase that gap by
buying more East-bloc goods, and the East bloc is not currently capable of
decreasing the deficit by making more hard-currency purchases in the community.

Instead, diplomats say the most important impact of the warmer Economic
Community and Comecon relations may be felt in the political realm. Both sides
in the negotiations appear to be playing out a fragile diplomatic ballet, in
which a major aim is to wean the other side's dancers away from their presumed
political choreographer. European Community diplomats privately admit that they
hope the normalization of relations will eventually bolster trade with the East
European countries -thus reducing those countries' economic and political
dependency on Moscow.

Likewise, Moscow is assumed to be seeking greater contact with Western Europe in
order to pull it away from the influence of Washington. ''It gives another
institutional channel for dialogue between Eastern and Western Europe,'' said a
Western diplomat here, referring to the hoped-for ties between the community and
Comecon. ''The Soviets will look at this as a way to bring the West Europeans
closer to their point of view and away from the Americans.''

Meanwhile, the senior EuropeanCommunity official, reflecting the community's
cautious approach, said, ''We are not throwing ourselves into Gorbachev's
arms,'' adding that there are ''certain dangers in dealing with Comecon.''

Control and Prestige

The dangers, from the community's perspective, are two-fold: that an accord
between the Europeans and Comecon would give the Soviet Union, which dominates
the Moscow-based trade group, more control over the commerce between Eastern and
Western Europe and that such an accord would give Comecon undue international
prestige by placing it at the same institutional level as the powerful
community.

To avoid the potential pitfalls of dealing exclusively with Comecon, the
community is following a two-track negotiating policy. It has told Comecon that
it was willing to have formal relations, but that the establishment of
diplomatic ties must be accompanied by the separate negotiation of formal
relations and comprehensive trade pacts between the community and the six East
European allies of Moscow - East Germany, Poland, Hungary, Rumania,
Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria. Cuba, Mongolia and Vietnam are also members of
Comecon.

The last round of talks between the community and Comecon, in 1981, fell apart
over the community's insistence on parallel, but separate, accords.

According to the European Community official, the community now ''aims to go
ahead in parallel with Comecon and the member states.'' He said that by the
first half of next year the community may be able to inaugurate formal relations
with Comecon and ''some'' of its members. However, he cautioned that the signing
of comprehensive economic cooperation agreements with Moscow and the six East
European nations ''could take quite long,'' given the intricacy of such accords
and the differing needs of each country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graph of European Community trade with the East bloc (Source: European
Community)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THAILAND'S NEW ENVOY SAYS HE SEES ISOLATIONISM IN U.S.

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 578 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 22


Thailand is sending a new Ambassador to Washington next week in hopes he can do
something to ease his Government's worries about isolationist and protectionist
trends in the United States.

The envoy, Arsa Sarasin, is Thailand's highest ranking foreign service officer.
Mr, Sarasin spoke at length of Thailand's foreign policy concerns in an
interview here Friday.

He said these included concern about Soviet pressures to expand its influence in
Southeast Asia, fear that the West would come to accept Vietnamese domination of
Cambodia and Laos and a perception that the White House has lost the power to
sustain a foreign policy.

Since 1975, Mr. Arsa said, ''the involvement of the United States anywhere in
the world is decided by the people in New York or Washington, not so much by the
Administration - and nothing can be done about it.''

Getting to Know Congress

A large part of his job, Mr. Arsa said, will be getting to know the leaders of
Congress, where measures affecting Thailand often originate, for example those
affecting policies on narcotics, refugees and economic matters.

''In the area of trade,'' he said, ''we have been hit by textiles. There is the
question of steel pipes, of canned tuna, the question of rice and now of sugar.
And I am sure there will be many more issues.''

Mr. Arsa, the 50-year-old Permanent Secretary of the Thai Foreign Ministry, is
an experienced diplomat most recently involved in relations with the Soviet
Union and the Communist nations of Indochina.

He is a 1959 graduate of Boston University, with a degree in business
administration. His father, Pote Sarasin, a former Thai Prime Minister and head
of the now-disbanded Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, was Bangkok's envoy to
Washington from 1952 to 1957.

Mr. Arsa, a member of a wealthy banking and business family, has been a foreign
service officer since 1959. He has been involved in economic and political
affairs in European and Asian posts and was the country's chief policy planner
in the mid 1970's. He has been the director of the Foreign Ministry and chief
adviser to the Foreign Minister since 1982.

Officials say that Thailand, once Washington's strongest ally in the region, has
distanced itself from the United States somewhat over the last decade. Mr. Arsa
said that this is because of the country's involvement in the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, which since 1967 has forged diplomatic, cultural and
some economic ties among Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei and
the Philippines.

The change in attitude has also been due, Mr. Arsa said, to the lesson Southeast
Asians learned when America relinquished its direct combat role in South Vietnam
in 1973. He said that Thailand's ''difficult'' decision to ask the United States
to close its bases in this country in 1975 and 1976 sprang from uncertainties
about an American alliance and fears of vulnerability.

''You can afford to change your policies,'' he said. ''But we have nowhere to
go.''

A large part of his job in Washington, he said, will be to get the image of
Thailand as a vulnerable nation, still dependent for 80 percent of its national
income on agriculture, across to Americans, who, he said, are preoccupied with
Japan and China.

''We have to make the American people aware of us,'' he said, ''aware that there
is this Kingdom of Thailand, just beginning to practice democracy, where people
want to go on with this democratic system.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TIGHT RACE FOR GOVERNOR LOOMING IN KANSAS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM ROBBINS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 919 words

DATELINE: MANHATTAN, Kan.


Michael Hayden, a man who normally smiles quickly, grips hands vigorously and
claps shoulders easily, glanced briefly at his opponent and peered sternly out
across his lectern at his audience.

''I am very much opposed to wheat sales to South Africa,'' said Mr. Hayden, the
42-year-old Republican Speaker of the State House of Representatives, who is a
candidate for Governor of Kansas.

Lieut. Gov. Thomas R. Docking, his Democratic opponent, stood tall and straight
behind a lectern a few feet away, facing his audience and his opponent with a
manner that was studious, sincere, almost severe.

As Governor, Mr. Docking said a few minutes later, he would demand budgets that
would be ''austere but adequate.''

What followed for the audience of agricultural reporters here in north-central
Kansas were revealing glimpses of the principals and some elements of strategy
in what many believe is likely to become one of the year's tightest and most
strenuously contested political contests. It is also a race that presents one of
the sharpest contrasts of competing candidates.

Third in Line of Dockings

Few present were unaware that Kansas, although predominantly Republican in
registration figures, has had Democratic Governors for nearly 20 of the last 30
years.

To those with a little knowledge of Kansas political history, Mr. Docking's
words brought a knowing smile. He is seeking to become the third in a line of
Dockings to govern his state.

The words ''austere but adequate'' permitted the 32-year-old Democrat to evoke
the memories without mentioning the names of his father, Robert, who served two
terms, 1967 to 1975, and of his grandfather, George, who also served two terms,
from 1957 to 1961, before the Governor's term was lengthed to four years from
two.

Both earlier Dockings were popular, fiscally conservative Governors and both
used the ''austere but adequate'' slogan.

As Robert Docking's son, Thomas Docking had spent eight of his formative years
at Cedar Crest, the Governor's mansion in nearby Topeka, where leading
Democratic figures of the period of visited and where leaders such as Robert F.
Kennedy and former Senator Edmund S. Muskie made deep impressions on the youth.

That background, Mr. Docking said in an interview, will help him counter barbs
from his opponent, aimed at his comparative youth.

''I've got a lifelong background of interest in issues that confront this
state,'' he said.

Mr. Docking is a graduate of the University of Kansas, where he earned a
master's degree in business administration as well as a law degree. He was a
member of a prestigious Wichita law firm when, at the age of 27, he was sought
as a running mate for the current Governor, John Carlin, in his second-term
race. Mr. Docking was 28 when he became Lieutenant Governor.

Tough G.O.P. Candidate

His Republican opponent has sometimes successfully played the role of a ''good
old boy'' from the western Kansas farm country who made his mark by learning to
eat ice cream and chew tobacco at the same time while making tough trades as a
member of a House conference committee in negotiations with his Senate
counterparts.

But Mr. Hayden, born and reared in Atwood, a town of 1,665 people, who spent his
youth working on the family's farm there, is far from a hayseed. He was
graduated from Kansas State University and, after war service in Vietnam, earned
a master's degree in biology.

In Vietnam, where he was elevated from platoon leader to company commander, he
was awarded a Bronze Star and several other medals for valor. He has served in
the state House since 1972.

He entered politics, Mr. Hayden said, because of ''environmental concerns.'' ''I
soon figured out that the people who made the real decisions regarding the
environment were politicians,'' he said.

In college, Mr. Hayden, an ardent hunter and fisherman, majored in wildlife
conservation.

''The important thing is he entered politics for the right reasons,'' says
former State Senator Winton Winters, a Republican, who remembers Mr. Hayden as
''tougher than a boot'' in many an all-night negotiating session over
conflicting elements of related legislative bills.

The Politics of Wheat

To some listeners here it seemed strange to hear Mr. Hayden, a Republican from
farm country in the nation's highest-production wheat state, propose banning
sales of the grain to South Africa. But others note that South Africa's
purchases are so small they can have relatively little impact on national and
international markets.

In any event, some people say, Mr. Hayden has reason to be relatively confident
of his strength in farm country. He carried most of the state's rural areas and
small towns in his successful campaign for the nomination. He was weakest in
urban areas, running second to Larry Jones, a business leader, in such populous
areas as Wichita, Kansas City, Kan., and suburban Johnson County.

A firm stand on South Africa might even help him in urban areas, some people
say.

In the interview, Mr. Hayden scoffed at suggestions that the primary might have
indicated a vulnerability in urban precincts. ''There I was running against
Republicans,'' he said. ''In November it will be a Democrat.''

Mr. Docking, his opponent, seemed equally confident. The family slogan,
''austere but adequate,'' he said, reflects a ''fundamentally conservative
philosophy'' that will once more appeal to Kansans.

''It reflects a commitment to manage our finances and serve people who need
help,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Michael Hayden and Thomas Docking (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HUMAN RIGHTS AND THE MEDIA

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 369 words


WHAT are the responsibilities of journalists in the coverage of human rights?
''The Media and Human Rights,'' on Channel 13 at 11 o'clock tonight, tries to
provide an answer. It doesn't succceed, although, presumably, it doesn't expect
to. The question has too many layers.

The program - presented by the Center for Communication - brings together
prominent journalists and other interested parties to discuss the coverage of
human rights in South Africa, Poland and the Philippines. Ted Koppel moderates
the discussion, and also poses the most interesting questions. What are the
differences between South Africa and Poland? Are journalists ever used? These
questions aren't resolved either, but light is shed in some corners.

Thus Charlayne Hunter-Gault of the ''MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour'' says that South
African press restrictions, apparently aimed at the outside world, deny news of
racial unrest to white South Africans as well. Peter Swanepoel, a press officer
for the South African Embassy, rebuts this. Nonetheless, Ms. Hunter-Gault has
made her point: white South Africans may be poorly informed about their own
country.

Why do journalists not focus more on human rights violations in Poland? Aryeh
Neier, vice chairman of Helsinki Watch, says there is ''an uneventful revolution
in Poland.'' The revolution, though sweeping, lacks drama. Mr. Neier also says
that the most important concern in the world today is human rights.

A few panelists take mild issue with this. Karen Elliott House, foreign editor
of The Wall Street Journal, says that human rights ''isn't the only issue.''
Charles Krauthammer of The New Republic says that the press reported on the
''tiger cages'' in South Vietnam, but neglected to examine larger symptoms of
abuse in North Vietnam. Journalists, he says, may focus on abuses by only one
side.

Subsequently, Mr. Koppel says that he is a ''little disturbed'' by some of his
colleagues; he thinks they should be more concerned about human rights than they
are. If nothing else, the program, produced by Kerry Smith Marash, gives us a
feeling for complications. ''The Media and Human Rights'' is not compelling
television, but it does offer some sophisticated viewpoints.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

COMPANY NEWS;
2 Trade Blocs Open Talks

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 8, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 181 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Sept. 22


Europe's two main trading groups, the European Community and the Soviet-led
Comecon, opened talks today, resuming a dialogue broken off more than five years
ago.

The negotiations were seen by officials of the community as part of a campaign
by the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, to expand economic ties with the
outside world.

The three-day ''exploratory contacts'' among technical experts are not expected
to produce substantial agreements. But they could lead later this year to a
joint declaration establishing formal relations, the head of the community's
delegation, John Maslen, said in an interview last week in Brussels. Mr. Maslen
directs the community's relations with the state-controlled economies of Eastern
Europe.

The members of Comecon, or the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, are the
Soviet Union, East Germany, Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria, Poland, Czechoslovakia,
Mongolia, Vietnam and Cuba.

The European Community members are Britain, West Germany, Italy, France,
Denmark, Luxembourg, Belgium, the Netherlands, Ireland, Spain, Portugal and
Greece.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 25, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Students Must Be Forgiven for Their Youth

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 268 words


To the Editor:

In ''You Mean We Have a History?'' (Op-Ed, Sept. 13), Joe Patrick Bean, an
assistant professor of history, lamented that his freshmen students cannot
interpret current events because of their lack of firsthand experience. He
wondered how these students could ''draw meaningful conclusions from the Vietnam
experience and apply them to what may or may not be an analogous situation in
Central America.'' He concluded, ''they cannot do so on the basis of their own
memory.'' He felt that because these students were born after the start of the
cold war, they could not understand our relationship with the Soviet Union.

Mr. Bean, as we have no memory of Vietnam, and therefore (supposedly) cannot
make sense of Central America, the same logic dictates that because you have no
memory of the Russian Revolution, you are unable to analyze current East-West
differences. If you didn't live during the 1860's, how can you make judgments
about civil rights in the South? And how can you judge Hiroshima and Nagasaki if
you weren't alive thousands of years ago to watch the evolution of Oriental
culture? Carried to further extremes, how dare the Pope preach the word of
Christ if he himself was not present at the Last Supper?

I also think that if everyone were born with infinite knowledge of the past,
there would be no need for history professors. If you want to blame us for an
unwillingness to learn, blame us for that, not for bad timing. Besides, when
would you want us to have been born?

DAVID HYATT
  Ridgewood, N.J., Sept. 13, 1986

The writer is a high-school student.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 25, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TALKS IN SEOUL ON CHARTER AT IMPASSE

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea, Sept. 24


For the last few months, South Korea's political parties have tried to achieve
something rare for this fractious country - agreement, through debate, on a new
way to select the national leader.

Compromise, however, has been a scarce commodity. The two sides are seriously
deadlocked. As a result, politicians, intellectuals and foreign diplomats fear
that South Korea may be heading down a familiar road of confrontation, with a
threat of street disorders and Government crackdowns.

Invariably, each camp says the other is at fault.

Kim Young Sam, strategist for the main opposition force, the New Korea
Democratic Party, has said, ''If the Government keeps opposing democratization,
I am sure that we face political catastrophe.''

And Lee Jong Ryool, press secretary to President Chun Doo Hwan, has said, ''If
the opposition goes to the streets and we have troubles, they are the ones to
blame for the ensuing instability.''

Direct Elections Are Sought

Anti-Government leaders say they will settle for nothing but a strong President
chosen through direct elections. The ruling Democratic Justice Party is equally
insistent on an indirect system in a Prime Minister selected by Parliament holds
true power.

In principle, the two sides are pledged to ironing out differences peaceably
through a 45-member committee created in July to revise the Constitution and
political system. In reality, mutual distrust is so great that no serious
discussion has taken place.

The two sides are unable even to go beyond the sort of shape-of-the-table
arguments that had once stalled the Paris peace talks to end the Vietnam War. In
this case, the snag is the opposition's demand for live coverage on television,
which so far has virtually ignored the process in normal news programs.

Mr. Kim's party has set next Tuesday as the deadline for committee agreement. It
has threatened to walk out after that and to take its case ''directly to the
citizens,'' in what it hopes would be a reprise of the ''people power'' campaign
that toppled President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines.

But the party has also declared a political moratorium for the Asian Games,
which end here Oct. 5, and so the deadline is likely to be extended by at least
a few weeks. Some analysts, especially within the ruling party, predict eventual
compromise, saying that the politicians must first be ''pushed to the brink''
before they can come up with a solution.

Still, South Korea has a history of political intransigence and sudden
explosion, and some people see a potential for new disaster.

''In both parties,'' a Western diplomat said, ''the ones willing to settle for
half a loaf are losing out at this point.''

The constitutional debate comes at a time of growing violence, with student
extremists and labor militants showing little hesitation about hurling gasoline
bombs at the police, who respond with steady volleys of tear-gas canisters. The
radicals demand immediate withdrawal of the 40,000 United States troops
stationed in South Korea and the overthrow of Mr. Chun, a general turned
President whom they denounce as a ''military dictator.''

Students Inclined to Violence

Until recently, the student were natural allies of the opposition. But their
embrace of armed confrontation has shaken politicians of all stripes. Mr. Kim
and his associates recognize that, if they take to the streets, they risk
igniting violence inadvertently. They vividly remember May 3, when extremists
took over a rally in Inchon, touchizg off South Korea's worst street rioting in
six years.

Continued disruptions, politicians say, could invite a sharp Government
reaction, possibly even direct intervention by military hard-liners believed to
be urging Mr. Chun toward a firmer stand against radicals.

As it is, the Asian Games have produced tough precautionary measures. Security
is tight throughout Seoul, and the authorities have suspended classes at six
colleges. In a pre-Games raid of campuses around Seoul, the police rounded up
more than 1,000 people for questioning.

All legal debate inevitably focuses on the intentions of Mr. Chun, who rose to
power in 1980 in a military takeover.

He is an unpopular leader, never tested at the polls, and even his supporters
are convinced he could never win a direct election. But he has promised to step
down at the end of his term in February 1988. Doing that would make him the
first South Korean leader ever to transfer power free of an uprising, coup or
assassination.

''If there is anything I really desire, it will be none other than to be praised
as the greatest contributor to developing democracy in the nation,'' he was
quoted as having said in a newspaper interview this week.

Under the existing Constitution, an electoral college selects the President, and
Mr. Chun would find it fairly easy to hand-pick his successor. In fact, some
politicians believe he already has decided on another former general, Roh Tae
Woo, now party chairman.

Opposition leaders such as Kim Dae Jung have accused Mr. Chun of ''seeking to
hold power behind the scenes.'' All year, they have pressed for a new political
process, settling on direct presidential elections as their preferred method and
their only chance to oust the present regime.

At first, the Government tried to suppress the opposition campaign, but as
pressure mounted, President Chun yielded and agreed to constitutional revision.
But he draws the line at direct elections.

Any constitutional revision must be approved by two-thirds of the National
Assembly, then by a majority of voters in a referendum. With the help of small
opposition groups and independents, ruling-camp leaders say, they probably could
muster the necessary two-thirds without agreement from the New Korea Democratic
Party.

But they also acknowledge that all this might do is invite charges of foul play
and thereby incite further anti-Government feelings.

''Trust is the real issue,'' a foreign diplomat said, ''and that is in short
supply.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 25, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEWS;
'OUR WORLD' RECALLS '69

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 30, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 495 words


''OUR WORLD'' is a retrospective. What did things look like in, say, the summer
of 1969? More accurately, what did things look like on television? ''Our
World,'' the new ABC magazine program at 8 o'clock tonight, uses old film to
show us. There are worse ways to spend an hour than in watching.

The program presents Linda Ellerbee and Ray Gandolf as hosts, narrators and
reporters. They perch on stools in front of what is supposed to be an old
newsstand, then segue into glimpses of the past. ''Think of this not as a
television studio,'' Mr. Gandolf says, ''but as a combination of your
grandmother's attic and the old neighborhood.'' The magazine show, Miss Ellerbee
continues, will be ''the stuff of yesterday.''

Then we go to yesterday: 1969 in Cocoa Beach, Fla., when the space program was a
national mania; Gulfport, Miss., struck by Hurricane Camille; Chappaquiddick,
Mass., and Senator Edward M. Kennedy; Woodstock; views of Vietnam; Beverly Hills
and Bel Air, Calif., after the Charles Manson gang butchered seven people. We
see other events and places, too.

Was all this only 17 years ago? Was the summer of '69 when Jacqueline Onassis
turned 40, Judy Garland died and the Smothers Brothers were dropped from prime
time? It does seem like yesterday, except, of course, if you are in your teens
or 20's. Presumably, then, it is faded history.

Nonetheless, Miss Ellerbee and Mr. Gandolf, who also co-wrote the program very
gracefully, do have a quiet sense of humor about the past, and they do have
events in perspective. There may not be much point to some of what we see or
hear: the recollections of a man, who, 17 years ago, slept in the house next
door to a house struck by the Manson gang, are not terribly interesting. Also,
why is Mr. Gandolf, in one brief sequence, in the middle of a California desert?

Perhaps it doesn't matter. ''Our World'' - produced by Rolfe Tessem and Vincent
Stafford - is a scrapbook, and scrapbooks aren't always zippy; on television,
they sometimes turn turgid. On the other hand, ''Our World'' does have Miss
Ellerbee and Mr. Gandolf, and there's something good to be said for that. If Mr.
Gandolf looks like your favorite uncle, Miss Ellerbee looks like that
interesting woman who lives down the street. The point is, they look like
people.  Therefore, there's no particular news or journalistic reason for Miss
Ellerbee to tell us that she was in Eagle Pass, Tex., in 1969, worried about
''diaper changes and feedings,'' although it is nice to know. We like Miss
Ellerbee for giving us the information. It means she is one of us. If we are
going to look at a scrapbook, it's better we should look at it with someone we
know.

''Our World'' concludes with a small wrap-up; '69 may have been the time of the
counterculture; John Wayne still won an Oscar for playing a marshal in ''True
Grit.'' The program lets you figure out the significance of this, if there is
any, yourself. ''Our World'' is a pleasant hour.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 27, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE TALK OF THE U.N.;
AT U.N. ASSEMBLY: MAGIC, DOVES AND DEBATE

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1186 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 26


Just before he was to make his speech on Monday, President Reagan got stuck in
an overloaded elevator for nearly a minute before a security guard employed by
the United Nations pried the door open.

On International Peace Day, Marcella Perez de Cuellar, the wife of Secretary
General Javier Perez de Cuellar, let loose a live ''peace'' dove that promptly
fell to the ground with a thud.

And at a dinner for Asian ministers, Foreign Minister Tadashi Kuranari of Japan
unleashed what his spokesman described as a ''secret weapon'': He performed four
magic tricks.

It's that time of the year again, the time for protocol mishaps and
reception-overload, for security measures and marathon meetings as another
General Assembly debate opened.

In between, the presidents and prime ministers, foreign ministers and special
envoys - even a couple of kings and princes - parade to the Assembly podium to
tell the world just what they think of it.

The annual three-week general debate - no debate at all but a series of speeches
- is the closest thing to a State of the World address as world leaders bring
their concerns to the attention of their constituents at home and their
colleagues abroad.

It serves another important, though perhaps less lofty, function as well. ''I'm
convinced that all the talking helps relieve tension,'' Portugal's deputy chief
delegate, Antonio Monteiro, said. ''It's group therapy for the world.''

For the most part, the world's concerns are vastly different from the first
Assembly 41 years ago, which grappled with the extradition and punishment of war
criminals, a worldwide shortage of grain and the economic reconstruction of
countries devastated by World War II.

This year, with uncertainty over whether there will be a Soviet-American summit
meeting because of the Daniloff affair, East-West relations have overshadowed
speeches and meetings. And stunned by a wave of terrorist attacks in France,
Pakistan, Lebanon and Turkey, many speakers have called for cooperation among
nations to combat a growing problem.

Leaders have also urged the resolution of the global debt crisis, apartheid, a
variety of regional conflicts and the financial woes of the host organization.
The United Nations controllers say they may not be able to meet the payroll by
Dec. 31.

Some speakers seek to inspire, taking the broadest tour d'horizon. President
Oscar Arias Sanchez of Costa Rica, for example, said he was ''putting his faith
in in a higher destiny that will lead us to liberty and democracy'' when he
spoke on Wednesday.

Others included concerns closer to home: from King Juan Carlos's call for the
rapid return of Gibraltar to Spain to the demand by Foreign Minister Wu Xueqian
of China that Vietnam withdraw from Cambodia.

At a time when the United Nations is struggling to streamline, Angola's Foreign
Minister, Afonso Van Dunem, has emerged as a kind of in-house hero at this
session.

The Angolan official was only 10 minutes into what was billed as a 40-minute
discourse Tuesday when he suddenly stopped, turned to the General Assembly
President, Humayun Rasheed Choudhury of Bangladesh, and announced what many
delegates have called the most courageous statement of the 41st General
Assembly.

He said, ''Mr. President, I have decided not to speak the entire speech which I
have.'' Anyone who wanted a copy of it would find it distributed later, he
added.

Because the Assembly is scheduled to end three weeks early as a cost-cutting
measure, his gesture was warmly welcomed.

''It was a revolutionary gesture,'' said Mr. Choudhury, who has made an
efficiently run Assembly his top priority. ''If everyone did this, it would save
us hundreds of thousands of dollars.''

In the interest of brevity, the British Foreign Secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe,
kept his speech shorter than usual and handed out a detailed appendix that
included his views of subjects as far-ranging as the Horn of Africa and
commodity pricing, while Spanish Foreign Ministry officials distributed red
T-shirts that said, ''The truth, if brief, is twice and good.''

One diplomat even suggested a return to the early days of the Assembly, when a
light on the podium warned speakers when their time was up, and when the
microphone could mysteriously go dead.

Mr. Choudhury is so intent on keeping the sessions moving on time that he pushed
the Assembly to waive the requirement that a quorum be present before the
meetings start. ''What that means,'' a diplomat said, ''is that the meetings
start on time but there's no one to hear them.''

To that, the Assembly President replied, ''If the speeches were shorter, more
people would come.''

When a lunch with heads of state and government on Monday had not ended by the
time the Assembly was to start again, Mr. Choudhury left before dessert was
served, telling his colleagues, ''I'm sorry to be discourteous, but I'm getting
up. Otherwise, this will be a very expensive coffee.''

Sometimes the verbal jousting both inside and outside the Assembly hall gets so
rough that one side has to back down. In a special session that preceded this
week's debate, Congo's Foreign Minister, Antoine Ndinga, angered Israeli
officials when he said there were only two countries in modern times comparable
to South Africa: Nazi Germany and Israel.

Israel protested through the United States, and American officials paid a visit
on Mr. Ndinga, telling him that President Reagan just might not look favorably
on a meeting with Congo's President, Denis Sassou-Nguesso, when he visits
Washington next month.

In a letter to the chief American delegate, Vernon A. Walters, the Congolese
apologized ''in case the interpretation of that passage could have equated
Israel to the Nazis, which as one knows cannot be compared to the Jews for
evident historical reasons.''

The matter would have quietly ended there, had not Israeli officials distributed
the letter to journalists. And Thursday, the name-calling continued, when Clovis
Maksoud, who represents the League of Arab States in the United Nations, called
the American delegation ''a stage manager for Israel at the U.N.''

Outside the United Nations, demonstrators with various political opinions and
aspirations are once again jockeying for position. The Committee for Democracy
in Bangladesh protested what it called military rule in Bangladesh; Albanians
demonstrated against Yugoslavia's treatment of their compatriots, and a lone
protester wearing a gray ski mask stood outside an elaborate dinner at the
Libyan Mission on Thursday night, handing out pamphlets against Col. Muammar
el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader.

The most talked-about event of the week has to be Mr. Kuranari's impromptu magic
show at a dinner for Asian Foreign Ministers. He even succeeded in getting
Indonesia's Foreign Minister, Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, and Australia's Foreign
Minister, Bill Hayden, to help him with a rope trick.

''It was a stunning experience,'' a veteran Asian diplomat said. ''Japan is
among the most formal countries in the world, and to see the Foreign Minister do
magic tricks was just remarkable, and, well, charming.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 27, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DAVID L. BERMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 36, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 122 words


David L. Berman, a senior human resource officer of Citicorp, died Wednesday in
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. He was 44 years old and lived in Park
Ridge, N.J.

Mr. Berman joined Citicorp in 1969 as an education specialist and was the senior
human resource officer responsible for the company's corporate staff, technology
and information business segments. He received his bachelor's degree from
Rutgers University and a master's degree in psychology from Kent State
University. He was a captain in the Marine Corps and saw service in Vietnam.

He is survived by his wife, Eileen; a daughter, Nicole; a son, Brian; his
mother, Dorothy Berman Dicker, and two sisters, Judith Berman Packman and
Barbara Berman Sundel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PRESSURE ON SPECTER INTENSIFYING IN PENNSYLVANIA

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 30, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1191 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, Sept. 27


Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania is well ahead in the polls. He has raised
far more money than his Democratic opponent, Representative Bob Edgar. And the
Republicans have won every senatorial contest in this state since 1962.

Yet the political professionals here and in Washington, both Republicans and
Democrats, give Mr. Edgar at least some chance of overtaking Mr. Specter in the
last 40 days of the campaign. That is so even though Mr. Edgar is one of the
most liberal Democratic senatorial candidates in the country at a time when the
kind of blunt, uncompromising stands he takes on issues are supposed to be
electoral poison. An Edgar victory in November would stand a lot of careful
political calculations on their heads.

Mr. Edgar, a 43-year-old Methodist minister, has been elected six times to the
House from a heavily Republican district in the Delaware County suburbs of
Philadelphia. But he has won by an average of only 11,000 votes. He defeated a
heavily favored rival this spring to win the nomination to oppose Mr. Specter.
And now he is stepping up the pressure on the 56-year-old Senator, who is
serving his first term.

Ad Enrages Specter Camp

A series of television advertisements, which began appearing this month, shows a
bust of Mr. Specter, looking a bit like Caesar. An off-screen voice lists his
votes, and with each one a crack opens in the bust until finally it crumbles
into dust. The announcer intones: ''Senator Arlen Specter: He's just not what
he's cracked up to be.''

The commercials are intended to drive home Mr. Edgar's contention that ''there
are two or three Arlen Specters out there.''

The commercials so enraged the Specter camp that the Senator's press secretary,
Dan McKenna, exploded in a string of expletives when a reporter from United
Press International called for a comment about them. Mr. McKenna later denied
making the remarks, but other officials in the campaign described the denial as
''pro forma.''

Mr. Specter, who expects to spend $6 million to $7 million as against Mr.
Edgar's $2 million to $3 million, plans to put some tough counterattacking
commercials on the air within the next week, according to David Garth of New
York, his communications media consultant. Some politicians here think Mr. Edgar
may run out of money before Election Day, leaving the final say to the Senator.

'He's Not a Waffler'

''We're not going to rest on our lead and let him drag Arlen's six-year record
through the mud,'' said Gordon Woodrow, Mr. Specter's campaign director. ''He's
not a waffler, and the people know it. Edgar is the one with the problem,
because he's way out of the ideological mainstream in this state.''

Mr. Specter says his mixed record of supporting the White House on some issues
and opposing it on others reflects his efforts to do what is best for the state.
He likes to say, ''It isn't easy being a Republican Senator from Pennsylvania.''

While it is true that Pennsylvania has a tradition of choosing moderates for
high office, it is also true that Mr. Edgar has, through his work in behalf of
Vietnam veterans, his crusades against pork barrel legislation and other
initiatives, managed to win the backing of many conservative and moderate
voters, even though he gets zero ratings from conservative groups.

He also has a geographical advantage that most recent Democratic senatorial
nominees have lacked: He is from the same part of the state as his opponent. In
the past, Democrats have found themselves caught up in local rivalries, with
Republicans able to exploit the animosities between the Pittsburgh and
Phildelphia areas through better organization and financing.

''This time,'' says Anita Dunn, Mr. Edgar's press secretary, ''we don't have a
contest between the Pirates and the Phillies. Both of them are from
Philadelphia, and they can slug it out here. In the west, the terrible problems
in the steel industry and all the other economic troubles ought to give us a
considerable advantage.''

Mr. Edgar hopes to capitalize on Mr. Specter's votes against two of President
Reagan's conservative judicial nominees, Jefferson B. Sessions and Daniel A.
Manion. So many Republicans were upset by those votes that Richard A. Stokes, a
school teacher who spent only $2,400, was able to take 24 percent of the primary
vote from the Senator.

In addition, Mr. Edgar hopes to cut into the black support that helped Mr.
Specter win narrowly six years ago. In that election, the Senator won the votes
of about 40 percent of this city's 400,000 black voters; Representative William
H. Gray 3d, Philadelphia's most popular black politician, promises that Mr.
Specter will do much less well this time. He was reportedly irked when the
Senator cast a vote against sanctions on South Africa and is backing Mr. Edgar
strongly.

Specter Has Strong Team

Mr. Specter made his reputation as Philadelphia's District Attorney. But he lost
three straight elections before beating former Mayor Peter Flaherty of
Pittsburgh for the Senate in 1980. Worried about his ability to hold his seat,
some White House political operatives tried to persuade the state's popular
Governer, Dick Thornburgh, a Republican, to run against him, but Mr. Thornburgh,
after much pondering, decided not to do so.

Since then the Senator has raised a huge war chest and assembled a strong
campaign team, including Mr. Garth, Robert Teeter, his pollster, and Eddie Mahe,
a top Republican expert in direct mail, in grass-roots organization and in
Election Day get-out-the-vote operations.

His exertions have paid off in a strong early lead. A poll of 1,169 registered
voters taken in early September for station WTAE-TV in Pittsburgh showed the
Senator with 49 percent, Mr. Edgar with 31 percent and 20 percent undecided. The
margin of sampling error is plus or minus four percentage points. Several
subsequent surveys have shown much the same picture.

Come-From-Behind Candidate

The Edgar forces counter the figures by arguing that their candidate is only
just now becoming known in much of the state. They note that he has come from
behind many times in the past and argue that 50 percent is considered a poor
showing in the polls for an incumbent. And they point out, finally, that
Pennsylvania, unlike most of the country, seems to have been shifting slightly
in recent years toward the Democrats.

Their contentions win support in some surprising quarters. For example, a
wealthy Republican businessman in Philadelphia said, ''It would be a tremendous
mistake to write Edgar off, because people think he's a solid, worthwhile
candidate, unlike a lot of these fly-by-night Demoratic types.''

The best guess of most analysts here is that Mr. Edgar will close the gap
somewhat in the coming weeks but probably fall short of winning because of
relatively meager financing. If he does more than that, he might tip control of
the Senate to his party, since the Republican Party is counting heavily on a
Specter victory, and in the process suggest to a lot of people that, at least
with Ronald Reagan's name absent from the ballot, issue-oriented liberals can
still win.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Repr. Bob Edgar campaigning in Harrisburg (UPI); photo of Vice
Pres. Bush with Sen. Arien Specter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JUSTICE DEPT. STILL FIGHTING 1976 PRIVACY SUIT

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 33, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 629 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 27


The Justice Department is still fighting a citizens' damage claim that was filed
10 years ago against five Federal agents whom a jury found in 1981 to have
illegally wiretapped and harassed a group of Washington area blacks and Vietnam
peace activists in the late 1960's.

At issue now are the amount of damages for which the defendants are to be
personally assessed. But the Justice Department might have to pay that judgment
because of a recent proposal by Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d.

In 1981 the trial jury set the personal damage liabilities at a total of
$711,000 for the five defendants, who were agents of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, but the United States Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia held this to be ''excessive'' and ordered the damages reassessed.

Court Vows Swift Action

At a hearing Friday, Federal District Judge Louis F. Oberdorfer, who presided at
the 1981 trial, said he would ''move very swiftly'' to determine the liabilities
as well as who should pay the plaintiffs' legal fees, which may exceed $350,000.

On July 29, Mr. Meese announced his proposal to use Justice Department money to
pay civil judgments and the legal defense costs incurred by employees who are
successfully sued for ''official acts.''

The F.B.I. agents have maintained that whatever they did that invaded the
plaintiffs' privacy or violated other constitutional rights was done in the line
of duty.

'Financial Ruin' Is Seen

One of a battery of private Washington lawyers retained by the Justice
Department to defend the agents told Judge Oberdorfer that the agents ''may be
facing the prospect of total financial ruin''

The agents were found responsible for unconstitutional invasions of the privacy
of five people here who had been activists against the Vietnam War. Their
private lives and political preferences went into large files, based on
telephone wiretaps and informers' reports, in a program inspired by J. Edgar
Hoover, the bureau's Director, and later discredited. .

The Hoover program was termed an effort to ''avoid violence'' at a time of
racial turmoil and antiwar protest by infiltrating with paid informers what the
bureau called black nationalist and antiwar groups.

The appellate court's ruling was made in 1984 by a panel that included Judge
Antonin Scalia, who was sworn in Friday as an Associate Justice of the Supreme
Court.

At the hearing held Friday to reset the amount of the award, a team of private
lawyers hired by the Justice Department argued that the defendants should not
have to pay punitive damages and the court's assessment of compensatory damages
should be ''nominal.''

One Asks Separate Liability Trial

The defendants are Charles D. Brennan, the bureau's former chief of domestic
intelligence; George C. Moore, who headed the ''black nationalist'' branch of
the Hoover campaign; Courtland Jones, Gerald Grimaldi and Gerould Pangburn. Mr.
Pangburn, who is represented by Earl Silbert, who was a prosecutor in the
Watergate case, has asked for a separate jury trial on the scope of his
liability.

The team of private defense lawyers, including A. Raymond Randolph, a former top
Justice Department official, has been paid a total of $190,600 by the Government
through last May 15, according to an accounting obtained from the Justice
Department under the Freedom of Information Act by Armand Derfner, one of the
plaintiffs' lawyers. He estimated that additional fees since then would add ''at
least $30,000'' to the department's legal bill in this case.

Anne Pilsbury, also a lawyer for the plaintiffs, said outside the courtroom that
her clients offered ''more than a year ago'' to settle the case for a total of
$40,000, ''but we never got a call back from the Justice Department.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRIAL IN FILM DEATHS HEARS MOTHER OF A VICTIM

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 36, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 479 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Sept. 27


A Vietnamese immigrant whose 7-year-old son was killed in the filming of
''Twilight Zone: The Movie'' has testified that she was never told the fatal
scene would involve a low-flying helicopter and explosions used for special
effects.

The witness, Kim-Hoa Lee, whose son, Myca Dinh Le,, was killed July 23, 1982,
along with the actor Vic Morrow, 53, and a 6-year-old girl, Renee Shinn Chen,
said the associate producer, George Folsey Jr., had explained the scene to her,
''He told me that they were going to shoot the movie, and if they hire Myca,
they would use him where a Vietnam village would be bombed and destroyed, and
only two children would survive,'' Mrs. Lee said.

She was testifying in the Criminal Courts building here Thursday in the trial of
Mr. Folsey, John Landis, the director of the movie, and three other defendants.
The case, in which they are accused of of involuntary manslaughter, is being
tried Mondays through Thursdays.

Not Told About Blasts, She Says

Mrs. Lee firmly said no when Deputy District Attorney Lea Purwin D'Agostino
asked her if Mr. Folsey had mentioned that her son would be near such explosions
or under a helicopter 20 feet above him. The script called for the helicopter to
rescue Mr. Morrow and the children.

The explosions, set off under a bamboo hut, destroyed the tail rotor section of
the helicopter, causing it to spin to the ground and strike Mr. Morrow, Myca and
Renee. Mr. Morrow and Myca were decapitated and Renee was crushed.

On trial with Mr. Landis and Mr. Folsey are the movie's unit production manager,
Dan Allingham; the special effects coordinator, Paul Stewart, and the helicopter
pilot, Dorcey Wingo.

Mrs. Lee testified that she accompanied her son to the filming at a remote
location 40 miles north of Los Angeles the night of July 21, 1982.

''The plan was that my husband would go with Myca,'' Mrs. Lee said. ''I got
home, and I look at Myca and he say: 'I really want you to go, Mom. But if
you're tired, you can stay.'''

'Laughing and Giggling'

She said the two children were kept ''waiting and waiting'' in a trailer on the
movie set.

Filming of the scene with the children did not begin until 2 A.M. July 22, Mrs.
Lee testified, when they were taken to a thatched hut on the set to join Mr.
Morrow.

''They tried to get the picture of the two kids, but Myca and Renee kept
laughing and giggling,'' Mrs. Lee said. ''Mr. Landis tried to tell them not to
laugh and giggle too much.'' The children's behavior delayed that scene a a few
hours, and in the interim other scenes were shot.

The filming went on until 4 A.M., Mrs. Lee said, and Mr. Folsey asked if the
children, who were to be paid $500 each for the scene, could return the next
evening. They did, and the helicopter crashed at 2:20 A,M. July 23.

The trial before Judge Roger W. Boren of Superior Court resumes Monday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MISSING BOOKS LISTS SPEAK VOLUMES

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 52, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 875 words


New York, a city of writers and readers, is a literate place and, as such, it is
sometimes possible to take its measure in its public reading rooms.

Every other month, managers in the 82 branches of the New York Public Library
survey their stock and file reports on the most popular books -those that need
to be replaced because they have been worn by constant reading or those that are
repeatedly stolen.

''These are the favored ones - year after year - read under dim spot-lamps in
taxis or air shuttles, balanced on subways, carried on boardwalks and into
bathtubs,'' said Donald Walker, the associate director of branch library
programs and services. ''They develop broken spines, pages like prune skin or go
to their reward in the land of lost umbrellas.''

Books on mental health seem to be the most popular, followed by, in no
particular order, Cambodian and Mandarin dictionaries, histories of Puerto Rico,
the plays of Shakespeare and Neil Simon, novels by Gabriel Garcia Marquez,
biographies of Miro and Michelangelo, the diaries of Anne Frank, Dostoevsky and
Vietnam veterans, essays by Sir Thomas More and Gloria Steinem.

The 'High Casualty List'

''An Artists's Guide to the Art Market,'' is on the list, as are
''Twentieth-Century Chinese Stories'' and cookbooks by James Beard and Julia
Child, perhaps stained by spilled Madeira or an errant pat of butter.

Books that are stolen are put on the ''High Casualty List.'' Some are simply
popular. Others may fall into the hands of those who think they are too
expensive to buy or too compromising to put on the checkout desk.

Truman Capote's ''Breakfast at Tiffany's,'' J. D. Salinger's ''The Catcher in
the Rye,'' Berlitz language books and the works of Sigmund Freud appear
regularly on the lists of both worn and stolen books.

''Dewey's 100's, 400's, 600's and 900's vanish,'' said the coordinator of adult
lending, Viola Barrett - in other words, so-called how-to books. ''New York City
Street Smarts'' - Dewey 914.471 - is missing, along with ''How to Hypnotize Your
Friends'' and ''How to Raise and Train Pigeons.''

Sociology Through Borrowing

''The Winner's Guide to Casino Gambling'' might have been taken to Atlantic City
and lost, and various careers might have been begun by those who are apparently
still in need of ''On Singing Onstage,'' ''Tap Dance: A Beginner's Guide,''
''The Complete Illustrated Book of Close-Up Magic,'' ''How to Break Into
Commercials and Modeling'' and ''How to Get Your Child Into Show Business.''

The lost-and-stolen lists can also be used as a kind of sociological gauge.

''Branch librarians have unique barometers of what is sometimes called 'the
metropolitan mind,' or spirit -like meteorologists measuring microclimates,''
Mr. Walker said.

''My patrons are out of work; they want books on coping with society's ills,''
said Phyllis Mack, who manages the Aguilar Branch in Harlem.

Theft, she said, is nil. But worn thin are test guides for high school
equivalency, post office carriers, police and secretarial exams.

What They Can't Find

Photography is also popular. ''They ask for 'anything on the black photographer
who made Harlem famous,' James Vanderzee.'' Dark-room manuals are never on the
shelf. When requests come for occult, horoscope, handwriting analysis or voodoo,
''they're already checked out,'' Mrs. Mack said.

At the Webster Branch on York Avenue, readers like biographies of ''people from
various ethnic groups who suffered - like war or the Holocaust -came to New
York, worked hard and became rich and famous,'' said the branch manager, Sandra
Beye.

'' 'Taking Care of Your Wealth' is my top category - mutual funds, stock market,
real estate, Sylvia Porter's guides, brownstone renovation,'' she went on.
''Older readers exhaust price guides for stamps, antiques, collectibles - no car
repair manuals - but decades of annual price guides to vintage models.''

Downtown at the Jefferson Market Branch, off 10th Street in Greenwich Village,
the most popular books ''have religion, poetry, house plants or art in the
titles,'' said the branch manager, Adele Bellinger.

Prop for a Party

At the general library at Lincoln Center, which specializes in the performing
arts, the coordinator, George Louis Mayer, said his patrons pore over scripts of
Noel Coward and Harold Pinter preparing for auditions. Also, ''not a day goes by
without requests for 'The Greatest Hits of 1936,' for a 50th anniversary,'' Mr.
Mayer said.

Jean-Paul Michaud, who is in charge of ordering reference books for the system,
says that page-nippers are as much a liability as book-nabbers.

Page-nippers slice key entries out of World Book encyclopedias, gelato recipes
from cookbooks, 1968 Fords from ''Chilton'' car repair manuals, routes from
''The Rand-McNally Road Atlas,'' batting averages from ''Bill James' Historical
Baseball Abstract,'' a list of the tallest people in the world from ''The
Guinness Book of World Records.''

The sick pillage medical books -''The Physician's Desk Reference,'' ''Taber's
Encyclopedic Medical Dictionary'' - removing pages that detail the side effects
of drugs.

''New Yorkers are a challenge,'' Mr. Michaud said. ''They approach knowledge
with such a sense of urgency.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Astoria Expands On Its Movie Heritage

BYLINE: By ANDREW L. YARROW

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1859 words


Giant klieg lights peer down from the 30-foot ceiling, and a melange of assorted
props, unused set walls, scrim and a tangle of wires surround two sets - a
spartan basement apartment and a plush suburban bedroom - at opposite ends of
Kaufman Astoria Studios' stage H. The tattered linoleum floor is strewn with
boxes, and a bare lightbulb hangs from rusting pipes in the apartment of
Brantley Foster, a Kansas boy who has come to New York to make his fortune.
Foster - played by Michael J. Fox - works in a mail room but has duped his
unwitting company into thinking he is an executive, all the while juggling two
romances. Mr. Fox, and the rest of the cast and crew of the new Herbert Ross
comedy, ''The Secret of My Success,'' are finishing their last day of shooting
at Astoria.

While a patient entourage of teen-age girls waits in the studio's lobby for a
glimpse of Mr. Fox, on nearby stage E - the country's largest outside Hollywood
- crews are busy assembling a house for Alan Pakula's ''Orphans,'' starring
Albert Finney. Filming began this month. And, in a few weeks, Paul Newman will
be directing Joanne Woodward in Tennessee Williams's ''Glass Menagerie.''

These productions have followed close on the heels of the $30 million Elaine
May-Dustin Hoffman-Warren Beatty extravaganza, ''Ishtar,'' and a new Woody Allen
film, both slated for release early next year. Universal, Orion, Lorimar and
20th Century-Fox have all recently worked at Astoria, according to Siobhan
McClory, an Astoria studio spokesman, and the nearly 30 features filmed there
since the studio's rebirth in 1977 have included ''Brighton Beach Memoirs,''
''The Cotton Club,'' ''The Verdict'' and ''Arthur.''

Between big-budget features, things are far from quiet at the sprawling,
19-building entertainment complex tucked away amid blocks of soot-darkened
warehouses, grimy auto-parts shops and tidy working-class rowhouses on the
low-slung, industrial streets of this heavily Greek-American Queens
neighborhood. The 66-year-old landmark studios -where the likes of Valentino,
Gloria Swanson and the Marx Brothers once performed - have rapidly become
today's pre-eminent outpost of movie making east of the Sierras, according to
many who have worked there.

''The facilities have improved over the last few years and are as good as
California, and the costs are about even,'' said David MacLeod, assistant
producer for ''Ishtar.''

''New York's pool of talent is great, and Astoria is a total support system for
a producer,'' said Dina Merrill, whose production company, Green Room Features,
moved to Astoria last year. ''For New York-based people, it's a way of doing
films without moving to California.''

And Woody Allen gave his imprimatur to the studio, saying, ''It's clean,
everything works, the dressing rooms are nice, and there's no other studio of
comparable size in New York.''

But feature films are not all that's happening at Astoria. ''There's a
misperception in Hollywood and elsewhere that this is just a film operation,''
said Tom Corcoran, a studio consultant. Dozens of music videos and commercials
have also been taped here.

And if George S. Kaufman's dreams come true - as they likely will for the
prominent real-estate developer and studio chairman - Astoria's six giant sound
stages, recording studios, radio stations, production companies and dozens of
other current occupants will soon be joined by an in-house film production
company, new video postproduction facilities, broadcasting studios and sound
stages, live theater, a film museum and a public tour.

Kaufman Astoria Studios is the largest complex in the rapidly expanding universe
of New York film production, but it is only one of hundreds of film and
television facilities in the city. Film making at Astoria and smaller New York
studios, such as Silvercup and Empire in nearby Long Island City and Camera Mart
in Manhattan, generated $2.3 billion in revenues in 1985, according to Patricia
Reed Scott, director of the Mayor's Office of Film, Theater and Broadcasting.
All told, 85 feature films and 95 television projects (excluding soap operas,
talk shows and news shows) originated in New York last year, numbers that rival
Los Angeles-based productions, she said.

Below the sound stages and past the commissary, adorned with Art Deco light
fixtures and giant 1920's movie stills, music is wafting down the freshly
painted corridors. A singer named Atanas is mixing his new single in the main
recording studio of Master Sound, while the co-owner, Ben Rizzi, surrounded by
sound, monitors a panel of hundreds of red and black buttons. Despite many
singers' and musicians' reluctance to leave Manhattan or Hollywood, the year-old
facility has lured such performers as Placido Domingo, Michael Jackson and
Marvin Hamlisch, and its commodious studio has held even a 57-piece orchestra
and 20-person chorus to record the ''Edwin Drood'' cast album.

Master Sound has been connected to a sophisticated fiber-optic-and-satellite
facility called Teleport that can instantly transmit music to record-pressing
plants and television or radio stations. Teleport also gives film makers the
capability of zapping videotaped dailies to Hollywood.

A few doors from Master Sound, the formerly Manhattan-based radio stations
WHN-AM and WQHT-FM have been on the air from Astoria since July. ''We have more
space, the costs are less, and it's like a family here,'' said Darryl Whitehead
of WHN.

Indeed, these are Astoria's principal selling points. In its one million square
feet of offices, stages and support facilities, some 800 employees of 80
businesses ranging from ad agencies and production companies to law offices and
photo studios are working in an atmosphere that combines an almost palpable
sense of dynamism and a sort of easygoing friendliness.

For years, it was a Hollywood cliche that if it needed New York, it could create
it on its giant back lots. Despite the fact that ''from Edison to Griffith,
nearly everything worth mentioning about the early American cinema took place
within a few miles of the Hudson,'' according to Richard Koszarski, curator of
film at Astoria's emerging film museum, the city's former leading role in
motion-picture history was all but forgotten from the 1930's to the late 70's.

In 1920, film studios already flourished from Manhattan to Mamaroneck, when
Adolph Zukor and Jesse Lasky's Famous Players opened their ''Long Island
Studio'' on 36th Street and 35th Avenue near Astoria's huge Steinway piano
factory. During the next 12 years - when Hollywood became synonymous with movies
- Famous Players-Lasky (renamed Paramount Pictures in 1927) made 114 movies
there, including such silent classics as the Marx Brothers' ''Cocoanuts'' and
Gloria Swanson's ''Manhandled.'' Limousines chauffeured screen legends like W.
C. Fields, Lillian Gish and Clara Bow across the Queensboro Bridge, and Ginger
Rogers, Louise Brooks and Claudette Colbert made their first major films at
Astoria.

In her memoirs, Gloria Swanson wrote: ''The place was full of free spirits,
defectors, refugees who were all trying to get away from Hollywood and its
restrictions. There was a a wonderful sense of revolution and innovation in the
studio in Queens.''

The Depression forced the studio to close, only to reopen in 1942 under the
auspices of the Army. From World War II through the Vietnam War, thousands of
training films were made at the rechristened Signal Corps Photographic Center.

After the Army moved out in 1971, schemes to make the studio a City University
film school were bandied about, recalled Lawrence Barr, a studio vice president
whose father was a prop man at Astoria 50 years ago. Beginning in 1976, a
cooperative effort involving the city, the Federal Government and unions,
businesses and individuals in the movie and television community reopened the
abandoned, vandalized studio. The nonprofit Astoria Motion Picture and
Television Foundation was established, and in 1977, Sidney Lumet -who had worked
at Astoria as a child actor in the 1939 film ''One Third of a Nation'' - ushered
in the renaissance of feature-film making at Astoria with his musical, ''The
Wiz.'' Although films such as ''Hair'' and ''All That Jazz'' followed, it was
obvious that substantial renovations were necessary if the studio was to
survive. Thus, in 1981, Mayor Koch awarded expansion and modernization rights to
the developer George Kaufman.

''When we took over,'' said Mr. Kaufman, ''the windows were out and there was
glass in the streets. We got $8 million from the government and raised another
$20 million to build, renovate, and buy land, but it would have cost at least
$100 million to build from scratch.'' Mr. Kaufman assembled a celebrity-studded
list of investors including Robert Sarnoff, Neil Simon, Alan King, Dina Merrill,
James Nederlander, Johnny Carson, Dick Cavett and Sidney Lumet.

''It took tremendous devotion and effort to get it going,'' said Queens Borough
President Claire Shulman, who helped chart the studio's future during New York's
fiscal crisis a decade ago. ''It's been a big win for the city: It's created
thousands of jobs, probably a billion dollars have turned over, and we've
brought movie making back to where it started.''

This history is but one chapter in the celluloid chronicle that will be the
subject of another component of Kaufman Astoria - the American Museum of the
Moving Image. After five years of planning and collecting, construction has just
begun, and Rochelle Slovin, the museum's executive director, hopes that the
first phase of the four-story, 60,000-square-foot museum will open by late 1987.
''It will tell the story of the techniques and technology of motion picture and
television history, and of how movies have affected people,'' she said.

Exhibits will range from costumes, props, cameras and fan magazines to hands-on
centers where visitors can take simulated screen tests, make personalized music
videos and learn the rudiments of film editing. In the meantime, temporary
exhibits are open an hour before the Friday and Saturday evening public
screenings at the museum's Zukor Theater.

Ms. Slovin is not the only one with big plans for the future. According to
Michael Bennahum, studio co-chief executive, an in-house production company that
will annually finance four to six low-budget features, television movies and
miniseries will soon be in business. So will new television production, editing
and other post-production facilities, as well as more radio stations and sound
stages. But Mr. Bennahum is most excited about a planned $8 million, 900-seat
theater devoted to ''experimental musical theater.''

The icing on the creative cake will come several years down the road, after 36th
Street is closed and landscaped, and great Hollywood-like iron gates are
installed at 35th and 34th Avenues. With the larger-than-life, Technicolor
visions that once were confined to that other coast, Mr. Kaufman and Mr.
Bennahum playfully envision a special subway train whisking visitors from
Manhattan to a flashy, high-tech studio tour, complete with magic house, special
effects and rides.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Alan Pakula and Albert Finney (Brian Hamill)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NICARAGUA'S U.N. VOICE

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO; Elaine Sciolino is chief of The Times's United
Nations bureau

SECTION: Section 6; Page 29, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4262 words


SHE HADN'T BEEN EXPECTED TO AT-tend the reception, but it was her first
invitation from the United States Mission to the United Nations, and as
Nicaragua's chief delegate, Nora Astorga accepted. When she shook hands with her
somewhat bemused American host, Vernon A. Walters, the chief United States
delegate, he told her, in impeccable Spanish, how pleased he was that she had
come. She complimented him on how well he spoke her native tongue.

After a polite stay, she crossed the street to the Security Council, and two
hours later railed against American aggression in Nicaragua. ''We hope reason
and wisdom will prevail over brute force,'' she said.

The United States may be waging a war by proxy against Nicaragua, but the two
countries still have diplomatic relations. So neither Ms. Astorga nor Mr.
Walters see any contradiction in being civil to each other. ''We said
nonsense,'' she says, ''but it was important nonsense.'' Mr. Walters, who
regularly attacks Nicaragua as a Marxist-Leninist dictatorship that has betrayed
its revolutionary goals, speaks graciously of Ms. Astorga's appearance. ''It
required a certain courage for her to come.''

In the male-dominated world of multilateral diplomacy, where protocol does much
to smooth the rough edges of political reality, a woman like Nora Astorga has a
distinct advantage. The 37-year-old diplomat is much sought after in an
environment where charm at evening receptions is often as important as skill in
corridor politicking.

Much of Ms. Astorga's time recently was spent sharpening strategy for the
just-under-way General Assembly session, at which Nicaragua will figure
prominently when the subject of Central America comes up for discussion early in
November. She plans to ask for reaffirmation of past resolutions during the
session and may introduce new ones, including a call for the United States to
abide by a World Court decision and a condemnation of new American aid to the
rebels.

Vernon Walters, reflecting the Reagan Administration's vision of Nicaragua as a
Marxist-Leninist dictatorship that persecutes Catholics, Jews and ethnic
minorities, notably the Miskito Indians, and one that has silenced the
opposition press, will campaign vigorously against the resolutions. But
Nicaragua, which enjoys the support of the Soviet bloc and that of the 99-nation
Nonaligned Movement, can be expected to win easy majorities.

Ms. Astorga serves as her country's only direct point of diplomatic contact with
much of the world, as Nicaragua has embassies in only 38 of the 158 member
states of the United Nations. Her mission within and outside the meeting halls
is straightforward: to win broader support for Nicaragua's revolution and to
discredit American policy in Central America. Even those who oppose her goals
acknowledge that she applies herself vigorously.

''She goes out of her way to get to know the key diplomats and explain her
country's policies,'' says a State Department official familiar with her
activities. ''But,'' he adds, ''even the best diplomat can go only so far with
what is clearly a lousy hand.''

Some of her critics charge that she is just a pretty face whose role is as a
propagandist. ''Norita is a resonance box and what is put into it is decided in
Managua,'' says Arturito Cruz, who worked with her in the foreign ministry
before he joined his father, the contra leader Arturo Cruz. Indeed, some
diplomats who deal with her regularly say she is overprogrammed. ''It is hard to
cut through her charm,'' says one third-world ambassador. ''I have spoken with
her many times but feel I don't know her.''

An Asian ambassador thinks that ''she's still a little green when it comes to
United Nations politics. She's still learning how to handle herself under
pressure.'' At Security Council meetings, she sometimes appears nervous,
chain-smoking Marlboros, fingering her jewelry, folding and unfolding her hands.
MS. ASTORGA PLAYED HER CARDS WELL DURING Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega
Saavedra's July visit to New York. She held private meetings with more than 60
chief delegates from different blocs and won Security Council support for the
World Court decision calling American aid to the contras illegal. She assisted
in drafting Mr. Ortega's speech to the Council, which was more conciliatory in
language than any he has made from the same podium. And she applied her legal
skills to the writing of the final Council resolution. The three-day debate
ended in an American veto, but his Security Council appearance gave Mr. Ortega a
pulpit from which to charge that the Reagan Administration was marching toward
another Vietnam in Central America.

The Ortega trip was as much a campaign to woo the American public as to win
votes in the Council, so Ms. Astorga doubled as a tour consultant. When she was
not in the Security Council, she was accompanying President Ortega and his wife
on a carefully planned street campaign that took him from the Brooklyn
waterfront to churches, including the Episcopalian Riverside Church and the Park
Slope Methodist Church, which has a sister parish in Nicarauga, and to housing
projects and newspaper editorial board offices. She even hinted subtly that Mr.
Ortega give shorter, more concise answers to reporters' questions.

When the singer Judy Collins asked Mr. Ortega, at a party given in his honor by
the folk singer Mary Travers of Peter, Paul and Mary, who supports many liberal
causes, why he didn't reopen the newspaper La Prensa or lift the state of
emergency as a ''gesture'' of Nicaragua's good will, Mr. Ortega called on Ms.
Astorga to respond. Her answer was standard Sandinista rhetoric. After telling
the 80 assembled entertainers, political figures, peace activists and
journalists that ''sometimes you have to take measures that are not popular
abroad,'' she added, ''You can't ask us to be perfect when we are in a state of
war.''

Ever since she arrived on the diplomatic scene in March, Nora Astorga has been a
tireless salesman for her country, carrying the cause of the Sandinistas beyond
the United Nations to the universities, churches and television audiences of
America. And now that Congress has approved $100 million in new aid to the
contra rebels, her visibility is sure to increase.

With her smartly cropped hair, painted nails, dress-for-success wardrobe and
Americanized English, Nora Astorga scarcely fits the Reagan Administration's
composite profile of the Sandinista. But what makes her especially intriguing is
that she comes with a ''past.'' It is difficult for her fellow diplomats to
begin a conversation about her without references to the incident that has made
her Nicaragua's most infamous female revolutionary. Some compare her to Judith,
the virtuous widow of the Old Testament who, to save her people, used her
sexuality to kill the Babylonian general Holofernes. Others say she is more like
Jael, who was praised in the Book of Judges for inviting an enemy general to her
tent, where she drove a peg through his head. Filippino women who fought with
the Aquino forces against President Ferdinand E. Marcos cite Nora Astorga as a
role model.

''She wears her past,'' observes one male Western ambassador, ''like other women
wear perfume.''

I T WAS ON MARCH 8, 1978, International Women's Day and a year before the
Sandinistas overthrew the regime of Anastasio Somoza Debayle, that Nora Astorga,
then a corporate lawyer and a divorced mother with two children, lured the top
Somozista general, Reynaldo Perez Vega, a reputed torturer and womanizer, to her
bedroom. When he began to undress, she gave a signal and three Sandinista
companeros burst out of hiding. They were supposed to kidnap the general for
interrogation and exchange him for political prisoners, she says, but when he
resisted, they slashed his throat with a knife.

Today, she has no regrets. ''It was not murder,'' she says, ''but political
justice.'' Sexual intercourse, however, would have been a different matter. ''I
couldn't have done it, even with all my political conviction,'' she says. ''He
was too much of a monster.''

Ms. Astorga claims to resent what she calls ''morbid curiosity'' about the
murder. But she acknowledges that had it not been for that one dramatic act of
revolution, she might scarcely be noticed. ''It's one of the high points of my
life,'' she admits matter-of-factly. ''It has not been a disadvantage. But I
insist, my life is more than that single act.''

The attention showered on Nora Astorga has made some of her female comrades a
bit resentful. ''Nora is famous outside Nicaragua because of one action,'' says
Sonia Roa-Suazo, a former revolutionary and foreign ministry official who broke
with the Sandinistas because she disagreed with the turn the revolution had
taken; she now lives in California. ''Inside Nicaragua, she's nobody special,
and there are many women who have done more than she.''

Her role in the general's murder cost Ms. Astorga the job as Nicaragua's
Ambassador to the United States two years ago. Although the State Department was
ready to accept her nomination, the Central Intelligence Agency let it be known
that the slain general had been a valuable C.I.A. ''asset,'' and that his murder
was a hostile act. Today there is an admission in Washington that politics
played no small part in her rejection.

The Reagan Administration could do little, however, to block Ms. Astorga's
nomination to the United Nations. She was, in fact, a natural choice: four years
as a Deputy Foreign Minister and three years as one of Nicaragua's delegates to
the United Nations had taught her the ropes of diplomacy, and she is articulate
in a way many of her less-educated revolutionary comrades are not. Mr. Ortega
denies that the appointment was an effort to tweak Mr. Reagan's nose, telling
reporters during his recent visit to New York that the Administration rejected
her because ''it was afraid of the message she would bring to American public
opinion. However, we feel honored that she represents us at the United Nations,
a body that is so important to the peoples of the world.''

Ms. Astorga, also represents Nicaragua at various overseas conferences, most
recently at the Nonaligned Movement's triennial meeting earlier this month in
Zimbabwe. But despite her intense campaigning to have Nicaragua named as the
site of the movement's summit conference in 1989, a decision was postponed for
at least a year. ''There is a lot of concern that since Nicaragua's whole
domestic and foreign policy is geared against the United States, it might not
have the proper focus,'' explained an Asian diplomat keenly involved in the
Nonaligned Movement. The chairmanship falls to the leader of the host country
and guarantees high visibility as the movement's spokesman. Disappointed but
undaunted, Ms. Astorga means to try again. ''It is a very important goal for
us,'' she says, ''and we feel we could strengthen the movement.''

N ORA ASTORGA, who uses her maiden name, came late to revolution. Born in
Managua, she was the first child of a lumber exporter and rancher who pushed her
to excel and a homemaker who never taught her how to cook or sew. Although the
Astorgas were not part of Nicaraguan aristocracy, they and their four children
lived comfortably in servant-staffed houses. The family had been closely
associated with the Somozas since the days when Nora Astorga's grandfather
served as that regime's defense minister.

Although as a young girl she played with peasant children during summers on the
family cattle ranch, still managed by her brother, in the town of Villa Somoza,
now Villa Sandino, those experi-ences did not sufficiently raise her social
conscience enough to keep her from spending Saturdays at the pool or on the golf
course of Managua's only private country club. Of those days, she says, ''I
wanted to get married to someone with an aristocratic name, have kids, and,
well, get to the top socially.''

She also wanted to study in Paris, but her father thought the United States
would be a better choice. As a sociology major at Catholic University in
Washington, she was untouched by the turbulent days of the antiwar and
civil-rights movements in the United States. She calls her American experience
''the two most superficial years of my life.''

On her father's orders, she returned home to study law at the Jesuit-run
Universidad Centroamericana in Managua. It was there, she says, that she
realized her life had little purpose. Influenced by a fellow student, she began
working secretly for the Sandinistas, running errands, passing messages, buying
supplies, transporting the movement's leaders in her Opel station wagon and
giving them sanctuary in her family's houses, without her parents' knowledge.

When she was 22, she told her parents that she was going to marry Jorge Jenkins,
a student activist who is now Nicaragua's Ambassador to Brazil. Her father had a
heart attack the next day. She married Mr. Jenkins in a traditional, Catholic
ceremony that, despite their opposition, her family attended. The young couple
spent the following year in Italy, where he studied anthropology while she
studied banking law and computer programming. Five years and two children later,
they separated. ''He was a bit too machista,'' Ms. Astorga says, ''and I was a
bit too self-sufficient.''

Her bourgeois life style as a corporate lawyer for a leading Nicaraguan
construction company provided an ideal cover for Sandinista assignments. But she
soon tired of the minor tasks she was given. ''One day,'' when she was 29, she
recalls, ''I didn't mind anymore about my life. I was willing to leave
everything I had, including my kids. I told my companeros, I am ready to do
more, something dramatic.''

Her involvement in the General Perez Vega affair determined her course. At the
training camp to which she fled after the murder, Ms. Astorga learned how to
fire weapons, and soon she was leading a military squad. But when she became
pregnant with the child of her lover, Jose Maria Alvarado, now a member of
President Ortega's inner circle, she was sent to a desk job across the border in
Costa Rica. After the Sandinistas took over in July 1979, her legal background
made her a natural choice for the job of chief special prosecutor in the special
tribunals for Somoza ''war criminals.'' But her relationship with Mr. Alvarado
unraveled after they had a second child. Ms. Astorga says, ''The truth is, with
a revolution and kids, you don't have much time for a husband.''

N ORA ASTORGA moves easily in the rarified atmosphere of the United Nations,
where only three other women, from the Seychelles, Belgium and Barbados, lead
their countries' missions. It is a culture that Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the former
chief United States delegate, characterized as full of more ''rank sexism'' than
''any other arena I have ever been in in my life.''

But Ms. Astorga's feminism is a Latin one, and she admits that she fully enjoys
the perquisites of being a woman in a man's world. While Dr. Kirkpatrick
steadfastly boycotted the delegates' lounge, a kind of male club where
horse-trading is conducted over cigars and Scotch, Ms. Astorga is a regular
visitor, kissing and shaking hands with colleagues as she makes her entrance.
''It's the place to be,'' she says, ''and I like the attention.''

Her conversation may be filled with descriptions of how a vast northern empire
is poised to invade her country at any moment, but Nora Astorga never raises her
voice and she always smiles.

She seldom goes unnoticed, though. It is not that she is classically beautiful.
Her teeth are crooked and she has a graceless walk, but with her high
cheekbones, heart-shaped face and sleek, tall frame - 5 feet 11 inches in the
high heels she insists on wearing - she cannot help but stand out. Her
movements, in fact, are so carefully watched that during a recent Security
Council debate, a woman diplomat from Latin America says, ''the moment Nora
Astorga crossed her legs, all the eyes in the room were off the speaker and on
her.''

By 9 A.M., she is usually at her desk in the Nicaraguan Mission's office on
Second Avenue, where she meets with her deputy, Julio Icaza; her counselor,
Arelys Bellorini, who handles public affairs, and the two other political
officers on her staff. She also talks daily by phone with the Foreign Minister
Miguel d'Escoto Brockmann or one of the vice ministers and plows through the
long daily briefings they telex to her from Managua.

Just before noon, she crosses over to the United Nations, where she meets with
as many as a dozen diplomats during a workday that ends no earlier than 8:00
P.M. and is often extended by diplomatic social engagements.

Like her less revolutionary counterparts, Ms. Astorga frequently conducts
business over lunch at chic and expensive East Side restaurants.

''She invited me to lunch and to my surprise, I was alone with her,'' says one
middle-aged diplomat. ''Obviously, she wanted to create sympathy for herself,
that she was far from being a radical Marxist-Leninist. Alas, for me, I don't
think there was anything else on her mind.''

In the evenings, Ms. Astorga sometimes invites her fellow diplomats to the
theater or ballet, her office doubling as a dressing room as she changes from
tailored gabardine into flowing white chiffon or green silk.

Despite an easygoing social exterior, she remains an intensely private person.
She has confided to only a few close associates that it was a mastectomy that
kept her out of work for seven weeks, and even though she has been undergoing
chemotherapy, she has immersed herself in a full work schedule. ''I just don't
dwell on it,'' she says. ''It's not that important.'' To escape ''the noise and
dirt'' of Manhattan, Ms. Astorga rents a six-bedroom house that sits on a creek
near a large bank of trees in Scarsdale, an elite Westchester suburb. It is
furnished mainly with wicker furniture from local shops, and decorated with
feminist art, some with revolutionary themes, which she brought from Nicaragua.

The house is never empty. There are her three daughters and a son who range in
age from 5 to 14, two teen-age nieces, a widowed mother, a maid, a cook and a
chauffeur, who drives Ms. Astorga to work every morning in a 1978 blue Mercedes,
a relic of prerevolutionary days. Her children and nieces all attend Scarsdale's
prestigious public schools. In November, her household will include an adopted
son, the offspring of a woman friend killed during the revolution.

Ms. Astorga takes a somewhat cavalier attitude toward protection for herself or
her family: ''If something is going to happen to us, it's going to happen with
three bodyguards or none.''

The neighbors don't seem to mind that the representative of a country with which
the United States maintains a de facto state of war lives in their midst. ''She
is an extremely well-bred, well-mannered, attractive woman,'' says Betty
Zentall, the real-estate agent who rented Ms. Astorga the house for $4,500 a
month. ''I haven't heard a word of complaint.''

Ms. Astorga rankles at criticism that Government funds are being squandered on
lavish living at a time when war-torn Nicaragua is facing a worsening economic
crisis. She defends the $1,500 that the mission spends monthly on ''diplomatic
representation'' as appropriate. ''In order to fulfill my duties, I have to do
certain things,'' she says. ''I don't live like a millionaire. But you can't
expect me to wear blue jeans to the Security Council.'' MS. ASTORGA'S AT-tempts
at ''selling'' her nation to America is almost as im-portant for Nicaragua as is
her work at the United Nations. In this, she easily upstages her country's
Ambassador in Washington, Carlos Tunnerman Bernheim, a reserved 53-year-old
former Minister of Education whose speeches sometimes resemble academic
lectures. At a speech to students at New York University, Ms. Astorga portrayed
Sandinism this way: ''Communists we are not; Marxists we are not,'' adding, ''We
just don't believe that Communism or Socialism is a contagious disease.'' At a
funeral service for a Dominican sister who had been active in Nicaragua, her
eulogy moved the assemblage at Manhattan's St. Vincent Ferrer Church to tears.
At a recent opening of Nicaraguan paintings in a chic SoHo gallery, she
attracted almost as much attention as the art.

She also actively promotes the ''sister city'' program that Nicaragua has with
about a dozen American municipalities, from Concord, N. H., to Portland, Ore.,
and she is planning a speaking tour to some of them this fall.

Much of the publicity about Nicaraguan activities in the United States is
handled by a small public relations firm, Agendas International, which was
founded three years ago by Darryl L. Hunt and Donald J. Casey, former Maryknoll
priests. The two had met Nicaragua's Foreign Minister d'Escoto 30 years ago in
Maryknoll College and have been believers in the Sandinistas ever since.

For $25,000 a month, the duo consult almost daily both with Ms. Astorga and
Ambassador Tunnerman in Washington. They plan advance work for official trips in
the United States, help write speeches, arrange public appearances and prep
visiting dignitaries for press conferences and television appearances.

But even the most sophisticated media campaign cannot help Ms. Astorga to defend
some of Nicaragua's positions. When the Reagan Administration accused Nicaragua
of invading Honduras with 1,500 troops last spring, for example, she called
press conferences and went on national television to charge the Administration
with ''lies and fabrications.''

Although it was not an ''invasion,'' Nicaraguan troops had, indeed, crossed the
border to attack contra camps, an admission Ms. Astorga even now is loathe to
make. ''They say their camps are in Nicaragua,'' she says. ''That's what we say,
too. So we have destroyed these camps. That explains why it was not an act of
aggression against Honduras.''

Some of her fellow diplomats call her evasive on other thorny subjects. She
refuses, for example, to explain why Nicaragua abstains every year when most of
the nonaligned nations have voted to condemn the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
Instead, she refers to a 1980 speech by one of her predecessors in which Afghan
rebels were referred to as ''mercenaries and counterrevolutionaries.'' On why
her country supports Iran in its war with Iraq, she says, ''I don't usually
comment on internal things in other countries.'' She denies that Nicaragua's
revolution resembles that of Cuba. When pressed, she claims ignorance: ''I just
don't know Cuba in detail to pinpoint things that are good or are bad. The Cuban
people believe what they have is good for them.''

Her responses accurately reflect the policies articulated in Nicaragua. The
closing of the opposition newspaper La Prensa was necessary, she says, because
''it was financed indirectly by the C.I.A., and you cannot give your enemies all
the possibilities to harm you.'' Two grants totaling $200,000 had been awarded
to La Prensa by the National Endowment for Democracy, a private American group
that channels money from the United States Information Agency to various
institutions in countries where democracy is deemed fragile or nonexistent
($50,000 was withheld after La Prensa was shut down). The closing of La Prensa
eliminated the only press opposition to the Ortega regime.

As for recent measures taken against churchmen, Ms. Astorga says that Bishop
Pablo Antonio Vega had to be expelled from Nicaragua because ''he held many open
meetings with counterrevolutionaries and was practically asking for U.S.
intervention. Just because he's a priest doesn't mean he's above the law.'' In a
country where the populace is overwhelmingly Catholic, and where a war with the
church would undercut the revolution's legitimacy, she is quick to add, ''This
action is not against the church; it is against an individual who also happens
to be a church person.''

Pope John Paul II said he ''strongly deplored'' the expulsion, which he called
''an almost incredible act'' that recalled the ''dark ages'' of Latin-American
anticleri-cism. A meeting on the church-state rift has been scheduled for this
weekend between President Ortega and the Nicaraguan Primate, Miguel Cardinal
Obando y Bravo.

As for her own commitment to religion, Ms. Astorga, who attended mass daily
until she was 17, says she is no longer a practicing Catholic. But she is
raising her children as Catholics, and is herself still religious enough to have
received communion this summer at the 25th anniversary celebration of Foreign
Minister d'Escoto's ordination as a Maryknoll priest in Ossining, N.Y.

Although the revolution she defends has lost much of its original luster for
countries that had hoped it would usher in democracy after decades of
dictatorship, Nora Astorga has won the respect of many of her colleagues at the
United Nations. ''She functions like any good ambassador overseas,'' says Cavan
O. Hogue, Australia's Deputy Permanent Representative at the United Nations, who
first met Ms. Astorga in 1982 when he was Ambassador to Nicaragua. ''She doesn't
rush around slapping backs and thumping tubs. She certainly doesn't act like a
Mata Hari.''

Even Vernon Walters, a retired three-star general and former Deputy Director of
Central Intelligence, has some kind words for an opponent whose debating skills
rival his. ''She defends the interests of her country very adequately,'' he
says. ''And I'm glad she realizes all generals are not alike.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Nora Astorga in chair and at Security Council session
(Anthony Barboza; Brian Alpert/Keystone); Photo of Nora Astorga with small
audience after Security Council session (Brian Alpert/Keystone) (Pg. 94)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

WHAT STRANGERS? WHAT GATES?

BYLINE: By Ronald Sanders; Ronald Sanders, author of ''The High Walls of
Jerusalem,'' a history of the Balfour Declaration, is writing a history of
Jewish emigration from Central and Eastern Europe since the 1880's.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1692 words


ARAB AND JEW Wounded Spirits in a Promised Land. By David K. Shipler. 596 pp.
New York: Times Books. $22.50.

THIS year, around the beginning of summer, a quiet equinox occurred in Middle
Eastern history. Since then, the State of Israel has lived with the West Bank,
the Golan Heights and the Gaza Strip as part of its internal life longer than it
has lived without them.

Whoever was in Israel before June 1967 can remember what now seems another way
of life - something of a provincial idyll, comfortable in its precarious way.
There was, to be sure, a whimsical and hazardous border: in the case of
Jerusalem, it zigzagged right through the heart of the city. There also were the
ever-recurring Arab guerrilla raids. But in the everyday round, it was not hard
to become persuaded that these dangers were no worse than the muggings and riots
then considered to be the standard fare of American cities. As a military
threat, the Arabs seemed to have been dealt with once and for all in 1956. And
in the realm of the conscience, though there were the refugees just across the
border and the second-class status of Israeli Arabs to perturb the morally
serious, the Arab question usually yielded to the more urgent ones of the time:
how to integrate the newly arrived Oriental and North African Jewish population,
or what were to be the goals of the Jewish state now that the old pioneering
spirit was giving way to an atmosphere of relative affluence and
bureaucratization. Conscience in those days could be mainly ethnocentric.

All this has radically changed in an interval during which, as David K. Shipler
observes in his powerful new book, ''Arab and Jew: Wounded Spirits in a Promised
Land,'' a whole generation that has ''never known a time when the West Bank was
not under Israeli occupation'' has grown up to serve in the Israeli Army. That
old rambling border and the provinvial spirit it delineated are now buried like
so many archeological treasures beneath the throb of a world-historical
confrontation. In the Israel of today, Jewish history is once again, as it had
been so often before, a problem for the conscience of mankind. The questions of
Arab and Jew, Israeli and Palestinian, never really minor ones, have rudely
emerged since June 1967 among the central political concerns of our time. And
enormous quantities of words and headlines have been written about them. INDEED,
it hardly seemed possible that there was anything more to say on the subject.
Yet Mr. Shipler, a major supplier of material for those headlines from 1979 to
1984, when he was chief of the Jerusalem bureau of The New York Times, has done
precisely that. Out of five years' worth of notes he has produced a definitive
report of enormous size that, while exhaustively covering the whole often
familiar ground, manages to do so with remarkable freshness and originality. Its
18 chapters and nearly 600 pages seem to leave no aspect of the complex
Arab-Jewish relationship untouched, ranging through such contrasting topics as
war and friendship, terrorism and intermarriage, reciprocal myths and
understandings, social and sexual attraction and repulsion, conflicting
nationalisms - even the complementary roles played by the Holocaust in the
outlooks of the two protagonists - all presented in an abundance of narratives,
anecdotes and conversations that never seem hackneyed, even when they dwell on
points often repeated in the past.

''I personally feel,'' a woman named Deborah Reich tells the author, ''that the
major psychological mechanism operating on both the Jewish and Arab sides for
the past several decades now has been denial. Golda [Meir] said there is no
Palestinian people; Arafat said the Jews are just a religious group. You're
going to tell me who I am? That's what they do, on both sides. It really is two
legitimate claims to the same square inch of turf.'' Now this is familiar stuff;
but what makes it fresh is that it is coming from the mouth of a young American
Jew working in Israel in a program to promote Arab-Jewish cooperation, and doing
so in a mood reminiscent of that of the old pioneers. ''I think,'' she says,
''that bi-cultural cooperation is more beautiful than a people who has been
dispossessed for two thousand years having its own state. It's not that that
dream isn't beautiful, but this dream is even more beautiful.''

This is truly an idealism for the time when Israel is passing from its second 19
years into its third. Moreover, there is something utterly American about it -
as there is about this whole book, from its moments of most painful indictment
to those of its most generous-hearted amiability. ''I am neither Arab nor Jew,''
Mr. Shipler announces in his opening sentence - but he is most certainly an
American.

Indeed, like so many of his countrymen - gentile or Jew - who have spent time in
Israel, Mr. Shipler clearly has been attracted by the openness, energy and often
cantankerous individualism of this brash little democracy that can often seem a
far-flung extension of America itself, so redolent of both its virtues and its
faults. Only an American reporter, for example, could have achieved the kind of
intimate exasperation that characterizes Mr. Shipler's account of the background
to the Sabra and Shatila disaster, when Lebanese Christian militiamen entered
the camps there, which were under Israeli protection, and unexpectedly massacred
hundreds of Palestinians. He writes, ''The degree to which Israeli policy-makers
felt themselves capable of preventing [the camps from again becoming P.L.O.
bases] corresponded to their growing and mistaken pride in themselves as
sophisticated and streetwise players in the rough games of Arab rivalries,
vengeance, and politics.'' This piece of street wisdom is coming from someone
who speaks, as it were, the same language as the men he is criticizing. For
there is a subtext throughout Mr. Shipler's book that amounts to being a
vicarious dialogue inside the American conscience. The book even abounds with
the presence of American-born Israelis at almost every turn, engaged in a
virtual family quarrel. They loom large among both its heroes and its villains:
on the one side are people like Deborah Reich; Rabbi David Hartman, who dream of
an Israel that will be a truly ''pluralistic'' society like the one he came
from; and Clinton Bailey, an eminent authority on Bedouin culture, who
personally drives the jeep in which he roams the desert for research. On the
other are the religious extremist Meir Kahane and a striking number of the more
fanatical Gush Emunim settlers on the West Bank, who see themselves as the new
incarnations of the old pioneering spirit. The era of the Lebanon invasion of
1982 has fully aroused the post-Vietnam feelings of all these Americans, as well
as of Mr. Shipler himself. His discussion of racial attitudes also takes on an
American tinge, leading him off the mark occasionally, as when he seeks
parallels between the anti-Arab attitudes of lower-class Sephardic Jews and the
antiblack prejudices of blue-collar Americans in the 1960's.

I was even inspired to come up with an American illustration of my own when, at
one point, Mr. Shipler extended his moral disapproval to the many Jews who were
reluctant to take their medical problems to Arab clinics and hospitals during a
strike by Israeli doctors in March 1983. I remember several years ago meeting an
American Christian woman living in Jerusalem, where her husband had been brought
by his career, who had strong pro-Arab sympathies and was testy regarding the
Jews, but who admitted that she had gone to the Hadassah hospital to give birth
to both of her children. Has the day come yet when the choice of an Arab or a
Jewish hospital in such circumstances would be a matter of indifference to a
person of Western culture? When it does, then perhaps some of the other
quasi-American prejudices noted among Israelis by Mr. Shipler may also
disappear. BUT this too is a family quarrel. For it is noteworthy how often the
moral criteria to which Mr. Shipler resorts, as a gentile American of
conscience, are the same as those that would be applied by any Jew of
conscience, American, Israeli or other, however varying their conclusions might
be. These above all include criteria deriving from that ultimate reference point
for the moral history of our time, the Holocaust. ''The Holocaust never quite
leaves Israeli Jews alone,'' Mr. Shipler writes. ''Arabs use it against them,''
he continues, ''and they use it against Arabs. Jews use it against other Jews.
Even the president of the United States, it seems, can use it against the prime
minister of Israel.'' ''Mr. President, I know what is a holocaust,'' wrote a
deeply offended Prime Minister Menachem Begin to President Reagan after Mr.
Reagan had used the word to describe the Israeli bombardment of West Beirut.

One of Mr. Shipler's most impassioned moments comes when he accompanies a
Swedish reporter, Cordelia Edvardson, a Jewish survivor of Auschwitz, to the
Ansar prison camp built by Israelis in southern Lebanon during the 1982 war.
''Ansar is Auschwitz!'' the Arab prisoners chant over and over, and when a
leader of the prisoners' committee expresses these sentiments to him and his
companion, Mr. Shipler waits tensely for her to reply in terms of her own
experience. But she does not, and when he later asks her why, she says: ''It
would have been unfair. He was behind bars, and I was free.''

Then Mr. Shipler tells the story of a mother who waited at the front door when
her son came home from his military service in Lebanon; it was just after the
Sabra and Shatila massacre, and she would not let him in until he had answered
questions clearing himself of any involvement in it. ''His mother was not sure
that he was telling her the truth, and she is not sure today. But she let him
come home. It was her most painful moment in all the years she had had this boy,
she said to friends. She was a survivor of Hitler's concentration camps.''
Whether deservedly or not, Israelis and Americans will always be haunted by that
comparison: it is proof of their common morality.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

A picture caption accompanying a review of David K. Shipler's ''Arab and Jew''
on Sept. 28 incorrectly located the town of Hebron. It is in the
Israeli-occupied West Bank.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jew praying at the Cave of Machpelah in Hebron while two Arabs
sit in background (Magnum/Peter Marlow)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NAMELESS LOVERS CHASED THROUGH HELL

BYLINE: By Caryn James; Caryn James is an editor of The Book Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1512 words


THE STARS AT NOON By Denis Johnson. 181 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $15.95.

FOR Denis Johnson, hell is a world without meaning - or, as the flippant,
philosophical narrator of ''The Stars at Noon'' tells us, hell is Nicaragua in
1984. She is a down-and-out American trapped in Managua and through her Mr.
Johnson creates a vision bleaker than the madness and murder of his first novel,
''Angels,'' more desperate than the postapocalyptic world of his second,
''Fiskadoro.'' What better setting for such pessimism than the political and
moral morass of 1980's Nicaragua? Here, as the narrator says, is ''the
hyper-new, all-leftist future coming at us at the rate of rock-n-roll,'' where
she finds no usable past or hopeful future, just a torturous present of
ramshackle McDonald's and starving children.

An unreliable narrator especially short on veracity, she claims she has come to
Nicaragua to discover ''the exact dimensions of Hell,'' but seems bent on losing
all trace of consciousness or conscience. We never learn her name; she is
appalled by the corruption of both the Sandinistas and ''the stupid CIA.'' And
though she arrived in Central America as a Witness for Peace-style observer, she
lasted two and a half days before escaping into Managua's shady underworld,
where she halfheartedly masquerades as a journalist, sidelines as a prostitute
and lives on her cache of black market Nicaraguan cordobas. In the Managua she
has discovered, everything is debased - the currency, the minor officials who
sleep with her and renege on their part of the bargain, and especially language
itself.

The English businessman who starts as her john and becomes her lover is another
nameless sort, a weak-jawed Brit caricature who passes industrial secrets to
rival countries and calls it humanitarianism. ''A humanitarian in Hell,'' the
narrator thinks. ''This guy, at some point in his earthly existence, must have
been truly evil, possibly Hitlerian.'' It's true, he's in trouble. His company
and the Costa Ricans knew of a possible oil deposit under Lake Nicaragua; in the
interest of fair play, he gave the information to the Nicaraguans, who
apparently told the Costa Ricans they'd been double-crossed. Now the Costa
Ricans are after the Englishman, and from there the plot grows as convoluted as
Mr. Johnson can make it. The narrator's assessment of things is what truly
matters, though, and with her determined amorality she easily equates industrial
espionage and political power plays with the Holocaust.

The hell Mr. Johnson invents for this muddled narrator is no Dantesque vision of
sin and retribution, but a more ironic, sinister inferno than any she could
imagine. He cruelly grants both her desires - for nihilism and meaning. ''I
tried to lock my attention onto the problems ahead of me and mislaid all sense
of the goal,'' she says while driving to meet a man who might exchange her
illegal cordobas for the dollars needed to buy a plane ticket out. ''The fumes
and smells and roaring temperature of Managua's roadways savaged all mental
effort.'' Yet, tipped off that the Nicaraguan officials suspect her of something
- related, she guesses, to ''the Englishman's activities as a blabbermouth''
-she instinctively tries to warn him. Suddenly, the Nicaraguans are after both
of them, and as they head for the border she glides straight toward the
emotional bond she so consciously avoids.

Abruptly, the novel takes on elements of an escape thriller. Will the
Nicaraguans let them cross the border? Will the Costa Ricans let him live if
they do? More important, will she betray him to save herself? An American -
presumably a C.I.A. agent, though nothing is certain or admitted in this shadowy
world - tracks them and asks her to sell out her lover in exchange for her own
freedom. The novel's plot is too tangled, the players' loyalties too obscure,
for real suspense here. In this country where good and bad bleed into each
other, evil is embodied in the omnipresent, devilish American agent, who seems
to collude with everyone - Sandinistas, contras, Costa Ricans - and who talks in
''burned-out words'' about Vietnam. The language of war and protest is as dead
as the language of love, which is mocked by the narrator's heartfelt,
superficial words about the Englishman: ''I loved him! In my heart, my belly, in
my bones, my teeth, I loved him!''

In her careless way, she is relieved to have her choices narrowed by border
guards and the American and the pressure of circumstances. And though she later
says, ''I had a revelation. Nothing fancy. . . . Either I'm Christ or I'm Judas:
it's kill or be killed,'' her discovery is glib, despite its ''nothing fancy''
disclaimer. It points to the novel's most serious flaw - the narrator is a
cardboard mouthpiece for the author. With her religious imagery and taste for
irony, her philosophical attitudes toward everything from her own prostitution
to Managua's oppressive heat, it's not plausible that she could remain so
willfully dazed. Mr. Johnson's first-rate soul-searching is trapped in her
second-rate mind, which frequently borrows the author's eloquence and
intellectual rigor. MR. JOHNSON has always been scrupulous about finding a
language to suit his themes; the straightforward prose of ''Angels'' matched its
working-class tale of crime and punishment, and the poetic flights and patois
dialogue of ''Fiskadoro'' suited a world that could be approached only through
the imagination. In ''The Stars at Noon,'' language slides off its moorings, as
style mirrors substance almost too well. Just as often as it is debased, the
language is inflated by the empty abstractions of the narrator, who is ''trying
to make clear what can't be understood or forgiven'' - whether she is tortured
by free-floating original sin or by political murders she has witnessed, the
author doesn't say.

The novel's epigraph, from a W. S. Merwin poem -''The stars at noon, / While the
light worships its blind god'' - is an encapsulated version of the relationship
between these two nameless characters in their unjust world. And like much of
Mr. Johnson's own poetry (the most recent volume is ''The Incognito Lounge''),
this novel is an encapsulated narrative, begging to be fleshed out. Still, it is
daring, this political novel that disdains politics, this philosophical work
that rejects all philosophies. Coming just a year after ''Fiskadoro,'' it
suggests that Denis Johnson is one of our most inventive, unpredictable
novelists.

BRANDED SOULS Managua is like New York City in summer -Manhattan, in a sense, is
a Third World nation -although the only Managuan building fat as a New York one
is TELCOR. . . . Here and there in this country there were telephones, but if
one wanted to call Planet Earth, one put the call through at TELCOR, the small,
timeless, dead center of Hell, where souls were being branded with the shapes of
their hope. . . . Eventually they call a name that sounds like yours and shout
the number of the booth they expect you to enter, and either you get one without
a door, so that everybody waiting to make whatever calls the burning
circumstances are forcing them to make can now memorize the names of your
contacts and trace the character of your desires, or you close yourself up
behind the Plexiglas while the chamber fills with your used breath until you
really can just no longer speak.
  - From ''The Stars at Noon.''

WRITING IN A FEMALE VOICE Denis Johnson visited Nicaragua and Costa Rica two
years ago with the idea of writing a magazine article. But he found after being
there ''a minute or two'' that people might take seriously what he had to say in
nonfiction, a prospect that didn't sit easily. So he chose what intrigued him
most -the Central American atmosphere - as the backdrop for ''The Stars at
Noon,'' a spiritual allegory about hell. The female narrator has no name; nor do
the characters she runs into. ''I thought it was appropriate that the people in
hell wouldn't have any names,'' Mr. Johnson said. ''She refers to a couple of
people with names, then withdraws them.'' He acknowledges it is unusual for a
man to write in a woman's voice. ''I would have felt uncomfortable, but I had
done a number of dramatic monologues in the female voice,'' he said in a recent
telephone interview.

The 37-year-old poet and novelist began his career at the University of Iowa
Writers' Workshop. His first collection of poetry was published in 1969. Two
volumes have appeared since, and a fourth, ''The Veil,'' is due next spring. At
his 29-acre ranch in northern California's Mendocino County, Mr. Johnson
alternates between writing poetry and fiction. ''Depends on the day,'' he said.
Whatever he writes, he is speedy. The latest novel - a fourth is in the works -
came particularly fast, taking eight to nine months. ''I felt rushed because I
wasn't really steeped in the locale. The feeling of the locale was leaving me
rapidly, so I wrote it fast. I wanted to give it the kind of sensation that it
had left in me.''
  - Jane Perlez

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Denis Johnson with his dog Harold; drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COLD WAR ON CAMPUS

BYLINE: By David M. Oshinsky; David M. Oshinsky, who teaches history at Rutgers
University, is the author of ''A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe
McCarthy.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1728 words


NO IVORY TOWER McCarthyism and the Universities. By Ellen W. Schrecker. 437 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $20.95.

DURING the late 1940's and 1950's, several hundred college professors were
questioned by Congressional committees about their political beliefs and
associations. Most of them were former Communists or left-wing radicals, and
many refused to cooperate. Although few of these recalcitrant professors were
cited for contempt, the vast majority of them were punished by their employers.
Some were censured or placed on probation; others were fired, then blacklisted
for years. ''No Ivory Tower'' by Ellen Schrecker is both a history of the purges
and a sounding board for the victims, many of whom Ms. Schrecker has diligently
tracked down. Their vivid recollections are the best part of an otherwise
familiar story.

Ms. Schrecker, who teaches history at Princeton, begins her book by charting the
development of ''academic freedom,'' a rather elusive concept. She notes that it
was never intended to protect a dissenter who brought trouble to his school.
There were always limits to the amount of political activity a college would
tolerate, and these limits were defined by groups outside the academy. Until the
cold war, however, a dissenter might be banished for a specific act but rarely
for his party affiliations. The most celebrated exception occurred in New York
City after the investigation by the Rapp-Coudert committee of the New York State
legislature of 1940, when 31 Communist professors from the city colleges were
fired or forced to resign. But even here, the professors were dismissed because
they lied about their party membership, not because they belonged to the party.

The cold war made things worse. The Soviet takeovers in Europe, the reports of
Stalin's brutality, the war in Korea, the trials of Alger Hiss and the
Rosenbergs - all served to erode the public's slim tolerance for left-wing
political activity. In Washington, Congressional committees began to investigate
''Communist influence'' in a host of professions, while the Truman
Administration ordered a sweeping loyalty program for Federal employees. At the
same time, state and local governments chipped in with loyalty oaths and lesser
remedies. Ohio declared Communists ineligible for unemployment benefits.
Birmingham, Ala., ordered them to leave town. In New Rochelle, N.Y., an
ordinance designed to register Communists netted one perplexed citizen. He came
to police headquarters thinking it applied to commuters.

In 1948, a special committee of the Washington state legislature decided to
investigate subversive influences at the University of Washington in Seattle. It
was, Ms. Schrecker writes, ''the first, and in many ways the most important,
academic freedom case of the entire Cold War.'' Testimony was taken from
''expert'' witnesses like J. B. Matthews, a former missionary and anti-Communist
crusader, who claimed, among other things, that Dwight Eisenhower, then
president of Columbia University, was coddling Communists there. Eleven Seattle
professors appeared. Several admitted that they were former Communists; the rest
refused to say anything at all. When the hearings ended, six witnesses were
hauled before a faculty review committee. The university fired three of them,
all of whom had tenure and two of whom were members of the Communist Party. The
other three - all former Communists -were put on probation.

The response was significant. The academy did not rise up in protest. Most
professors (and virtually all administrators) agreed that Communists should be
barred from teaching in colleges. They claimed that academic freedom did not
protect party membership because the party was a conspiratorial organization
that demanded blind allegiance from its followers. In some ways, however, this
issue was more symbolic than real. There were not many Communists left in
academia in 1948. Most of them had quit the party - or the profession - long
before. In fact, the key issue raised by the Seattle experience was what to do
about faculty witnesses who refused to cooperate with legislative committees.
That issue would affect many colleges and hundreds of lives.

As professors were subpoenaed in significant numbers by these committees, the
Fifth Amendment became a common line of defense. Some took the Fifth as a matter
of principle. Others took it to avoid testifying about their colleagues or to
hide something. Whatever their reasons, these professors could count on a
disciplinary hearing when they returned to campus.

Ms. Schrecker describes a number of these hearings in meticulous detail. At most
of them, she notes, the faculty committees were unsympathetic to their ''Fifth
Amendment'' colleagues, and were quite willing to see them dismissed. At a few
places, like Rutgers University, the committees recommended the retention of
these dissidents on the grounds that their teaching records were impeccable, and
that professors deserved the same constitutional protection as everybody else.
(Rutgers fired them anyway.) Wherever possible, Ms. Schrecker has captured the
memories of the victims, their thoughts about the hearings, the dismissals, the
blacklists, the ravaged friendships, the loss of work and self-esteem. If there
is a weakness here, it is Ms. Schrecker's attempt to lionize the victims - one
wonders how some of these ''absolute'' civil libertarians felt about, say, the
Federal prosecution of Nazis or Trotskyists - but on this score she is hardly
alone.

Ms. Schrecker also considers the willingness of so many academics to support
these dismissals. There were several reasons for this, she believes, including
opportunism, dishonesty and fear. But the main reason was cold war patriotism -
the feeling that professors should back their Government, oppose its enemies and
cooperate with Congressional committees. ''Patriotism, not expedience,'' she
writes, ''sustained the academic community's willingness to collaborate with
McCarthyism.''

Her comments are well taken. Though many professors did criticize Senator Joseph
McCarthy and his methods, the academic community did not seriously challenge the
cold war consensus that included politically motivated dismissals. What is
puzzling, however, is Ms. Schrecker's surprise that the academy behaved no
better than other institutions in American life. ''Such a discovery is
demoralizing,'' she writes, ''for the nation's colleges . . . have traditionally
encouraged higher expectations. . . . Here, if anywhere, dissent should have
found a sanctuary.''

The problem is that Ms. Schrecker has already taken the opposite view. One of
her major themes, in fact, is that outside pressures, not lofty principles, have
traditionally determined the levels of acceptable dissent on our campuses. By
the McCarthy era, these pressures threatened the academic community as never
before. And - ironically - the academy justified its abuses by stressing the
concept of ''higher expectations.'' As the Association of American Universities
warned in 1953: ''If [a professor] is called upon to answer for his convictions,
it is his duty as a citizen to speak out. It is even more definitely his duty as
a professor. Refusal to do so, on whatever legal grounds, cannot fail to reflect
upon a profession that claims for itself the fullest freedom to speak and the
maximum protection of that freedom available in our society.''

Despite her excellent research in many areas, Ms. Schrecker could have done
more. She did not apply for the relevant F.B.I. files under the Freedom of
Information Act because ''it would have been a time-consuming, expensive, and
not necessarily successful process.'' This may be true, but the few F.B.I. files
she does use -supplied to her by some of the people she interviewed - add
immensely to her story.

What we need to know is what sort of information did the F.B.I. supply
Congressional committees in these academic cases? How important was the bureau
in influencing the decisions of college administrators?

What role - if any - did the F.B.I. play in the blacklisting process? MORE
significantly, Ms. Schrecker has sampled a small and select number of colleges.

Her study rarely goes beyond the Ivy League, the top state universities, and a
handful of other schools like Chicago, Temple and Reed. As a result, her views
about campus politics in general do not always ring true. Had she bothered to
look beyond the endless rallies at Berkeley and Columbia, for example, she might
have reconsidered her myopic observation that ''Spain . . . stirred as much
political emotion on the campuses of the thirties as Vietnam did in the
sixties.''

Did McCarthyism also haunt the faculties at lesser places? Ms. Schrecker claims
that ''few schools of this type had Cold War academic freedom cases,'' but she
may be missing the point. It is possible - indeed likely - that ''radical''
professors had a tougher time in provincial surroundings, where religious and
patriotic groups were strong, and where procedural safeguards for teachers did
not exist. Following World War II, when the college population quickly doubled
in size, many local institutions began to recruit Ph.D.'s from the nation's best
graduate schools. For the first time, these colleges were staffed by people who
did not come from the surrounding area, who did not fit into the local culture
and who seemed to mock the community's traditional beliefs.

The fact that few of these people were Communists or uncooperative witnesses did
not really matter to those who were determined to preserve the status quo. What
did matter was that many of them criticized the American Legion, or stayed away
from church, or supported unpopular causes like civil rights. We know that ugly
battles occurred - as in the widely publicized case of Luella Mundel at Fairmont
State College in Wheeling, W.Va., in 1951 - but the full impact of McCarthyism
on higher education will have to await the arrival of community studies that are
just now beginning to appear.

''No Ivory Tower'' has a number of gaps, and it tends to preach as well as to
inform. Nevertheless, Ms. Schrecker's survey is a valuable reminder that our
colleges were not immune to the politics of McCarthyism and of its awful human
toll. Above all, it is the victims we remember, and the trail of broken careers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Washington state legislature special committee hearing on
subversie activities at the University of Washington, 1948 (from ''Cold War on
the Campus,'' courtesy of the Seattle Post-Intelligencer)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICANS REPORTEDLY SUPERVISED AIRSTRIP PROJECT NEAR NICARAGUA

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1258 words

DATELINE: LIBERIA, Costa Rica, Sept. 28


Two Americans and the local police commander supervised the building of a
military-size airstrip near Costa Rica's border with Nicaragua, according to
local residents, including some who say they worked on the project.

The accounts of the origin and building of the airstrip include details that
directly contradict official Costa Rican explanations. The accounts indicate
that the airstrip may be intended for use to supply Nicaraguan guerrillas or
assist the American military.

Six Costa Rican residents of this border area, three of whom said they helped
build the 1.2-mile-long airstrip, said in interviews that Americans had overseen
the construction after the police official arranged the project.

The existence of the airstrip, 20 miles northwest of the town of Liberia and 12
miles from the Nicaraguan border, was reported on Wednesday by the Costa Rican
Government. It said it had ordered the field closed.

The strip is situated near an American-built base used to train Costa Rican
border patrol units, and American military engineers and special forces have
been involved in projects in the area in the last year. Nicaraguan guerrillas
have bases nearby and have clashed with Nicaraguan Government forces on both
sides of the border, although not in the last year.

'Americans Were There'

One town resident who befriended an American working on the airfield said the
American identified himself as a former Green Beret demolitions expert who said
he was working on ''classified'' matters.

''Americans were there and there was always a lot of mystery,'' said a local
contractor, Leon Victor Arrieta, who says he was hired earlier this year to
spend three months building the airstrip with the advice of the Americans and
the protection of the local police commander. ''I was told not to say I was
building an airstrip. I was told to say I was building a road.''

Mr. Arrieta said that he was ordered in April to finish work at the airfield
quickly and that shortly after that workers in the area told him that a large
military airplane had landed.

Several other local residents said the airfield's existence and use was an open
secret in this conservative area, where opposition to the leftist Nicaraguan
Government is fierce.

''We all know it is a military airfield built by the Americans,'' said a local
businessman with close ties to the Costa Rican Government. ''But we will claim
it is only a tourist project because we wish the United States would invade
Nicaragua and get rid of the Communists there.''

The official spokesman for the United States Embassy in San Jose, Costa Rica,
has refused to comment on the airfield in response to several telephone calls
over the last five days. [In Washington, a spokesman for the Defense Department
declined to comment.] The newly elected Costa Rican Government, which has tried
to remain neutral in the conflict in Nicaragua, appears to have been embarrassed
by publicity about the airstrip. Nicaragua is suing Costa Rica in the World
Court for permitting its territory to be used by Nicaraguan guerrillas.

In its first public statement last week, the Costa Rican Government said it
closed the airstrip earlier this month because it feared it was used by
Nicaraguan anti-Government guerrillas and by drug traffickers. Public Security
Minister Hernan Garron added that the field was begun as a tourist project and
was later intended as an alternative airstrip for a nearby Costa Rican
Government training base.

The airfield is six miles from an American-built base that is used to train
Costa Rican border patrol units. But a mountain divides the strip from the base
and there appears to be no connecting road. There is flat land near the base
that would appear better suited for an airstrip to serve it.

The Green Berets helped build and run the training base, situated near the
village of Murcielago. Both the base and the airfield are within a few miles of
the closest natural deep-water port to the Nicaraguan border.

While it is possible that the airfield is used by drug traffickers, it is far
larger than the size normally needed by drug runners, who usually fly light
airplanes that do not require long landing strips.

The airfield is long enough to handle all but the largest military aircraft. The
Costa Rican police reportedly found a newly built wooden barracks at the field
and a stock of aviation fuel.

The Americans who supervised the project gave their names only as ''Robert'' and
''Mr. Bill,'' according to the two local contractors who built the field. The
Americans often consulted with the local police commander and drove a jeep
without license plates, one of the contractors said. Three other Americans
visited the strip from time to time, the contractor added.

The two contractors, Gerardo Cordoba and Mr. Arrieta, said ''Robert'' and ''Mr.
Bill'' planned and oversaw all details of the construction. Mr. Cordoba, the
chief contractor, refused to say if the Americans or the police commander, Col.
Jose Ramon Montero, paid him for his work. Mr. Arrieta estimated the project
cost $80,000.

The American who gave his name as ''Robert'' said he was a former Green Beret
demolitions and construction expert who had been in Vietnam, according to a
close friend of his in this town who asked to remain unidentified.

''Robert'' said he was working on the training base nearby and also on
''classified'' projects that he could not discuss, the local resident said.

According to several other local residents the airfield was built from start to
finish under the protection of the local police, known as the civil guard.
Colonel Montero, who has since retired as police commander, was the one who
first asked the two local builders to construct the airstrip in January, the
contractors said.

Colonel Montero kept a 24-hour police guard at the airstrip and placed a locked
gate on the road to the site, one of the contractors said.

A reporter who tried to see Mr. Montero for the last three days was told by
servants that he was not home. In an interview last week with a local newspaper
Mr. Montero admitted being involved with the airfield but denied any Americans
had been present. He said it was a tourist project.

The immigration official in charge of the Liberia airport, a Government-run
installation, said he was surprised Mr. Montero would not see an American
visitor. ''Colonel Montero likes Americans and is very close to the American
Embassy,'' the official said.

Airstrip Is Not Registered

According to the Costa Rican Public Security Minister, Mr. Garron, the airfield
was started last year as part of a tourist development. It was financed by an
American company called Udall Research Corporation based in Panama, he said,
denying any Costa Rican police involvement in the project.

When the tourist development failed, the airstrip was handed over to the
Government under the administration that left office in May, Mr. Garron said.

Udall Research Corporation is not listed in Panama at the telephone numbers
given on official government forms. Nor is the airstrip - the largest private
field in the country, according to Mr. Garron - officially registered with the
national civil aviation office.

The Costa Rican Government that left office four months ago appeared far more
willing to aid clandestine American efforts against Nicaragua than the present
Government.

''I found a fact when I came into office,'' Mr. Garron said last week, appearing
perturbed. ''What I can say is that the airfield is now under guard.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map shows location of airstrip

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE FIND ALLY IN TEXAS: TIME

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 915 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Sept. 28


Efrain Martinez remembers well the stormy spring evening in 1980 that he locked
Gene Fisher and Nguyen Van Nam together in a room at the Holiday Inn in
Seabrook, Tex.

It was the beginning of the shrimping season, and like the clouds gathering over
Galveston Bay, conflicts between American and Vietnamese fishermen along the
Gulf Coast were growing increasingly ominous. The focus of the hostility was on
the two men, leaders of rival fishermen's associations.

''Colonel Nam brought a couple of bodyguards, but they had to wait downstairs,''
recalled Mr. Martinez, who is a Justice Department conciliator. ''And Fisher had
some guy calling him every 15 minutes to make sure he was safe.

''But they sat there face to face for two hours and got an agreement worked out,
even exchanged phone numbers. They had been talking about each other for months
through the media, but that night they started to understand each other as
persons.''

Sessions on Problems Set

In a similar way the uneasy assimilation of Vietnamese immigrants into Texas is
softening into the tolerance that comes with time, familiarity and economic
reality.

But a growing Vietnamese minority is presenting new challenges for the police
and social agencies. Monday and Tuesday, police officials and Asian American
leaders from 15 Gulf Coast cities will meet in New Orleans to form a multistate
network to address problems of crime and communication.

''The shrimpers' problems of six and seven years ago aren't as prevalent,'' said
Mr. Martinez, one of the organizers of the conference. ''But difficulties are
continuing and emerging with delivery of police services to Asians.''

The relative isolation of the immigrant community, with a far different culture
from the surrounding majority population, is at the heart of the problem. As the
population rises, so does crime, and it tends to stay within the community.
Further, both the police and Vietnamese leaders say, the inclination among
residents is to try to deal with the problem themselves rather than go outside,
to the police.

It was the same isolation that led to the shrimpers' problems, a dramatic clash
of cultures in which a white fisherman was killed and dozens of Vietnamese boats
were burned. But a relatively swift transformation occurred, in part because of
economic necessity. In Palacios, a fishing town on the Gulf Coast, only one fish
processing plant used to buy from Vietnamese. Now they all do; they would have
no business otherwise.

''It's a whole system of trying to do things better, cheaper, and with a lot of
determination,'' Mr. Martinez said of the Vietnamese newcomers, who are now
building their own boats, and venturing farther out into the Gulf, once the
domain of corporate fishing operations. ''They kind of used their cultural
system and processes and superimposed them on our system. In some cases they
superseded our system.''

A Grudging Acceptance

Hence a grudging acceptance by old Gulf Coast hands. ''I can't say the Americans
and Vietnamese are drinking buddies,'' said Emery Waite, the only non-Vietnamese
left in the fish processing business in Seabrook. ''In my slip, Americans and
Vietnamese tie up together and joke around. But when you know their desire is to
put you out of business, you're only cordial up to a point.''

In the city, the growing Vietnamese community is no longer the monolith it once
was. The first immigrants, who came a decade ago after the fall of Saigon, were
generally well-educated and familiar with the West. Among them a younger
generation is emerging in force.

''There is a clear, distinguishable young Asian professional class in Houston,''
said Lan Nguyen, a 26-year-old lawyer, ''which will become a large percentage of
the bigger community and which will be a part of the decision-making group of
American society.'' Ms. Nguyen says she plans to run for political office in the
future.

Political participation is remote, though, for later immigrants, mostly poor
boat people who had no head start on assimilation and must concentrate on
survival.

Hostility and Violence

Houston's devastated economy has caused additional difficulties. In the last few
months, community leaders estimate, ''a few thousand'' Vietnamese have moved to
Dallas to look for work. Most of that city's approximately 20,000 Vietnamese
have settled, along with refugees from Cambodia and Laos, in ''Little Asia'' on
the east side, where they contend with hostility from other residents, who are
mostly of Hispanic descent. They are also victimized by the violent gangs of
young Vietnamese who prey upon their fellow immigrants almost exclusively.

''We are seeing an increase in organized Vietnamese criminal activity,'' said
Ron Cowart, an officer with the Dallas Police Department who operates a
storefront station in Little Asia. ''We're getting a lot of the problems Houston
has had for a while now.''

But he is not inclined to dwell on impossibilities. His Little Asia station -an
outreach effort that has been widely praised - is more like a community center,
with its Boy Scout troops, Buddhist meeting room and job referral bulletin
board.

Down the street, Mr. Linh is commuting from Houston to run a new multicultural
refugee assistance center. He described his ''mission impossible'' as trying to
persuade women in poor Cambodian families to go against tradition and seek work.

''Oh, well,'' he said wearily. ''Who knows? All kinds of strange things happen
in Texas.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vietnamese fishermen (NYT/Robert John Mihovil); Photo of
Vietnamese-owned fishing boat (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK;
Required Reading

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 231 words


A Hero's Protest Excerpts from remarks made by Representative Robert J. Mrazek,
Democrat of Nassau County, on the House floor Sept. 23:

Last year I had the privilege of meeting a man with a strength of character
unlike anyone I have ever met before. On Dec. 7, 1968, Chaplain Charles Liteky
was awarded a Congressional Medal of Honor for his bravery in the Vietnam War.

A year earlier, Charlie Liteky had crawled, without weapons, into enemy gunfire
to personally carry to safety 23 men from his company who had been wounded in
the firefight.

On Labor Day, Charlie Liteky embarked on a fast here at the Capitol to protest
not only United States policy in Central America, but also the apathy displayed
by Americans toward what he believes could become another Vietnam.

He has been joined in this fast by three other veterans - two from the Vietnam
War and one from World War II. Their fast is aimed at drawing the attention of
the American people to the impact that $100 million in lethal assistance to the
Contras in Nicaragua, the impact that sending those weapons will have on the
people of Nicaragua.

The same unbreakable determination that allowed Charlie Liteky to risk his life
to save the lives of Americans in Vietnam, Mr. Speaker, has led him to shun the
advice of the others and embark upon a fast to try to prevent senseless deaths
of people in Central America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

P.O.W.'S ALIVE IN VIETNAM, REPORT CONCLUDES

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 420 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 29


A Pentagon panel, after a five-month review of intelligence files, has concluded
that American prisoners of war are still alive in Southeast Asia.

The head of the group, Lieut. Gen. Eugene F. Tighe, Jr., a former director of
the Defense Intelligence Agency, said in an interview today that ''a large
volume of evidence points'' to the likelihood that Americans are being held by
the Vietnamese Government.

He said he doubted that the evidence was strong enough to give the United States
added leverage to win the release of any prisoners. He suggested Vietnam might
accept war reparations in return for the Americans.

The group's report, to be released at a briefing Tuesday at the Pentagon, found
that there was no cover-up of evidence that there are still prisoners, according
to General Tighe.

Last March, the current director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, Lieut. Gen.
Leonard H. Perroots, told a House subcommittee on Asian and Pacific affairs that
he had appointed General Tighe, at the request of Congress, ''to come in for as
long as necessary to get updated on follow-up actions'' by the Government on
missing servicemen.

General Tighe said his task force could not say how many missing Americans were
alive. Government officials have estimated that the number could be at least
100.

General Tighe said the best evidence came from many reports by refugees who said
they had seen Americans.

''There were as many differences as you could imagine,'' he said of the refugee
reports. ''They ran the gamut from first-hand sightings to hearsay. But when you
have that large volume of evidence that points in those directions, why that's
what you conclude.''

The review panel included Lyman Kirkpatrick, former inspector general of the
Central Intelligence Agency; Gen. Russell Dougherty of the Air Force, who is a
former head of the Strategic Air Command; Gen. Bob Kingston of the Army, who is
a former commander of the United States Central Command; Brig. Gen. Robbie
Risner of the Air Force, who was a prisoner of war in Vietnam, and Lieut. Gen.
John Peter Flynn of the Air Force, who was a leader of prisoners of war.

The actual search of intelligence files was conducted by Maj. Gen. John S.
Murray of the Army, former chief of United States military interests in Vietnam;
Col. Lester E. McGee Jr. of the Army, former intelligence specialist; John
Francis McCreary of the national strategic warning staff, and Roberta Carper
Maynard, a management specialist of the Defense Intelligence Agency.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

STATE OFFICIAL TO TESTIFY IN FILM DEATHS TRIAL

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 539 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Sept. 29


Testimony about waivers of state regulations on the hiring of children in the
motion picture industry will be permitted in the trial of John Landis, who
directed ''Twilight Zone: The Movie,'' a judge ruled today.

Prosecutors view the testimony by a California Deputy Labor Commissioner as
crucial to their case against Mr. Landis and four other defendants, who are on
trial for involuntary manslaughter in the deaths of the actor Vic Morrow, a
7-year-old boy, Myca Dinh Le, and a 6-year-old girl, Renee Shinn Chin, during
filming of the movie in the post-midnight hours of July 23, 1982.

In a hearing last week out of the presence of the jury, the official, Colleen
Logan, testified that it was the policy of her office to grant waivers to movie
producers who seek exemptions from the rules and regulations governing the
employment of minors in the motion picture industry.

Under the regulations promulgated by the Labor Commissioner's Office, children
under the age of 8 are not allowed to be filmed after 6:30 P.M. But Mrs. Logan
said that waivers to that regulation can and have been granted under certain
conditions.

Waivers Have Been Granted

Mrs. Logan said that in her 20 years on the job, she has received about 2,500
requests for waivers, many of which she said she has granted. In order to
receive a waiver, she testified, directors must explain the circumstances under
which the children are to be filmed.

Defense lawyers sought to block Mrs. Logan's testimony, saying the regulations
did not specify that exemptions could be granted.

In his ruling today, Judge Roger W. Boren of Los Angeles Superior Court said the
rules and regulations were drawn up by the Labor Commissioner's Office and the
Motion Picture Producers' Guild, and that it was the Labor Commissioner's
''unwritten policy'' to grant waivers.

Judge Boren ruled that he would allow Mrs. Logan to testify, as she did in the
hearing last week, that when directors seek waivers, her office as a matter of
routine conducts an investigation into the circumstances of the filming.

Scene Considered Dangerous

Mrs. Logan was expected to testify late this afternoon.

Lea Purwin D'Agostino, a Deputy District Attorney, said the defendants never
sought the waiver because they knew that such an investigation would have shown
that the scene was dangerous.

''And they knew that if the circumstances were investigated, there was no way
they could have gotten an exemption,'' she said.

Judge Boren also said he would not allow Mrs. Logan to give examples of past
instances in which she denied such waivers, nor would he allow her to say
whether she would have granted an exemption that would have allowed the children
to be filmed the day they were killed.

Mr. Murrow, who was 53, and the children were killed at a remote location 40
miles north of Los Angeles when a helicopter crashed on top of them amid special
effects explosions in filming of a Vietnam War scene.

Standing trial for involuntary manslaughter are Mr. Landis, the film's associate
producer, George Folsey Jr., the unit production manager, Dan Allingham, the
special effects coordinator, Paul Stewart, and the helicopter pilot, Dorcey
Wingo.

The trial is in its fourth week.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SUIT SEEKS REMOVAL OF CROSS AT MARINE BASE

BYLINE: By ROBERT TRUMBULL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 658 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU, Sept. 29


The American Civil Liberties Union and 15 individuals of various religious
faiths have filed suit in Federal District Court seeking to force the Marine
Corps to remove a huge cross from the military base here. The case is expected
to go to trial in Honolulu in November.

The litigation followed an unsuccessful effort earlier this year by the Jewish
Federation of Hawaii to force the Marines to dismantle the 65-foot-tall cross at
Camp Holland M. Smith. The Marine base in suburban Honolulu also houses the
headquarters of the United States forces in the Pacific, currently headed by
Adm. Ronald J. Hays, the Commander in Chief Pacific.

Named as defendants in the suit are the United States Government and the
commandant of the Marine Corps, Gen. Paul X. Kelley, whose headquarters is in
Washington.

In May General Kelley reversed a decision by the commander of Camp Smith, Col.
Gene Castagnetti of the Marine Corps, to have the cross removed. The colonel's
decision came after a panel of Marine and Navy legal officers had ruled that the
presence of the emblem on the military base violated the First Amendment of the
Constitution, which mandates freedom of religion.

'Ecumenical Memorial'

In a later statement, General Kelley referred to the towering cross as an
''ecumenical memorial'' to the marines and sailors who had died in the Vietnam
War, adding that he intended the huge cross to remain in place as a
''nonsectarian symbol of our national resolve to obtain a full accounting of
American servicemen still missing or unaccounted for in Southeast Asia.''

General Kelley's stand aroused the American Civil Liberties Union and members of
other groups here. They jointly filed a suit in Federal Court on July 31
demanding that the cross be ordered removed on the grounds that it violates the
First Amendment, which requires a separation between church and state.

The court action was filed in the names of Tim Kuriyuki and Kirk Cashmere, two
Honolulu lawyers for the A.C.L.U., and 15 individual Hawaii residents listed as
''seven Christians, two Buddhists, four Jews, a Unitarian and a Quaker.''

According to a July statement by the civil rights group, ''the cross at its
present location trivializes a religious symbol, makes outsiders of
non-Christians and is maintained with taxpayer monies.''

''If the military wants to erect a memorial, we have no objection,'' the head of
the A.C.L.U. in Hawaii, Vanessa Y. Chong, declared. ''But it seems to us that
using a cross, which the military now says is not a religious symbol, is both an
insulting trivialization of a very religious symbol improperly excludes
non-Christians.''

Objections to the Location

''We regret having to go to court on this matter,'' she went on. ''We have
notified the military that our objection was not to the cross but to its
location on public land''.

The court complaint against the Government and the Marine Corps declares that
the maintenance of the Camp Smith cross on military land ''is objectionable in
that it symbolizes governmental approval, sponsorship, preference and
endorsement of a specific religion,'' apparently a reference to Christianity.

''Certain of the plaintiffs oppose this practice on the grounds that it demeans,
trivializes and attempts to secularize a profoundly religious symbol,'' the
complaint states.

Alluding to the cross, the complaint states that the plaintiffs further oppose
the activity at the Marine camp ''on the grounds that public funds are being
used to maintain and illuminate this religious symbol on public property.''

''Certain of the plaintiffs who come within proximity of the cross object to it
as a religious symbol erected on government property,'' the complaint states.

Displaying the cross ''on public property violates the provisions of the First
Amendment of the United States Constitution, which prohibits the Government from
establishing any religion,'' the complaint concludes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Whose Foreign Policy?

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 567 words


Stung by Congress on foreign issues twice in a week, President Reagan has twice
threatened to shoot back, and has already done so once. Yet this week he may
suffer startling defeat as Congress votes to override. Who's in charge here?

Congress has long been a useful barometer of public opinion. On domestic issues,
when it has found a Presidential policy lacking popular support, Congress hasn't
been shy about opposing it. What's striking now is that Congress has mustered an
unusually strong fight on less-familiar turf.

Voting sanctions against South Africa challenges Presidential primacy on foreign
policy; threatening a test ban moratorium challenges it on national security.
Mr. Reagan may regard all this as unconscionable meddling in executive duties. A
more detached perspective sees, instead, a healthy maturation of the
legislature's ability to do its duties.

The Constitution invited such battles when it made the President and Congress
partners in foreign policy. Yet Congress was long a deferential partner. As
America's role overseas grew in this century, that began to change;
Congressional involvement in shaping that role grew with it. So, gradually, did
the intertwining of domestic and foreign. Who can differentiate between the two
on agriculture, trade, human rights or military spending?

Then Vietnam brought reverberating change. Congress learned what two Presidents
did not: overseas, as at home, a policy without public support cannot work. One
result, the War Powers Act, passed over a Presidential veto. It was the most
visible sign of Congress taking upon itself the role of containing the imperial
Presidency. By the time Mr. Reagan came to office, the country's mood had
changed again. He sent the unmistakable message: No one is going to push America
around any more. That forceful stance didn't always translate smoothly into the
details of day-to-day policy. But Mr. Reagan, with his bully pulpit and a couple
of special commissions, built enough of a consensus to keep Congress largely on
his side.

Except, as the months passed, for South Africa and arms control. Mr. Reagan has
not been able to assemble a sufficient following for his pallid condemnation of
apartheid. He drags lamely far behind other leaders of his own party. Nor, in
the sixth year of his Presidency, has he persuaded a worried public of his
commitment to control the arms race.

The Congressional role doesn't come easily, nor should it. The President rightly
bears the responsibility for coordinating and calibrating an intricate array of
relations and policies. As Congress has shown in its intramural fights over
chemical weapons, adherence to existing arms treaties and a ban on nuclear
testing, its foreign-policy-making methods are unwieldy.

But when the policies of the executive outreach or lag too far behind the public
will, it is the duty of Congress to speak up. One need not agree with
Congressional positions in every particular, or at all. Congress can be wrong
just as the public can be wrong. Presidents can be brave, and lonely.

But the test is not who has the right to speak for America. It is, in the best
sense, political. There comes a time when the public says ''hell no, we won't
go''; says it wants arms control; expresses its disgust with the saviors of
apartheid. At such a time, a President can resist, denouncing Congress for
meddling. Or he can lead.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 287 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ROBERTSON'S CAMP HOPES TO CAPTURE VAST TV EVANGELICAL VOTE IN NATION

BYLINE: By DUDLEY CLENDINEN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1397 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Sept. 29


Bound by a common theology and the spreading sensation that their number is
great and their time and leader have come, the Rev. Pat Robertson's brother
Pentecostal and charismatic evangelists are stirring to his still-unannounced
quest for the Republican nomination for the Presidency.

''When he said he felt led of God to do it, I had no alternative but to support
him,'' the Rev. Jimmy Swaggart of Baton Rouge, La., said last week, explaining
the passionate public endorsement he gave Mr. Robertson after a private
conversation.

It is the belief that it is possible to know the will of God and to be led by
it, a belief shared by Pentecostals and charismatics, that Mr. Robertson is
drawing upon. And in that sense, the audiences of his fellow evangelists are
pools rich in potential votes Mr. Robertson is the founder of the Christian
Broadcasting Network and a regular commentator on its 700 Club. It is not just
in his own audience, however, but in that great common sea of tens of millions
of evangelical viewers that Mr. Robertson's special opportunity lies. And in
response to what is clearly his strategy, those preachers and their followers
are beginning to flow to him.

It is a quickening that the Rev. Jerry Falwell, who is supporting Vice President
Bush, said was the beginning of ''a mighty Army.''

'Could Be the Biggest Army'

''It could be the biggest army to come down the road since Clean Gene's
Machine,'' said Jeffrey K. Hadden, professor of sociology at the University of
Virginia, author of the book ''Prime Time Preachers.'' He was referring to the
college students opposed to the war in Vietnam who carried Senator Eugene J.
McCarthy of Minnesota into the Democratic Presidential nomination process in
1968.

There is no certainty that what Mr. Robertson is trying to do can be done.
''We're breaking new ground; this hasn't been done before,'' said the Rev. Billy
McCormack of Shreveport, who said he had got in touch with 1,000 evangelical
pastors in Louisiana in behalf of the Freedom Council, Mr. Robertson's
now-defunct lobbying group.

No preacher has ever tried to summon this latent religious army to his own
political cause. And the preachers interviewed for this article agreed that Mr.
Robertson could have harder going selling himself to evangelicals who do not
belief that it is possible to personally know God's will.

But in the last two weeks, Mr. Robertson has persuaded two evangelists, Mr.
Swaggart of Louisiana and Oral Roberts of Oklahoma, both of whom are
Pentecostals, to give him emotional public endorsements. The evangelist Rex
Humbard sat on stage with him at Constitution Hall in Washington last week, and
the camera picked him out as Mr. Robertson announced to a national audience on a
satellite telecast that three million signatures on a petition would persuade
him to declare for the nomination.

The evangelist Jim Bakker of North Carolina, in response to a reporter's
inquiry, gave a mild reply: ''I would have no problems standing with him. My
feeling is that our viewers would welcome his candidacy.''

In the growing battle for the evangelical vote, Neil Eskelin, Mr. Bakker's
spokesman, said, ''Both George Bush and Pat Robertson have been here to talk
privately with Bakker in recent months.'' But it really would not matter whether
Mr. Bakker threw his lot with Mr. Robertson or not, he said.

Overwhelming Support Seen

''There's no question that Jim Bakker's television audience would vote
overwhelmingly for Pat Robertson -even if Jim Bakker were to endorse someone
else,'' Mr. Eskelin said. Close aides and spokesmen for other evangelists made
the same point.

Mr. Robertson, an ordained Southern Baptist minister, is a charismatic. Unlike
other evangelicals who also believe that the Bible is true and that one must be
reborn to experience salvation, Pentecostal churches like the Assemblies of God
and charismatic Christians of any denomination share an additional theology. It
is a belief in the ''gifts'' of the spirit, the abilities to heal and work other
miracles through faith, to speak in tongues, to discern the will of God.

Historically, those beliefs have tended to set their adherents apart from the
secular world.

In a union, between Mr. Robertson and the audiences of his brother evangelists,
which tend to be geographically and socioeconomically different from one
another, lies an unrealized potential variously estimated at 20 million to 30
million people. That is what makes Richard D. Minard, a former regional director
of the Republican National Committee, so enthusiastic about the potential
Robertson candidacy, a candidacy that he says ''could make the G.O.P. a majority
party.''

The basis of the respect that gives Mr. Robertson such special advantage is
easily seen in the data produced by a survey of audience size that Mr. Robertson
commissioned the A. C. Neilsen Company to do for him last year.

In the last three decades, Christian television has grown from small beginnings
to become a huge and complex phenomenon of incalculable influence.

Wide Potential in Audiences

As television ministries and television technology have proliferated and
diversified, poll takers and social scientists like Professor Hadden have been
frustrated by their inability to know the true size, and thus base influence, of
the different audiences. The best numbers thus far produced, Professor Hadden
said, are contained in the Neilsen survey, whose results he persuaded Mr.
Robertson to share with academics.

Conducted in February of last year, the survey showed that Mr. Robertson's 700
Club drew the largest audience of the top 10 television evangelists. The 10 drew
an unduplicated average monthly audience of 34 million, Professor Hadden said.
But perhaps more important was the fact that 6 others of the top 10 were all
Pentecostals.

Only one, Mr. Falwell, was a fundamentalist. It is that configuration of the
audience that gives Mr. Robertson his peculiar and powerful appeal to the
evangelical television audience, Mr. Falwell said.

''Pat will have the inside track,'' Mr. Falwell said. ''He will have the pole
position going out.'' And because of the common cultural and religious values
they share, Mr. Falwell said, Mr. Robertson will exert a powerful pull on
noncharismatic fundamentalists. Two of them, the Rev. Charles Stanley and the
Rev. Jimmy Draper, the two immediate past presidents of the 14-million member
Southern Baptist Convention, have already endorsed him.

''I think he will bring a mighty army of and non-Pentecostals out of the
fundamentalist and evangelical ranks directly in back of the Republican Party
candidate,'' Mr. Falwell said.

Mr. Falwell holds to Mr. Bush as that candidate, but other television preachers,
studying the same data, reached a different conclusion. When Mr. Robertson
sought him out for a private meeting in his office in Baton Rouge earlier this
month, Mr. Swaggart said Thursday, Mr. Robertson ''mentioned the numbers to
me.'' ''But I already knew the numbers,'' said Mr. Swaggart, who had the
second-largest audience in the Nielsen survey. ''They're obvious.''

Mr. Swaggart tallied up his thoughts: ''I feel that he will get just about all
the Pentecostal and the charismatic vote,'' he said. ''Let's say 80 percent.
That will translate into 20 million or 30 million votes right there. He will get
a high percentage of the Southern Baptist vote. Say 30 to 60 percent.'' And Mr.
Robertson would get some of the black charismatic vote, Mr. Swaggart said.

''The rest is anybody's guess,'' Mr. Swaggart said . ''How this is going to play
in Peoria remains to be seen.'' But in the Christian support alone, Mr. Swaggart
said, ''I think the numbers are there,'' adding, ''It's not a shoe-in'' for the
nomination. ''But he has a chance.''

At its headquarters in Virginia Beach Wednesday night, the Christian
Broadcasting Network will host a black-tie dinner and celebration of its 25th
anniversary. ''It is not, absolutely not, a political event,'' said G. Benton
Miller Jr., spokesman for the network.

But Oral Roberts and Jerry Falwell, and Jim Bakker and Jimmy Swaggart and ''most
of the national ministry leaders that you would readily recognize have been
invited,'' Mr. Miller said. And for 90 minutes, he said, that celebration, the
picture of evangelical unity, will be televised in a special broadcast on CBN.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Rev. Pat Robertson addressing supporters in Washington (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
