
                               1 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

China's Premier Sees Progress on Cambodia

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 203 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Sept. 30


Prime Minister Li Peng said today that significant progress had been made in
reaching a political settlement in Cambodia and that Beijing was ready to repair
ties gradually with Vietnam.

The Prime Minister, speaking at a reception on the eve of China's National Day
celebrations, held out hope for an early settlement of the 11-year Cambodian
civil war.

''We hope that Vietnam and the Phnom Penh regime will show sincerity by taking
positive steps towards the political settlement of the Cambodian question,'' he
said. ''Along with such a settlement, China is ready to gradually improve its
relations with Vietnam.''

Chinese-Vietnamese relations became hostile when Hanoi invaded Cambodia in 1978
and early the next year set up a pro-Hanoi Government there to replace the Khmer
Rouge, which China had backed; China and Vietnam fought a brief border war in
1979.

Today China backs a coalition of three guerrilla groups, including the Khmer
Rouge, that oppose the Hanoi-backed Phnom Penh Government in the Cambodian civil
war.

Vietnam's Communist Party chief, Nguyen Van Linh, visited China early this
month, and Vice Prime Minister Vo Nguyen Giap went to Beijing this month to
attend the Asian Games there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: WASHINGTON AT WORK;
Bush's Modulator of the Gulf Policy, And of What Not to Do or Say Now

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1521 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 29


After the late-night call from the White House telling him that Iraq had invaded
Kuwait, Brent Scowcroft, the President's national security adviser, had no doubt
that the United States had to be prepared to go to war, if necessary, to stop
Saddam Hussein.

He just as quickly reached a second conclusion, and then a third.

The invasion made it clear that the Iraqi President had to be neutralized as a
regional power. And the Bush Administration could not say the destruction of
President Hussein and his war machine was the goal of American policy if it
hoped to avoid war and win broad support for aims that could be achieved through
diplomacy and sanctions.

For more than eight weeks, Mr. Scowcroft has helped President Bush grapple with
the tension arising from these early judgments. It drives the carefully
modulated policy of forcing Iraq out of Kuwait with sanctions and leaving the
question of what to do about Mr. Hussein for the future.

Shared Generational Experience

Mr. Scowcroft's conclusions were shared by the President and his other top
advisers, just as they share formative generational experiences: decades of
watching American goals drown in overambitious or poorly articulated foreign
policies.

''It's nice to get involved in something and keep thinking, 'Boy, you know,
while we're doing this, let's clean up four or five other things,' '' Mr.
Scowcroft said in an interview. As the retired Air Force general reflected on
the days since the invasion, he reached back to an experience that did much to
form his thinking - the Korean War. In Korea, he is fond of pointing out, United
Nations forces led by the United States decided after early victories to push
beyond their initial goals and drive north to North Korea's border with China at
the Yalu River, thereby courting disaster by drawing China into the war.

''The Yalu River is a case where it looked like a great thing to do, but in fact
it caused us enormous problems,'' Mr. Scowcroft said.

''And therefore, while it would be nice to do some other things than what we
specifically started out to do,'' he said of the Persian Gulf crisis, ''what I'm
saying is we would consider it a signal victory to accomplish what we said we
needed to do.''

Balancing Unstated Desires

The task of balancing American's unstated desires and its articulated policy of
forcing Mr. Hussein out of Kuwait through diplomacy and economic pressure now
shape the days of the man who once seemed to the world outside the White House
to be a shadow following Mr. Bush, his voice on policy as whispery as his
demeanor.

For even if Iraq is driven from Kuwait by sanctions and diplomatic pressure,
White House officials have begun to realize, they will still have to meet the
challenge of keeping a bloodless victory from turning into a bloodless defeat.

''If our strategy works,'' a senior official said of President Hussein, ''he
still has his army, he still has his chemical plants, he still has his incipient
nuclear capability.''

''But we decided early on that adding as an objective the elimination of Saddam
Hussein as an individual or the Iraqi Army as an institution should not be the
focus of national policy,'' said the official, who spoke on condition that he
not be identified.

Pressure From Outside

The passing of some early milestones - insuring Saudi Arabia's defense and
imposing the economic sanctions - and the threat of the destruction of Kuwait as
a sovereign nation have increased pressure from outside the White House to reach
for more sweeping military aims.

As national security adviser, Mr. Scowcroft is increasingly involved in the
effort to deal with these issues, just as he was at the fulcrum of the balance
Mr. Bush has struck between his public goals and his unstated objectives.

The 65-year-old Mr. Scowcroft, who was also national security adviser to
President Ford, played a crucial role in proposals for deep troop cuts in Europe
and in nuclear arms control negotiations. At the same time, he was often blamed
for what some critics perceived as an overly cautious initial approach to the
upheaval in Eastern Europe in 1989.

And as Mr. Bush's secret envoy to China last year, he bore some criticism for
the President's effort to improve relations with Beijing after its violent
suppression of pro-democracy demonstators. But he also is given credit for
restricting the National Security Council staff, which he heads, to research,
policy advice and speech-writing, not the kind of political infighting and
covert operations that tarred the council's reputation under President Reagan.

Always at President's Side

A slight, austere figure who seems uncomfortable when he dons his checkered
pants for a frantic round of golf with Mr. Bush, Mr. Scowcroft has always been
at the President's side -in the Oval Office, on the golf course, in the
blue-and-white speedboat off the Maine coast. During the gulf crisis, it became
clear that he was not just tagging along.

During the long hours they spent together in August, Mr. Scowcroft said, he
helped Mr. Bush put the final touches on his strategy and made arrangements for
the President's ''endless phone calls'' to world leaders.

Mr. Scowcroft shifted uncomfortably in a chair in his West Wing corner office at
the suggestion that he had achieved a new measure of power in the President's
inner circle, which until August seemed so clearly dominated by Secretary of
State James A. Baker 3d.

If the lineup seems more hazy now, Mr. Scowcroft said, the image is ephemeral.
''I do the things I always do in a crisis,'' he said. ''Maybe it was more
visible, and maybe I had to do more, but I think that it was more in the nature
of the crisis than that there was a substantial change in the roles of the
players.''

A senior official who insisted on anonymity said Mr. Scowcroft's discussions
with the President had helped set the guidelines for what the Administration was
willing to tolerate in the gulf: ''How does it look in 90 days?'' the official
said. ''Suppose Hussein gets desperate and decides his only way out is to get
the Israelis involved? Suppose something happens to our Ambassador in Kuwait?
Suppose some hostages are killed? Suppose he attacks the oilfields? What are the
chances that the sanctions will in fact work?''

Baker Overseas at Outset

Mr. Scowcroft's presence was felt most strongly at the outset of the crisis,
when Mr. Baker was overseas.

Mr. Scowcroft's colleagues said he never had any doubt that the United States
would have to deploy troops, although it was not clear if Saudi Arabia would
cooperate.

To prepare the case, he worked closely with Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and with Defense Secretary Dick Cheney. Some
Administration officials say this troika has produced a new axis of influence in
the White House.

Robert M. Gates, Mr. Scowcroft's deputy, said Mr. Scowcroft had articulated
''the need to respond strongly and without equivocation'' during the first
post-invasion meetings of the President's security advisers.

''There was not any real dispute, but it was a matter of the urgent evolution of
people's thinking,'' Mr. Gates said. ''And in that, Brent was perhaps a step
ahead. He played a central role in bringing together the consensus that formed
rather quickly and in the crystallization of the U.S. response.''

'A Careful, Measured Policy'

Another official said the approach Mr. Scowcroft had advocated was ''a careful,
measured policy that is characteristic of Brent,'' adding ''He is prepared to
use force, but like a lot of the ex-military guys of his generation, it's not
something you do casually.''

Mr. Scowcroft, a West Point graduate and a pilot, spent much of his Air Force
career in the strategic, diplomatic and political branches, especially in
East-West relations and arms control.

From 1982 until he joined the Bush White House, he worked for Henry A.
Kissinger's New York consulting firm. He also served on three prominent
commissions: setting American doctrine for strategic nuclear missiles, reviewing
Pentagon management and, perhaps most important for his view of his current job,
one that investigated the Iran-contra affair in 1986-87. It is a classic cold
war resume. ''For Brent, Bush and Baker, the 1930's are a historical memory,''
an official said. ''They are postwar babies in the political sense. Their
historical context is not Munich but Korea, Vietnam, Soviet-American
confrontation.''

How to Neutralize Hussein

In addition to shaping the goals for the military operation, the experiences
that Mr. Scowcroft shares with Mr. Bush and his other advisers also played a
role in the Administration's groping for a political structure that could
neutralize Mr. Hussein's military strength if he left Kuwait.

An official said: ''You've got a Eurocentric group - arms control types,
East-West specialists, diplomats - who have just come through the amazing time
of ending the cold war. There is a sense that how we handle this crisis will
have consequences reaching far into the future. Nobody wants to blow it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait more than two months ago,
Brent Scowcroft, right, the national security adviser, has helped President Bush
cope with tension from the crisis. With them discussing the Kuwaiti Emir's visit
on Friday was Robert M. Gates, center, the deputy national security adviser.
(Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Poll Finds Strong Support for Bush's Goals, but Reluctance to Start a War

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 752 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 30


Americans overwhelmingly support President Bush's goals in the Persian Gulf, but
are not ready to start a war for them, according to a study of public opinion
released today.

The results of the survey, conducted for Americans Talk Security, a bipartisan
group of polling and consulting firms, are being issued at a time of increasing
concern in Washington that options short of war may not be adequate for forcing
Iraq out of Kuwait.

But 9 out of 10 Americans are not ready for their country to start a war. And
nearly half of those surveyed suggested they would be suspicious if the United
States said Iraq had started a war.

Seven out of 10 people said the United States should not even consider starting
a war until the economic blockade of Iraq and Kuwait and other initiatives have
been given a chance to work. Another 2 in 10 said the United States should never
start a war in the gulf under any circumstances. One in 10 said the United
States should go to war now.

Most Favor Readiness

Among those who wanted to wait and see whether the sanctions work, the
overwhelming majority said that the United States should get ready for a war in
the gulf and stay ready, but never start one.

Two-thirds of the Americans surveyed said they were not at all convinced by the
suggestion: ''The longer we wait the more things can go against us. If the
President thinks we can win, why wait?''

One thousand adults were interviewed between Sept. 21 and 26 for the survey,
which had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3.2 percentage points.

The survey consisted of 62 questions about attitudes on the Persian Gulf, making
it by far the most extensive effort made public to explore American opinion on
the subject.

Americans were evenly divided on how strong the United States military response
should be if Iraq attacks American forces in the gulf region. Of the people
surveyed, 49 percent said the response should be limited to the force necessary
for defense, and 47 percent said they would favor a massive counterattack and
all-out war.

The legacy of the Vietnam War was reflected in different and potentially
contradictory ways.

Americans do not want another military stalemate. Asked what they would do if
war did break out and then reached a stalemate, 73 percent said they would favor
launching a massive all-out attack to win.

But Americans are not certain that their Government will be candid with them if
war does come. About 47 percent said they believed the United States would tell
the American people that Iraq had started the war when the United States
actually had started it. Forty-two percent said the United States would not do
this.

The reluctance of Americans to start a war does not seem to be rooted in
ambivalence about the nation's goals or interests in the Persian Gulf.
Three-quarters of those surveyed said that President Bush did the right thing by
sending troops to the region.

Nine Goals Highly Valued

Alan F. Kay, director of Americans Talk Security, said that nine goals in the
Persian Gulf were viewed as very important or extremely important by at least 7
of 10 Americans. These ranged from bringing lasting peace to the Middle East and
preventing a war to removing Saddam Hussein as President of Iraq and insuring
that oil flows freely.

Among the other goals valued by the respondents were establishing the principle
that aggression will no longer be tolerated, securing an Iraq withdrawal from
Kuwait, and eliminating Iraq's ability to wage an aggressive war.

Mr. Kay said the wide array of goals supported by the respondents was unusual
for an American military commitment, and that it might present some dangers.

Chance That Support Could Fade

While support for a number of goals helps foster enormous support for a
commitment to the gulf, he said, it also means that American support could break
down as the situation grows more complicated and some goals are achieved and
others abandoned.

The return to power of the Kuwaiti royal family, a goal dramatized last week by
the visit to Washington of the Emir of Kuwait, Jaber al-Ahmed Al-Sabah, was
viewed as very important or extremely important by only 43 percent of Americans.

While only 12 percent of Americans said that maintaining the flow of oil was the
top goal, 26 percent said that it was the main goal of President Bush.

Mr. Kay said the public was in this case ''taking the high ground,'' adding,
''When they think about politicians, they're a little more realistic.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

First and Last, Armed Forces Exist to Fight;
Citizens and Defense

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 194 words


To the Editor:

In ''Summer's Soldiers'' (column, Sept. 13), Ana Quindlen describes recruiting
by the Unites States military as an appeal to self-interest. She is dismayed by
a military service staffed by untrained young people who have no access to
further education and promising jobs. No one could dispute this. It is a result
of decisions made in the aftermath of the Vietnam War, when society agonized
over the protests by and eventual loss of many of our brightest and best young
men.

It was decided that young United States citizens no longer had any obligation to
defend their country. Only those who chose to join would take on this task. The
results were just what Ms. Quindlen has described. Nevertheless the American
people expect our military leaders to provide us with well-trained forces,
highly motivated, able to cope with the increasingly complex equipment of a
modern army. Is it any wonder that they have had to rely on the appeals of
excitement and adventure?

Perhaps we need to rethink the role citizens play in the defense of their
country, so that it is shared equally by all.

BARBARA ISERLOTH
Fair Haven, N.J., Sept. 19, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Man Dead in Chinatown In Asian-Gang Gunfight

BYLINE: By JOHN T. McQUISTON

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 411 words


A wild burst of gunfire involving rival Asian gangs on a crowded street in
Chinatown left one man dead and two wounded yesterday, the police said.

The dead man, a 27-year-old Vietnamese, was shot once in the stomach by at least
two gunmen in front of the offices of a Chinese businessmen's association, which
was holding a reception for Taiwanese diplomats, said Officer Fred Weiner, a
police spokesman. The dead man was a gang member, the officer said.  The
shooting was the latest in a series of violent incidents in Chinatown between
Chinese-Americans, ethnic Chinese from Vietnam and Vietnamese who are members of
street gangs like the Flying Dragons, Ghost Shadows and Born to Kill,
law-enforcement officials said.

Two Chinese men standing near the entrance to the Fukien American Association at
125 East Broadway were wounded, one in the chest and the other in the leg, the
police said. It was not known if they were bystanders or targets of the gunmen,
Officer Weiner said, adding that neither was attending the reception.

'Dead at the Scene'

The shooting occurred at 4:21 P.M. as a group of Asian men were standing in
front of the association offices.

''Suddenly shots rang out and the Vietnamese man was hit,'' Officer Weiner said.
''He ran across the street and staggered about 30 yards up Pike Street, then
collapsed, dead at the scene.''

The 23-year-old Chinese man who was shot in the chest was taken to Bellevue
Hospital, where he was in critical condition.

The man who was shot in the leg was at the scene of the shooting when the police
arrived, but then slipped away in the crowd, the police said.

The police declined to identify any of the men until members of their families
could be notified.

'At Least Two Shooters'

Officer Weiner said the police recovered 14 spent 9-millimeter shell casings at
the scene and five spent rounds of an unknown caliber.

''We know there were at least two shooters, and there possibly may have been
more gang members involved, but they all fled on foot,'' he said.

While the dead man was Vietnamese, the police said they did not know whether the
gunmen were from another rival Vietnamese, Chinese or Chinese-Vietnamese gang.

The police said the dead man was not a member of Born to Kill, a
Chinese-Vietnamese gang that has committed a wave of robberies, assaults and
murders in Chinatown in recent years.

They said it was possible, however, that the gunmen were members of Born to
Kill.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Gen. Curtis LeMay, an Architect Of Strategic Air Power, Dies at 83

BYLINE: By ALFONSO A. NARVAEZ, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1205 words


Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, the former Air Force chief of staff who was an architect
of strategic air power and insisted that the nation be willing to use nuclear
weapons when necessary, died yesterday in a California military hospital. He was
83 years old and lived in Moreno Valley, Calif.

The retired four-star general died of a heart attack at the 22d Strategic
Hospital at March Air Force Base, an Air Force spokesman said.

General LeMay, who directed the air assault over Japan in the final days of
World War II and relayed the Presidential order to drop nuclear bombs, years
later wrote that a solution to the Vietnam War might be to bomb North Vietnam
''back into the Stone Ages.''

After World War II he commanded the Berlin airlift, then for many years was the
commander of the Strategic Air Command. He entered politics briefly in 1968 as
the running mate of George C. Wallace in the former Alabama Governor's
unsuccessful campaign for the Presidency.

Years after relaying the orders from President Harry S. Truman to drop nuclear
bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, General LeMay said the actions were not
necessary.

'Truman Told Me to Do It'

''We felt that our incendiary bombings had been so successful that Japan would
collapse before we invaded,'' he said in a 1985 interview with the Omaha World
Herald. ''We went ahead and dropped the bombs because President Truman told me
to do it. He told me in a personal letter.''

He was hawkish on the Vietnam War and an outspoken advocate of manned air power
based on a willingness to use nuclear weapons.

When Mr. Wallace introduced him as his running mate in 1968 on the American
Independent Party ticket, General LeMay called for use of any available means,
including nuclear weapons, to end the war. Later, he visited Vietnam on a
fact-finding mission and called for renewed bombing of North Vietnam, especially
the harbor at Haiphong.

In his book ''Mission with LeMay,'' published by Doubleday in 1965, he wrote of
the North Vietnamese, ''My solution to the problem would be to tell them frankly
that they've got to draw in their horns and stop their aggression or we're going
to bomb them back into the Stone Ages.''

Known as the ''Iron Eagle,'' General LeMay was an avid anti-Communist and held
other strongly conservative views. ''I don't believe there are good Communists
and bad Communists,'' the general said. ''I just think they are Communists and
they all have the same basic principles involved which I think are basically
wrong.''

At one point in his Vice-Presidential campaign, General LeMay acknowledged that
he was disturbed by the supporters who sometimes shouted, ''Kill them'' at black
hecklers.

''But I am a little more in sympathy with those people,'' he added, ''than I am
with people who come in and try to break up thge meeting.''

A tough, outdoors type, General LeMay appeared gruff and dominating and was seen
as implacable and unduly blunt.

One story that circulated about him was that when a group of colonels invited
him to dinner he replied with a scowl, ''A man should have dinner with his
friends, and the commanding general has no friends.''

His Trademark: A Cigar

A stocky man of 5 feet 10 inches who was known for the cigar clenched in his
teeth, General LeMay was seen as tough but also fair.

''I want to see all my key staff officers at least once a week,'' he said in his
first staff meeting in Germany in 1947 while he was heading the Berlin Airlift.
''Don't bother to knock, just walk in. If I'm busy, I'll tell you to get out. I
want men of action in my organization who can make their own decisions.''

Then he added, ''If you make an occasional wrong one, I'll back you up.''

He once instituted an Air Force survival school in the mountains near Colorado
Springs to imbue pilots with the will to escape if they were shot down behind
enemy lines. On one bitterly cold night as pilots were huddling in tents made of
parachutes, one of them began to complain loudly.

''Who thought up this deal?'' he demanded to know.

Out of the doorway of another improvised tent emerged the unmistakable cigar and
the four stars of the commanding general.

''I did,'' General LeMay said. ''Got any comments?''

His Early Years

Curtis Emerson LeMay was born in Columbus, Ohio, on Nov. 15, 1906, and as a boy
built crystal wireless sets and roamed the southern Ohio hills with a gun and
Bowie knife.

On graduating from high school, he tried to get a West Point appointment from
his Congressman but he had no political influence and instead went to Ohio State
University and studied civil engineering.

He was in the Reserve Officers Training Corps and was accepted as a flying
cadet. After receiving a commission in 1930 as a pilot and combat observer, he
became one of the top navigators.

He served in Michigan and Hawaii before being called to the Air Force's general
headquarters at Langley Field, Va. There he was assigned as an intelligence
officer for the 49th Bombardment Squadron. He was one of the first
navigator-pilots of B-17 bombers and took part in goodwill flights in the Flying
Fortresses. As an experienced long-range overwater navigator, he was selected to
start ferry routes to Africa and England and was awarded the Distinguished
Flying Cross.

He was promoted to colonel in 1942 and as commander of the 305th Bombardment
Group took his men to Europe as part of the Eighth Air Force. On the night
before departing, he admonished his men about their behavior in England.

''I don't want to hear of any of you men getting into any fights with the
British,'' he said. ''But if you do, you'd better not get whipped.''

His group was among the first American Air Force units to see combat in World
War II. He earned the Air Medal and the Silver Star in five combat missions over
Europe. Deciding that too many B-17's were missing their targets because they
were zig-zagging to avoid flak, he led a seven-minute straight-in run through
heavy enemy anti-aircraft fire to drop bombs on the German-held port of St.
Nazaire. This demonstrated the effectiveness of such straight-in runs.

He also developed the combat formation of placing aircraft at staggered levels
so firepower could be exploited from any angle. This stacking formation was
generally adopted for the duration of the war.

Night Incendiary Attacks

In 1944, he was assigned to the China-Burma-India theater of operations to head
the 20th Bomber Command, which had B-29 Super Fortresses. He initiated low-level
night incendiary attacks on Japanese industrial centers, including Tokyo.
Similar attacks devastated Nagoya, Kobe and Osaka. He received an Oak Leaf
Cluster to his Distinguished Flying Cross.

In August 1945, he became chief of staff of the Strategic Air Forces and was
part of the group that planned the atomic bombings of Japan. In 1947, he was
assigned to Germany, where he directed the Berlin Airlift that thwarted the
Soviet attempt to isolate Berlin as the cold war was breaking out.

A year later, he was appointed commanding general of the Strategic Air Command
and in 1961 was named Air Force Chief of Staff.

He is survived by his wife, the former Helen Maitland, whom he married in 1934,
and by a daughter, Jane.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Curtis E. LeMay (The New York Times, 1968); Major General
LeMay, left, leader of the 21st Bomber Command in the Pacific during World War
II, talking with one of his officers. (U.S. Army, 1945)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Scores of Actors Flock to Tryouts For Ethnic Roles in 'Miss Saigon'

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 925 words




What's that I smell in the air?
The American Dream. . . .
On stage each night: Fred Astaire.
The American Dream.
  - From ''The American Dream,'' in ''Miss Saigon.''

By 9:15 in the morning, there were 67 people in line outside the Royale Theater
on West 45th Street, around the corner from Shubert Alley and in the heart of
that part of midtown Manhattan known as the theater district or, more
specifically, Broadway. When the doors opened a little after 10, there were more
than 140, all there with one goal, one dream: to get a job in a Broadway show.

But this was not just any Broadway show, and this was not your typical open
audition. The show was ''Miss Saigon,'' the hit London musical that has been the
subject of much racial controversy in the last two months, and the audition was
specifically for ethnic minority actors - Asian actors, black actors, Hispanic
actors, American Indian actors.

''I'm here at this audition today because I look at it as being historical,''
said Adam Dyer, who is 25 years old and lives in New York City. ''You rarely see
an audition that is supposed to exclude a racial majority. It's a chance for
people who have not been considered for a lot of things to show their stuff.''

Lucy Liu, 21, of New York City, agreed. ''There aren't many Asian roles, and
it's very difficult to get your foot in the door,'' Ms. Liu said. '' 'Miss
Saigon' is really important for all Asians. It will have so much to do with what
happens in the future for us in the theater.''

Set Up After Union Dispute

Cameron Mackintosh, the producer of ''Miss Saigon,'' set up yesterday's open
audition, as well as one today, same time, same place, after his dispute with
Actors' Equity over the casting of the hit London musical was resolved last
month.

Back in August, Equity barred the British actor Jonathan Pryce from playing the
leading role of the Engineer, a Eurasian pimp, in the story of an American G.I.
and his Vietnamese lover in the last days of the Vietnam War. The union said
that it was concerned about the need to increase employment opportunities for
ethnic minorities and that it could not condone the casting of a Caucasian in
the role of a Eurasian.

The next day, Mr. Mackintosh canceled the $10 million show, which had an advance
ticket sale of more than $25 million. After receiving a petition from many of
its members urging it to reconsider, the union reversed its decision, saying it
had ''applied an honest and moral principle in an inappropriate manner.'' But
the producer said that before he could reinstate the show, he would have to be
given a free hand in casting. After many days of negotiations, a compromise was
worked out, and the show is to begin performances in March, as originally
scheduled, at the Broadway Theater.

One part of the compromise was that there were to be further auditions for
roles, with advertisements announcing the auditions placed in leading
Asian-American newspapers. The musical has a cast of about 50, with 34 roles
intended for ethnic minority actors and 27 of those specifically meant for Asian
performers.

The Hope: A Beginning

Yesterday's line began forming at 5:30 A.M. with the arrival of David Proctor,
26, of New York, who came straight from his job with Federal Express. Mr.
Proctor, a native of New Orleans, said he had worked in theater in Washington,
had been a stand-in on ''The Cosby Show'' and was hopeful ''Miss Saigon'' would
be ''the beginning of my Broadway career.''

Second in line was Maria Cristina Pizarro, 23, a New Yorker who hails from the
Philippines, who arrived a little after 7. ''A lot of people here are
talented,'' Ms. Pizarro said. ''I think it's good that they're giving everybody
a chance.''

Some of the performers, mentioning the dispute over Mr. Pryce, said they felt a
little uneasy about auditioning. ''I think my desire to do this show overrides
anything else,'' said Jonathan Sta. Ana, 24, ''but I do have mixed feelings
about Jonathan Pryce doing that role. I think it's time that Asians are noticed
for their worth, their abilities, in the performing community.''

Not all the actors and actresses were members of minority groups. Some said they
had shown up simply because it was an open audition. ''Anyone has a right to
audition,'' said Danny Macrini, 29, of New York. Those who wished to audition
were given an opportunity to do so.

Open auditions for the show were also held in Los Angeles on Friday and
Saturday, and a spokesman for Mr. Mackintosh said that about 240 people had been
seen there. Neither Mr. Mackintosh nor any of his associates would comment on
yesterday's audition, and the open audition was open only to performers, more
than 180 of whom had signed up by noon. Members of the press were not allowed
inside the theater. The spokesman indicated that Mr. Mackintosh did not wish to
turn the event into a media circus.

One of those in line was Joy Pak, 22, who came to New York two weeks ago from
Arizona. Ms. Pak, who was born in Seoul, South Korea, but moved to Arizona when
she was 4, said she didn't know whether she had enough experience to be
seriously considered for a role. ''I just want to have fun,'' she said. ''I want
to sing my heart out.''

She was familiar with the dispute over the musical, she added, but it didn't
trouble her. ''My concern is basically for the performer,'' she said. ''Whoever
the best performer is, he or she should get the job. Talent is what matters.
Acting is an illusion, and if you can create the illusion, more credit to you.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cliff Torng, Carol Chung, center, and Luri Domingo waiting at
Royale Theater to audition for ''Miss Saigon.'' (Chester Higgins Jr./The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Top Soviet General Tells U.S. Not to Attack in Gulf

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1109 words


The head of the Soviet military said yesterday that the economic sanctions
against Iraq were working and that no force should be used in the Persian Gulf
unless it was approved by the United Nations.

The remarks by the Soviet general, Mikhail A. Moiseyev, Chief of the Soviet
General Staff, were the most explicit comments made so far by a Soviet official
on the need to have United Nations approval for the use of force by the United
States and other nations that have opposed the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.

The Soviet general's comments - in an unusual joint interview with Gen. Colin L.
Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff - signaled a basic disagreement
with Washington about the circumstances under which military force could be used
in the Persian Gulf.

''We cannot view the resolution of any crisis like this by means of using
arms,'' said General Moiseyev, who is on a tour of the United States as a guest
of General Powell. But General Powell pointedly said President Bush had not
ruled out any options.

The two generals were interviewed by writers and editors of The New York Times.

Suggesting that military force was not needed to force Iraqi troops out of
Kuwait, General Moiseyev said the economic embargo was beginning to hurt Iraq.

''Saddam Hussein has really understood now finally how far he has gone,''
General Moiseyev said. ''He is finding himself in economic and political
isolation, and he can't survive very long that way.''

General Moiseyev asserted that protests, uprisings and desertions in Iraqi were
sapping the strength of the Iraqi military and impelling President Hussein to
seek a diplomatic solution.

''You can't keep an army together just by using fear and intimidation against
your own troops,'' General Moiseyev said. ''Also there are rumors beginning to
abound about people who are going to make attempts against Saddan Hussein's
life, forcing Hussein to begin to look for ways out of this crisis.''

He said that if military force was used by the United States and its allies,
such action should be approved by the United Nations.

Trust Between Generals

''I don't see really any other way,'' General Moiseyev said. His position also
underscored the reluctance of the Soviet military to be drawn into a conflict in
the region.

The Bush Administration, in contrast, has pointedly kept open the possibility of
using military force to drive the Iraqis out of Kuwait and of doing so without
United Nations sanction, a point General Powell reaffirmed today.

''They see any use of military force being within the context of the United
Nations actions,'' General Powell said. ''The United States hopes the situation
can be resolved peacefully. We are not eliminating any of the options that are
available to the President.''

Flanked by military aides, General Moiseyev sat beside his American counterpart
and spoke forcefully on an array of issues. The two men spoke warmly of each
other and General Moiseyev said there was complete trust between them. It was a
throwback to the days during World War II when the two countries became allies.

General Moiseyev was named Chief of Staff and First Deputy Defense Minister in
December 1988. At 49 he was the youngest Soviet Chief of Staff to be chosen
since 1952. His promotion from commander of the Far Eastern military district to
the ministry post over many senior defense officials was taken as a sign that
the Soviet leadership wanted to infuse the military with fresh ideas.

The Soviet general assailed the dwindling prestige of the military in Soviet
society and likened it to the fallen stature of the American military after the
war in Vietnam. He spoke with evident disdain about the recommendations by
Georgi A. Arbatov and other specialists at the U.S.A.-Canada Institute in Moscow
and others seeking to overhaul the Soviet military.

Israeli Attack on Reactor

In an unusual admission, the Soviet general said that Israel's bombing of the
Iraqi nuclear reactor at Osirak in 1981 was understandable.

The United States, the Soviet Union and other nations criticized the action at
the time. But General Moiseyev said yesterday, ''There was some sort of
foundation or reason for taking the action that Israel undertook.''

But many of the Soviet General's remarks centered on the Persian Gulf, a subject
he discussed with President Bush at a White House meeting yesterday before he
and General Powell came to New York.

Pentagon officials said last week that there appeared to be a split between top
Soviet Foreign Ministry officials who had called for tough action against Iraq
and their counterparts in the military who wanted to maintain some measure of
influence with Baghdad by maintaining advisers there.

Whatever the merits of that Pentagon analysis, General Moiseyev repeatedly
counseled against the use of force against Iraq and defended the continuing
presence of Soviet advisers, whom he called technicians, insisting that they
were making no contribution to the Iraqi military and saying that their presence
represented legitimate economic relations between Moscow and Baghdad.

Plan for U.N. Panel

General Moiseyev said that the United Nations Military Staff Committee should be
activated and that Foreign Ministry officials from all the nations opposing Iraq
should meet as part of the commission to analyze the situation.

The general, who said he had proposed the activation of the committee to
President Bush yesterday, said the committee could prepare an additional
resolution setting a timetable for resolving the crisis.

''I do not think Hussein is going to go for fighting the whole world,'' the
Soviet general said.

General Powell said the United States would consider the Soviet suggestion to
activate the committee but expressed caution about whether it would contribute
to a solution of the crisis in the gulf.

The Soviet general insisted that Moscow had only 206 advisers, including 42
interpreters, in Iraq, and that none were linked to the Soviet military. He said
that Iraq had posed no barriers to the withdrawal of the technicians, who he
said were involved in ''trade relations'' and that 77 were close to fulfilling
their contract and would return to the Soviet Union soon.

But he dismissed the suggestion that Moscow immediately withdraw the rest,
saying ''normal, healthy contacts with all countries'' were justified.

General Powell said General Moiseyev had presented a breakdown of the 206
technicians, which the Pentagon would examine. The Pentagon has said Moscow has
from 500 to 1,000 military and civilian advisers in Iraq and that some of them
are maintaining Iraqi aircraft.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gen. Mikhail A. Moiseyev, left, chief of the Soviet General
Staff, discussing options in the Persian Gulf crisis yesterday in New York City.
With him was Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
(Jack Manning/The New York Times) (pg. A1); Wearing a chemical-protective suit,
a member of the 164th Armored Battalion of the Army's 24th Infantry Division
jumped off an M-1 tank during a training exercise yesterday in Saudi Arabia.
(Reuters) (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE BUDGET AGREEMENT;
Pivotal Moment for Bush

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1158 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 2


With his speech tonight from the Oval Office, George Bush completed a
fundamental transition: The President who succeeded for so long at giving
Americans only good news is now telling them to prepare for economic pain at
home and the possibility of war abroad.

With remarkable speed, Mr. Bush has moved from the most protracted honeymoon in
recent White House history to twin crises that could determine the success of
his Presidency.

The decision to confront the Republican rebellion on Capitol Hill over the
budget agreement quickly and directly in a nationally televised speech
represented a judgment that any delay could allow events to spin out of control.
If the emerging prospects for passage of the budget package turn into defeat,
Mr. Bush would immediately lose his calculated gamble that such an agreement
would be good for the economy and thus bolster his re-election campaign in 1992.

For more than a year and a half, everything seemed to be going Mr. Bush's way,
especially in Europe. Then on Aug. 8, six days after the Iraqi invasion of
Kuwait, Mr. Bush went on national television to announce that he was sending
troops to the Persian Gulf and to prepare the country for the possibility that
American soldiers and civilians could die in a far-off war.

Tonight, less than two months later, Mr. Bush again spoke from the Oval Office
to add the bitter message that American must also prepare for 12 cents a gallon
more in gasoline taxes, reduced Federal spending in such touchy areas as medical
care for the elderly and a generally tighter economy.

Appeal to the People

Telling his audience tonight that ''this deficit agreement is tough and so are
the times,'' Mr. Bush said: ''This is the first time in my Presidency that I've
made an appeal like this to you, the American people. With your help, we can at
last put this budget crisis behind us and face the challenges that lie ahead.''

Suddenly, the 1988 campaign events at which loudspeakers blared ''Don't worry,
be happy,'' seemed very distant. Mr. Bush was selling a budget agreement that
not only violated his no-tax campaign pledge but did not include the reduction
in the capital gains tax rate that the President had made a crusade.

In a significant revision of his political rhetoric, the politician who tarred
his 1988 opponent as a tax-and-spend liberal and only two weeks ago was
attacking Congressional Democrats over the budget used his television appearance
tonight instead to make a pitch for budget coordination that at times sounded
like a set-up for the televised speech that followed, by George J. Mitchell of
Maine, the Senate majority leader.

So far, public support for the Persian Gulf operation appears to be strong. But
the budget crisis is one that tests Mr. Bush's ability to manage the economy,
one of his chief selling points in the 1988 campaign, as well as his sway over
Congress and his control of his own party.

The decision for Mr. Bush to go on television was reached so quickly that speech
writers were typing virtually until broadcast time. But the buffeting that top
aides like John H. Sununu, the chief of staff, and Richard G. Darman, the budget
director, took on Capitol Hill on Monday left a clear message for a seasoned
political professional like Mr. Bush: This was a time when there was no
substitute for Presidential authority, and not to use it meant the risk of
losing it.

''The President recognizes that these are twin tests of his leadership,'' a
White House official said tonight. ''But he obviously thinks he can rise to
them. It will be a big victory if he can carry this through, just as if we can
come through the crisis in the Middle East, the President will have shown
leadership in a big way.''

Good Position, Big Risk

The President is in a good position to confront his new challenge; his
popularity, higher than any other Presidents' at the same point of his
Administration, lends him political armor. The White House was confident that
Mr. Bush would win over Congress and succeed in persuading the public that the
budget package announced in the Rose Garden on Sunday is, at least, a necessary
evil.

But Mr. Bush is also without question taking a major political risk. Not only
was he forced to do much of the work for Democrats as well as Republicans in
selling the budget agreement with only his fourth nationally televised Oval
Office speech, but he was making it a personal test in his own party.

Although they strove to establish an air of bipartisanship, Democrats in
Congress did not hesitate to point out Mr. Bush's difficulty. ''The President
has been reticent until now to tell anybody anything they didn't want to hear,''
said Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House majority leader.

Vows Public and Private

White House officials said Mr. Bush had intended all along to make a televised
appeal on behalf of the budget agreement, something he had promised he would do,
both publicly and in private with Democratic leaders of Congress.

But they said the timing assumed new urgency today after two meetings at the
White House with rebellious Republican congressmen, and with the first test vote
in the House of Representatives only two days away. Mr. Bush will be on the road
on Thursday, campaigning for Republican candidates in New England.

''It's not that we are in a panic,'' one official said. ''Things seem to be
going our way, but gradually, and there are a lot of people who need the cover
to tell their constitutents that the President went on national TV and also
personally asked for their support.''

Mr. Bush's task is complicated by the public defiance of Representative Newt
Gingrich of Georgia, the House Republican whip, who should be rallying the
troops on Capitol Hill but instead has broken with the bipartisan budget
agreement. When the White House invited key Republicans down from the Hill today
for the meetings with Mr. Bush, Mr. Gingrich was not included.

Observing this spectacle, a leading House Democrat said, ''It's a little like
having the secret police turn against you.''

'A Serious Moment in Life'

Harry C. McPherson Jr., who served as an adviser to President Lyndon B. Johnson,
said, ''From what I've read about the Republican cloakroom, this does sound like
a serious moment in life for George Bush.''

Mr. McPherson said the President was in a far better position than Johnson
during a similar moment, when he had to confront American opposition to the
Vietnam war, fight inflation at home and impose a surtax on personal incomes to
pay for that very conflict.

''In the minds of the public I think the deficit and Saddam Hussein are stuff
that has happened to Bush. '' Mr. McPherson said.

But, he said, ''In talking about the pain that has to be endured because of the
deficit maybe this is finally the time when the public is going to connect the
Republican Administration and Bush himself with the deficit.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
The Saudis, the G.I.'s and the Common Cause: Allies, but at Arm's Length

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 874 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, Oct. 1


Almost two months after the King of Saudi Arabia asked American forces to defend
his country, the attitude of Saudi citizens toward the swelling American
military presence here seems supportive, yet decidedly ambivalent.

In dozens of conversations and interviews, many Saudis expressed backing for
American military assistance at a time when Iraq has invaded neighboring Kuwait
and massed a threatening army on the border of Saudi Arabia.

''We had a gun at our head,'' a senior Saudi official said. ''Virtually everyone
is very glad the Americans came.''

But beyond that gratitude, the acceptance of the American military presence here
appears strictly limited. The conditioned welcome reflects the very distinct
Islamic culture and deep trepidation of this conservative Arab country as it
confronts a radically changing world.

'It's a Mixed Feeling'

The majority of Saudis appear concerned that the American military presence not
be used, even inadvertently, to force political or social change on Saudi
Arabia.

''It's a mixed feeling, let me tell you,'' said a professional Saudi woman who
knows the United States well, referring to her reaction to having an American
army here. ''We hope this will end soon and the troops will go.''

Some Saudis' attitude toward the American troops verges on treating them as a
sort of contracted superpower enforcer, whose paid job is to defend Saudi Arabia
and American oil supplies - and then clear out.

''In a way, the American soldiers are a new kind of foreign worker here,'' said
a teacher in the capital. ''We have Pakistanis driving taxis and now we have
Americans defending us.''

Such attitudes are seldom expressed with any overt hostility. Rather, they seem
to reflect an acknowledgment that Saudi Arabia and the United States have very
different cultures, one liberal democratic, secular and libertine, the other
monarchical, puritanically Muslim and inward-looking.

Shared Interests

What unites them are not ties of brotherhood, both Saudi and American officials
say, but colder, though perhaps no less affecting, interests aimed at
safeguarding the security of the two countries. ''What's wrong with having
interests?'' asked a Saudi administrator here. ''Countries have interests -and
it is very much in the interest of Saudi Arabia and the United States to be
friend.''

American officials emphasize that they have no interest in trying to change
Saudi Arabia - a personalist monarchy in which there are no elections, no
constitution, no legal opposition parties, limited freedom of the press and very
limited rights for women and laborers. Nor does there appear to be much interest
among Saudis in promoting any of these political innovations in a welfare state
that has given them until now a very stable, prosperous and safe life.

A key part of the American policy of not disturbing the traditional Saudi way of
things appears to be to insure that most American soldiers remain separate from
Saudis. ''We will only create problems by trying to mix with the locals,'' said
an American military officer.

Saudis do not go out of their way to meet American troops or invite them into
their homes. The reason for such distance, again, appears mainly to be cultural.

Saudis can be extremely hospitable. But in the main they are an intensely
private, occasionally xenophobic, family-oriented people with no habit of
socializing with foreigners.

G.I.'s Question Attitude

Even though it is not overtly hostile, the local reception is a source of
questioning among American troops. Soldiers ask what the Saudis feel about the
United States and the American buildup here, because most troops have not spoken
to a single Saudi since they have arrived.

''In a way it's sort of sad,'' an American official said. ''Tens of thousands of
Americans are going to have come to Saudi Arabia without having any sense of
what this country or its people are like.''

Saudis say, however, that their chief concern is that American troops might
overwhelm their society in the way a huge American military presence overwhelmed
parts of Vietnam, Thailand and the Philippines.

''If one American soldier tries to pick up a Saudi woman, already it's a
disaster for us,'' said a Saudi official. His comment reflects local feelings in
a society where contact is virtually prohibited between unmarried women and men,
especially foreign men.

In a further reflection of deep cultural differences, there is now a debate over
the effects of having an American army of nonbelievers here during the Muslim
holy period of Ramadan next March and the annual holy pilgrimage to Mecca known
as the Hajj, which begins next June. Muslim fundamentalists have twice in recent
years initiated violent attacks and demonstrations during the Hajj, aimed at
undermining the Saudi royal family.

Some Saudi officials say the American presence will not prove to be a major
issue. Others worry that Iraq or Iran will use the next Hajj to denounce the
presence of infidel American soldiers in the holy land.

Commenting on such debates, an influential Saudi businessman took a broader
view. ''No matter what we do, the American presence here is going to affect
us,'' he said. ''Whether we like it or not.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Senate Gives Bush Limited Backing on Gulf Policy

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL C. NASH, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 458 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 2


The Senate overwhelmingly adopted a resolution today that supports the actions
of President Bush in the Persian Gulf to date, commends him for working through
the United Nations to impose economic sanctions on Iraq, but stops short of
endorsing the use of military force.

''This resolution is not an authorization for the use of force, now or in the
future,'' said Senator George J. Mitchell, Democrat of Maine, the majority
leader. ''Nor does this represent approval of all future actions taken by the
President. It is not a blank check.''

The action by the Senate, which supported the resolution in a 96-to-3 vote, came
a day after the House endorsed a similar, though more detailed, resolution of
support for the President by a 380-to-29 vote.

Both members of the House and Senate emphatically said that the support was only
for actions to date and that in accordance with the War Powers Resolution and
Congress's constitutional authority to declare war, they expected to be
consulted by the White House before any pre-emptive strike was made.

While the Senate's resolution is not binding on the President, the House's
resolution would have to be signed by the President and would represent some
binding authority on him.

Oil and Power Politics

Indeed, optimism by members of Congress is guarded. While they praised President
Bush for working through the United Nations to impose unprecedented economic
sanctions on Iraq for its invasion of Kuwait, they expressed concern about the
nation's engaging in a full-scale war over oil. They also worried that the
United States is becoming the chief policeman in the Middle East.

''I rise in very, very qualified support of this resolution,'' said
Representative Marcy Kaptur, Democrat of Ohio, in the House on Monday. ''This is
one member who is not voting for a long-term commitment of our ground forces in
that region.''

The House and Senate now have to convene a conference to work out differences in
the two resolutions.

Despite the broad support, some lawmakers expressed deep concern. Senator Edward
M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, who voted against the resolution along
with Senators Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, and Bob Kerrey, Democrat
of Nebraska, warned that the resolution was worded in a way that gave President
Bush far too much power.

''We must be careful not to confuse support with a blank-check endorsement for
future actions,'' Mr. Kennedy said. ''In my view, that is exactly what the
resolution does. It is, in effect, a Tonkin Gulf Resolution for the Persian
Gulf.''

He was referring to the 1964 resolution that authorized President Lyndon B.
Johnson to ''take all necessary steps, including the use of armed force, to
assist'' South Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Washington's Men Did Not Eat Spam

BYLINE: By MARIALISA CALTA

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 5; Living Desk

LENGTH: 585 words


IT was Napoleon who said that an Army travels on its stomach. That lesson became
reality to George Washington at Valley Forge, when, said Dr. Steven E. Anders,
the historian of the Army Quartermaster Corps, he ''heard the troops mutinously
chanting, 'No meat, no meat.' '' In Washington's day, the troops were allotted
rations of bread, meat and beer or cider, but in hard times they were reduced to
''fire cake,'' a mixture of flour and water baked on a griddle.

By the Civil War, Dr. Anders said, ''the starving times were over.'' A depot
system for distributing provisions had been established, and the Union troops,
at least, were regularly supplied. In addition to hardtack - biscuits of flour,
salt and water derisively called ''worm castles'' for the weevils that inhabited
them - the men received rations of dehydrated foods: desiccated vegetables
(nicknamed ''desecrated vegetables''), condensed milk and meat that was fresh,
salted or dried.

The beer ration was replaced by coffee, considered ''a great morale booster,''
Dr. Anders said. The job of cook was bestowed on the men who best knew their way
around a campfire and those who could be creative with hardtack: softening it in
water or coffee or frying it in fatback for a dish known as ''skilly galee.''

The Spanish-American War may have been called the ''splendid little war'' by
John Hay, the Secretary of State at the time, but camp life was just the
opposite, Dr. Anders said. Of the 5,462 deaths among troops, only 379 resulted
from combat. The rest died of diseases, many of them related to improperly
inspected, packaged or stored food and to bad sanitation. After rumors of
tainted beef swept through the military, Congressional hearings were held and,
Dr. Anders said, ''heads rolled and careers were ruined.'' The Army began to
concentrate on training food-service workers and on improving supply systems.

In 1906 the Army opened its School for Bakers and Cooks in Fort Riley, Kan. In
1913, 65,000 Civil War veterans converged at Gettysburg, Pa., for the 50th
anniversary reunion of the battle there, and the Army for the first time served
canned, boneless beef, which Dr. Anders said ''went over like gangbusters'' and
quickly was adopted as a ration.

World War I saw the introduction of instant coffee and the first mobile kitchen
units: wood-burning stoves mounted on mule-pulled wagons. The Army also adapted
from the French an insulated food container, commonly called a marmite, which is
still used to transport hot food to the front.

In World War II the C ration was introduced. This was an individual field meal
of canned food that was remarkably popular among soldiers and used through the
Korean and Vietnam Wars.

Today, soldiers dine on A rations, fresh food prepared in a mess hall; B
rations, dried or canned foods; T rations, precooked trays of food that are
heated in mobile field kitchens and M.R.E.'s (Meal, Ready to Eat), which are
individual meals heated by each soldier or eaten cold.

Nutrition research and improved packaging technology have advanced the
development of military food, Dr. Anders said. Throughout history, he said, the
military has been responsible for refining such techniques as canning and
freeze-drying, and popularizing the use of condensed milk, instant coffee and
Spam.

Napolean was not the only one to recognize the importance of food for the
military. His adversary at Waterloo, the Duke of Wellington, is said to have
boasted: ''Many can lead troops. I can feed them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

45 Return to the Place Where the Future Began

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 954 words


Grown men do not often gather to pay homage to their junior high school,
especially when it existed for only seven years.

But a quarter century after their school's founding, the graduates of the Msgr.
William Kelly School, a Catholic school for gifted minority and working-class
youths, boast of their alma mater with the pride and reverence most people
reserve for the tweediest Ivy League institutions.

Last weekend, 45 men reunited in the basement parish hall of a West Side church
to celebrate the school and teachers who helped open their eyes to a world
beyond cramped housing projects and blue-collar careers. They returned as
doctors, lawyers, executives,social workers and, in some cases, with paunches,
thinning hair and children in tow.

''Kelly was a turning point for me,'' said Michael Schneider, a physician who
flew in from Ohio to attend the reunion. He grew up in the Bronx, the son of a
janitor who had emigrated from Romania. ''It made me optimistic about the
future.''

Many said their experiences at the school, which they called simply Kelly, not
only awakened them to possibilities, but also to a responsibility to use their
talents to improve their communities. The school has produced several public
interest lawyers, government officials and entreprenuers who have employed
inner-city residents. Many alumni said the epitome of that philosophy was
Brother Brian Carty, a teacher and principal at Kelly who was their mentor,
friend and booster.

'Create and Take Risks'

''We always emphasized that the only change that is going to take place is by us
creating that change,'' said Brother Brian, a 46-year-old beefy, bespectacled
man whose easy smile is topped by a thick, bushy moustache. ''They did not have
to be passive and accept what is, but had to create and take risks.''

The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York took a bit of a gamble itself when it
opened the school in 1965 to meet the needs of talented inner-city children who
were not sufficiently challenged by the traditional curriculum. The 270-students
who attended the school had to pass a stringent test and be recommended by their
parochial and public school principals before being admitted to Kelly, which
served grades six through eight.

The school benefited from a synergy with the social ferment of the civil rights
and Vietnam eras. In contrast to local schools, which reflected the de facto
segregation of New York's balkanized neighborhoods, Kelly students came from the
five boroughs and all races.

''These kids were all bright and different,'' said Dr. Schneider. ''It was the
first time for many with a lot of other black kids or Hispanics.''

Big Payoff Came Later

They received an education that emphasized the basics of reading and writing,
but also valued independent study and group projects. Courses in psychology,
theology, cinema and philosophy and frequent field trips rounded out their
education and spurred them to think about their place in the world.

''We told the kids they had the ability and they had to start using their
heads,'' Brother Brian said. ''We expected a great deal from them and didn't let
them coast.'' He said the payoff came when a number of Kelly's alumni were
admitted to New England boarding schools or the city's elite public high schools
and later went on to Ivy League colleges.

''Kelly helped me see the big picture,'' said Kevin Allen, a third-year
opthamology resident at Harlem Hospital who graduated from Kelly in 1968. ''A
lot of kids today don't think they can be leaders, but Kelly brought that
across, that the world wasn't just the five blocks up and down my street.''

Closed in 1972

Dr. Allen added that the spirit of service he learned at Kelly has influenced
him to plan to open an office in the inner city when he finishes his residency.
''There's a huge need in the inner city for eye care, from young people who need
glasses for school to old people who have glaucoma.''

Neftali Martinez credited the lessons he learned at the school with having
helped him rebuild his life after it was torn apart by drug abuse and a fling
with the fast life on the streets. ''If it hadn't been for Kelly I would have
been lost or dead,'' said Mr. Martinez, 36, a treatment team leader at Creedmore
Psychiatric Hospital who said he used drugs while at Kelly. ''But there was this
connection to the world of ideas, Kelly kept me anchored and helped me realize I
have this talent.'' He said he now tries to impart the lessons he learned both
on the streets and at Kelly to a group of troubled teen-agers that meets
regularly at a West Side church.

The Kelly school closed in 1972, the victim of diminished archdiocesan funds and
dwindling numbers of the De La Salle Christian Brothers, the religious order
that ran the school. But Brother Brian, determined that today's poor urban
youths need such a school more than ever, kept alive his dream of reopening the
school. In 1984 he and a group of Kelly alumni, many of whom had remained in New
York, opened the De La Salle Academy on the Upper West Side, which is supported
by donations and a tuition assessed on a sliding scale.

The unfulfilled promises of the 1960's, combined with crack, unemployment and
broken families make the job more difficult, and hiring for the school is a more
expensive now that most of the 12-member faculty is composed of lay teachers.
But Brother Brian vowed to promote the values of service and achievement to a
new group of students that he hopes will become a new generation of urban
leaders.

His only fear is that they may become victims of their success. ''Too many kids
want to leave the city and escape to the suburbs,'' he said. ''But who can blame
them?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Brother Brian Carty, mentor for many of the graduates of the
Msgr. William Kelly School, was joined at the school's 25th anniversary
celebration by students of his new school, De La Salle Academy. From left were
Monica Welby, Monique Jennings and Barrence Anthony, back to camera. (Lee Romero
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 5, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
KPMG Peat Marwick Elects U.S. Chairman

BYLINE: By Alison Leigh Cowan

SECTION: Section D; Page 3, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 449 words


As the head of the San Francisco office of Peat Marwick, Jon C. Madonna had the
delicate task of merging his practice with that of the second-largest United
States office of KMG Main Hurdman, a British-Dutch firm that merged with Peat in
1987. Yesterday, his 1,850 partners elected him the next chairman of the
American unit of KPMG Peat Marwick.

He succeeds Larry D. Horner, 56 years old, a visionary leader who touched off a
three-way race for the top job when he announced in August that he would not
seek re-election. Mr. Madonna, who is 47, snared the crucial support of KPMG's
board on Sept. 7 and won the prize in an uncontested election yesterday at the
firm's annual meeting in Orlando, Fla.

James G. Brocksmith Jr., 49, one of the other two original candidates for
chairman, ran on the same slate as Mr. Madonna with the board's blessing and won
the election for deputy chairman against Wayne L. Garrison, the managing partner
of the Tulsa, Okla., office. David C. Smith, the third candidate for chairman,
withdrew from consideration after the board made its choice.

As chairman, Mr. Madonna will steer the firm through what is sure to be a
difficult decade. The United States audit market has matured, making the
profession less rewarding at a time when the risks are higher because of the
number of shareholder lawsuits filed against auditors who fail to detect
underlying business problems.

''The biggest challenge for all the firms and certainly now is to try to provide
value for our clients,'' Mr. Madonna said in a telephone interview from Orlando.
''Auditing and tax returns do not provide the value that the marketplace
respects.''

At least for now, he said he was not planning on any radical departures from the
previous management's strategy. Mr. Madonna also said he was not interested in
additional big mergers now or in dismantling the firm's much-vaunted partnership
structure.

Nonetheless, he said he intended to look hard at where the firm places its bets.
For instance, he said he thought the KPMG Peat Marwick could broaden its
commitment to manufacturing and high-tech clients, supplementing an existing
specialty in financial services.

Mr. Madonna, a native of Modesto, Calif., received a bachelor's degree in
accounting from the University of San Francisco in 1965. He joined Peat Marwick
in 1968 after two years as an officer in Vietnam, becoming a partner in 1976. In
1986, he was given responsiblity for the San Francisco Bay area practice, where
he managed clients like the Wells Fargo Bank.

A divorced father of two teen-age sons, Mr. Madonna plans to move to New York,
where the American firm has its headquarters. He will serve a six-year term.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jon C. Madonna, KPMG Peat Marwick (KPMG Peat Marwick)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 5, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Rice Officials Out

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 11, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 66 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Oct. 4


The Vietnamese Government has removed the three top officials of the state grain
body for making errors in managing the reserves, the official Communist
newspaper Nhan Dan reported on Wednesday. Among the problems, the publication
said, were ''a shortage of rice in reserve; bad quality of rice; the trading,
exchange and loaning of rice and many other supplies at variance with
regulations.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 5, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Leland Holland, 63, Officer Held Hostage At Embassy in Iran

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 269 words


Leland J. Holland, a retired Army colonel who was one of the 52 Americans held
hostage for 444 days in Iran after the takeover of the United States Embassy in
Teheran in 1979, died Tuesday at Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington.
He was 63 years old and lived in Warrenton, Va.

Colonel Holland died of cancer, said Dolores Lawson of the hospital's casualty
affairs department. He entered the hospital on Sept. 4.

Iranian militants swarmed into the embassy on Nov. 4, 1979, and took Colonel
Holland, who was the military attache, and the other American there as hostages.
They were not released until the Inauguration Day of President Ronald Reagan in
1981.

After their release, Colonel Holland and the other hostages told of beatings,
months in solitary confinement, constant fear of death and physical and mental
mistreatment at the hands of their Iranian captors.

Colonel Holland enlisted in the Army in 1952 and retired in 1986, six days after
he learned he had cancer. He served two tours of duty in Vietnam and also in
Italy and Germany before being assigned to the embassy in Teheran in 1978.

The colonel's military decorations included the Distinguished Service Medal, the
Legion of Merit and the Bronze Star.

He is survived by his wife, Mary Anne; four sons, James L. and John S. of
Warrenton, Joseph R. of Cincinnati and Jerome T. of Jersey City; two daughters,
Barbara L. Holland of Fairfield, Ohio, and Rose M. Brinkman of Chaptico, Md.;
his mother, Clara M. Holland of Galena, Ill.; two brothers, Edward A. of Scales
Mound, Ill., and Robert P. of Renton, Wash., and six grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 12, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

The headline of an obituary on Oct. 5 about Leland Holland, one of the 52
Americans held hostage in the American Embassy in Iran for 444 days, misstated
his age. He was 63 years old.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Col. Leland J. Holland (Associated Press)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
For Some Vietnamese in U.S., War goes On

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 788 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


Manh Nguyen, the manager of a Vietnamese television news program in San Jose,
Calif., recently tried to organize a panel discussion on relations between
Washington and Hanoi. He found, to his disapppointment but not surprise, that no
local Vietnamese would speak publicly in favor of normalization.

''The obvious reason is that they fear for their safety,'' said Mr. Manh, whose
daily half-hour program is called Vietnam Liberty News.

No matter that last week, 17 years after Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger
and Foreign Minister Le Duc Tho completed the Paris accord that allowed the
United States to pull its troops out of Vietnam, their successors, James A.
Baker 3d and Nguyen Co Thach met in New York to announce their intention of
formally moving to put hostilities behind the two old enemies. For many of the
800,000 Vietnamese in the United States, the war echoes violently on.

Even as Mr. Baker and Mr. Thach announced steps toward normalizing relations,
the Vietnamese community in America was astir over the recent killing of a
Vietnamese newspaper columnist in Washington. The columnist, it was generally
agreed, had spoken his views, sometimes leaning right, sometimes leaning left,
much too plainly.

The killing of the columnist, Triet Le, along with his wife, was the second in
less than a year of a staff member of his Vietnamese-language magazine, Tien
Phong. For the Vietnamese in the United States, it was just the latest in a long
chain of incidents of political violence over the years that have included
shootings, arson, suspicious suicides and half a dozen killings.

Although threats have been uttered by extremists on both sides of the
normalization question and other divisive issues, the fear of such violence
among the Vietnamese focuses mainly on militantly anti-Communist right-wing
groups, many of which include former South Vietnamese military men who have
never accepted their defeat.

''The war may be ending at the national level,'' said Yen Do, the editor of
Nguoi Viet, a Vietnamese daily newspaper in California, who has received several
death threats. ''But that only means more confrontation at the community
level.'' He said he foresaw more, not less, potential violence in the Vietnamese
community as a result of the moves toward full diplomatic relations.

''I think the celebration of normalization will require the sacrifice of some
symbol of reconciliation,'' he said. ''Someone who is a symbol of the
reconciliation spirit must pay with his life.''

It is an atmosphere that has produced what Liem Huu Nguyen, a San Jose lawyer
who has also been threatened for speaking out, once called ''a kind of
unofficial censorship.''

That ''censorship'' affects not only potential guests on Mr. Manh's television
program, but ordinary Vietnamese who are not active in public life.

''Deep down, everyone has some opinion, of course,'' said a Vietnamese engineer
who lives near Los Angeles. ''The trouble is that none of them can be expressed
freely because of some very small and extremely violent groups.''

He added, ''Please don't reveal my identity, so nobody can visit me. I know
that's ridiculous. I hate that situation. I want to be more open and specific
about my feelings, but I can't.''

These violent groups are in effect still fighting the Vietnam war. They are
still hoping vainly to oust from Hanoi the Communist government with which
Washington is now making peace, and still reacting with violence against those
who disagree with them.

What Mr. Baker and Mr. Thach formally agreed upon was their governments'
intention to ''take concrete steps that are conducive to the normalization of
relations between the two countries.''

In Washington's view, as repeated last week by the State Department spokeswoman,
Margaret Tutwiler, those steps must include a satisfactory accounting of
American servicemen missing in action and a political settlement in Cambodia,
which the Vietnamese invaded in 1978. The political structure of Vietnam itself
- the issue that was at the heart of the war and still passionately divides the
Vietnamese community here - no longer appeared to be on the American agenda.

To one Vietnamese newspaperwoman, Tran Tuong Nhu, normalization seemed to have
become possible because for Washington a former obsession had finally become a
sideshow.

''I'm surprised that Baker even had time to do this,'' said Mrs. Nhu, who is a
columnist for The San Jose Mercury News. ''The fact that he did it means to me,
well, O.K., Vietnam is no big deal any more. It seems to me that the war has
finally ended because the United States has found another enemy to replace
Vietnam. Saddam Hussein is a big-time crook, somebody Washington can really
hate.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
The Nightmare Haunting Washington Is Set in Beirut, Not Vietnam

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1831 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


While there has been much talk lately about how the experience of American
troops in Vietnam is influencing policy makers in dealing with Iraq, the shadow
of another military campaign may actually weigh more heavily on the minds of
many American planners, as well as their allies in the Arab world and Israel.
That is the bitter experience they all encountered in Beirut between 1982 and
1984.

To be sure, there are fundamental differences between the Lebanon fiasco and the
confrontation in the Persian Gulf. The stakes are much higher in the gulf and
the objectives of all sides much clearer. But many of the problems that
bedeviled Americans, Arabs and Israelis in Lebanon still haunt the region, and
they are now being recalled with foreboding by those who were involved. Many of
these people are still in vital positions - from Secretary of State James A.
Baker 3d, who was White House chief of staff in 1982, to the leaders of Saudi
Arabia, Syria and Iraq. Even some of the Marines now stationed in the Saudi
desert got their first taste of battle dodging bullets in Beirut.

In June 1982 the Israelis invaded Lebanon, quickly besieging West Beirut and
imposing a total embargo, in an effort to force the Palestine Liberation
Organization to unconditionally withdraw - much as the world now is trying to
press Baghdad to unconditionally pull out of Kuwait.

But it is often forgotten that more than two months after the Israelis imposed
their siege to starve the P.L.O. into submission, Beirutis were still dining on
imported delicacies and fresh fruit. Why? Because an airtight economic embargo
in the Middle East is a contradiction in terms. Even in the tiny area of West
Beirut, some of Israel's allies in the Christian Phalangist militia were bought
off by the P.L.O. and allowed food to be smuggled in. When the siege did begin
to pinch - when the Israelis turned the water off - heart-rending pictures of
thirsty and hungry children were beamed abroad, making it extremely difficult
for Israel to sustain the pressure.

The situation with Iraq is different in a number of respects, but one is of
crucial importance: While the United Nations embargo may not be able to control
everything that goes in, it is able to control virtually everything that goes
out. Since the Iraqi economy depends on the export of a single product - oil -
it could be ground to a halt, which will create its own pressures and problems,
even if it is not starved to death. Nevertheless, as Lebanon illustrates, in a
region long practiced in smuggling and piracy, and among peoples long inured to
war, it could take a long time to bring Iraq to a boil.

Indeed, one of the central lessons of the Beirut experience is the larger
relationship between force and diplomacy in the Middle East. For the first two
months of the Israeli siege, when Israel relied primarily on the embargo to
build up pressure on Beirutis so they would force the P.L.O. to leave, the
P.L.O. leader, Yasir Arafat, simply stalled. He offered a new diplomatic deal
each week, but always with the same bottom line: The P.L.O. stays in Beirut.

What finally moved Mr. Arafat to unconditionally withdraw was not hunger but
fear. And that happened only after Ariel Sharon, then Israel's Defense Minister,
concluded that unless Israel bombed and talked at the same time, it would be
talking to itself. Mr. Sharon ordered such massive bombings of West Beirut that
the P.L.O. leader became convinced that the Israelis were prepared to go to the
same destructive lengths as he was - that they would indeed bring the whole city
down on top of his head, killing him and destroying his entire organization. Mr.
Sharon made the choice for Mr. Arafat very simple: stay in Beirut and lose
everything, or leave and survive. He left.

Administration officials insist that those are also Saddam Hussein's choices.
But is he convinced? In 1982, the Israelis had the advantage of operating alone;
they could control the message they wanted to send to Mr. Arafat. But in
confronting Iraq, the United States is part of an international coalition. If
the threat to President Hussein is to be credible, it must come from every
member of this coalition; otherwise it gets diluted. With the Soviets, French
and Japanese all exploring diplomatic solutions in recent days, the message to
Baghdad is becoming very mixed. If Beirut is any precedent, as long as the Iraqi
leader believes that the Americans are not really free to go after him, he will
negotiate from now until Christmas - Christmas 1991, Christmas 1992, Christmas
1993 . . .

In 1982, the Israelis began massive bombing only after learning the hard way how
costly it can be for a foreign army to fight an urban war in an unfamiliar and
densely populated Middle Eastern city. If an army is prepared to intersperse
itself with the civilian population, as the P.L.O. did in Beirut and the Iraqis
are doing in Kuwait City, the attacker has to be prepared not only to sustain
large numbers of combat casualties among its troops, but to inflict large
numbers of civilian casualties as well.

''If you are the defender, a war in a city is the best possible war to fight,''
said Teddy Lapkin, a former Israeli army captain who spent two and a half years
in Lebanon. ''But if you are the attacker it is the most costly type of warfare
to fight. Next time you walk out of your office, look down the street and
imagine that you are leading a company of troops. From every window, from every
door, behind every corner and every ledge there could be a sniper waiting to
blow your brains out. If someone is firing at you from a building and you don't
have the troops to take every floor, then the only option you have is to call in
a tank and put enough shells into the foundation to bring the whole building
down. If civilians are inside, it is a tragedy, but as a military man what else
can you do?''

Beirut also teaches another lesson about the relationship between force and
diplomacy. During the summer of 1982, the Israelis managed to destroy the
backbone of the Syrian Air Force. If ever Syria's President, Hafez al-Assad, was
vulnerable to being pushed out of Lebanon, it was then. In September 1982, after
the Israelis withdrew from West Beirut, they were replaced by the United States
Marines, who came as peace-keepers to help the Lebanese Government get on its
feet. Many American officials argued at the time that with the P.L.O. already
out of Lebanon, Washington's top priority should be to press the Syrians and
Israelis to leave as well, so that Lebanon's sovereignty could be restored.

What happened instead was that the Reagan Administration felt guilty about
having stood by while the P.L.O. was forced to withdraw unconditionally. They
were also under pressure from moderate Arabs and Europeans to somehow compensate
the P.L.O., and so they introduced a peace plan - the Sept. 1, 1982, Reagan plan
- that called for the creation of a Palestinian homeland. The Israelis, who
hated the Reagan plan, became so preoccupied with trying to kill it, and the
Reagan Administration became so preoccupied with trying to sell it, that the
objective of removing all foreign forces from Lebanon was deflected and
eventually abandoned.

''We lost our focus on Lebanon when we introduced the Reagan plan and ended up
letting everybody off the hook,'' said a State Department official who watched
these developments firsthand. ''In the meantime, the Syrians were able to
rebuild their army and turn the Lebanese against us. By the time we woke up it
was too late.''

Some American officials were reminded of that episode last week as they watched
President Bush declaring at the United Nations that an Iraqi withdrawal from
Kuwait could pave the way for a settlement of the Arab-Israeli dispute. Will the
French and other peace plans now emerging shift some of the focus away from
Kuwait and buy President Hussein the time he wants to wear the Americans down?

That question brings up another lesson the Administration does appear to have
learned from Beirut. With the killing of 241 American servicemen by a Shiite
Muslim driving a suicide truck bomb in October 1983, it became clear just how
easily the local population can go from throwing rice to throwing grenades.

One policy maker said: ''One day the Lebanese were applauding and the next day
they were sniping. What that means in the gulf is that if we start to lose Arab
support within, or among, countries, we are in trouble - both politically and
physically. That is why from the start we felt that the most important thing we
had to do is to maintain an Arab consensus in support of this operation. We
cannot afford to lose even a single country. Not one. It keeps me up at night
worrying.''

What keeps America's Arab allies up worrying at night is the flip side of this
story. The Saudis, Egyptians and others watched in 1984 as the American giant
turned out to have feet of clay. The thing they remember most about the marines
in Beirut was not their arrival, but their departure. In Arab eyes, the Marines
simply cut and ran from Lebanon when the Syrians and their Lebanese allies made
the cost of staying too high.

So it is memories of Beirut, not Vietnam, that obsess the Arabs today. Having
learned from Syria, President Hussein appears to be counting on the Americans to
have no staying power once body bags start coming home. Said one top American
policy maker: ''He must be disabused of that.''

Finally, the most important Beirut lesson is that it is a lot easier to start a
war in the Middle East than it is to finish it. The Israelis invaded Lebanon to
drive out the P.L.O., but they eventually concluded that this could only be done
by going all the way to Beirut and decapitating the organization. Stopping short
of that would simply have involved them in an endless war of attrition.

But once they expelled the P.L.O., the Israelis could not find an exit for
themselves. The Lebanese allies they had counted on to control Lebanon for them
and to keep the P.L.O. out either were assassinated or disappeared. So the
Israelis won the war but could not consolidate the peace. In the end they, too,
had to unilaterally withdraw, abandoning any influence over Beirut. At the same
time they had to maintain a permanent garrison in southern Lebanon to protect
their most vital security interests.

American military planners insist that if Washington goes to war against Iraq it
will also try to sever the regime from its head in Baghdad, so that the Iraqi
forces in Kuwait will drop like a dead limb. But if Lebanon is any guide,
filling the power vacuum that would be created by a headless, war-ravaged Iraq
would not be easy and could require a permanent American presence as well. In
the Middle East, the line between military victory and political defeat is razor
thin. It is easy to start a war; Saddam Hussein has proven that. But knowing how
to finish it, while keeping your gains intact- that is the real trick.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Beirut 1983: Bomb explosion at the U.S. Embassy killed 63
people. (Laurent Maous/Gamma-Liaison)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 7, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Patience in the Persian Gulf, Not War

BYLINE: By Zbigniew Brzezinski; Zbigniew Brzezinski was national security
adviser in the Carter Administration.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 3122 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE crisis in the Persian Gulf is the first crisis of the post-cold-war era.
Thus, fortunately, it does not pose the danger of a U.S.-Soviet confrontation.
Nonetheless, if mishandled, the crisis could prompt devastating consequences for
the world economy, perhaps result in massive Arab and American bloodshed, and
almost inevitably generate major regional instability throughout the Middle
East.

It is thus a crisis that is too serious to be resolved by decisions in one
capital alone and too dangerous to be addressed on the basis of hysteria. It
calls for thorough strategic consultations among the countries concerned -
including, beyond the democratic West, the leaders of moderate Arab countries
outraged by Saddam Hussein's aggression - regarding the issues involved, the
policies to be pursued and the costs to be assumed.

As its point of departure, a collective strategic response to the Iraqi
challenge must be based on shared perspectives regarding three central concerns:

* It must provide for stable access by the West to reasonably priced oil, which
in practical terms means assuring the security of Saudi Arabia and the Emirates
from any further Iraqi pressures or aggression;

* It must protect the sanctity of the international order against unilateral use
of force, which in practical terms means a satisfactory resolution of the status
of Kuwait;

* It must take into account Iraq's significant military arsenal as a longer-term
regional security concern. (Additionally, and depending on whether the crisis is
resolved peacefully or militarily, the future of Saddam Hussein's personal
leadership may have to be addressed by the international community.) All three
of these issues involve objectives that are desirable, even though not all of
these goals are equally urgent or vital. But there is consensus not only in the
West but also among the moderate Arabs regarding the imperative need to deter
any Iraqi move against Saudi Arabia.

This objective is so vital to the well-being of the world economy that the
United States, rightly and courageously, was prepared to fight even alone. That
is why it immediately deployed such large forces to the region. There is little
doubt that other states, both Arab and non-Arab, would also join in a common
effort if the Iraqi Army were to strike further south.

The consensus is less strong, and strategic options become more divergent,
regarding the other two issues. Subtle differences emerge once the surface is
scratched as to what precisely should be the international coalition's
objectives and how should they be pursued.

WHAT IS TO BE DONE?

Broadly speaking, two strategies are emerging. The first favors sustained
international pressure on Iraq through the embargo to compel its withdrawal from
Kuwait. The alternative - which some favor if peaceful means fail, and some
prefer as the more effective solution - involves the use of military power,
thereby dealing not only with the issue of Kuwait but also with the challenge
posed by the Iraqi military machine. Given the enormous stakes, it is important
to assess these alternatives carefully, for their costs and prospects of success
differ significantly.

The peaceful coalition strategy will require time to prove itself. It may take
months to convince Saddam Hussein that the coalition's unity will survive and
that any leakage in the embargo will be insufficient to prevent a massive
deterioration in Iraq's economy and social well-being. This will impose major
demands on the democratic publics in the West to support the necessary
sacrifices and on their leaders, especially in America, to rebut hysterical
calls for military action. The approaching Congressional elections in the United
States may tempt some to advocate military action in the expectation that the
initial surge of patriotic feeling will work to the advantage of the party in
power.

A prolonged embargo will also require major economic cooperation among the
members of the coalition. Especially important will be the contributions of
Japan and Germany, both exceedingly rich countries yet countries that have made
a small contribution compared with America's.

There is thus the risk that, in the pursuit of the peaceful and patient
strategy, allied unity may come to be strained by increasingly sharp
disagreements regarding the distribution of the burdens involved. These
disagreements could become especially acrimonious as the recession -in part
stimulated by the higher energy costs and other expenses generated by crisis -
deepens in the United States.

THE RISK OF WAITING

The peaceful strategy, in any case, may also be derailed by developments beyond
America's and the international coalition's control. One cannot, for example,
preclude attempts at deliberate provocations, designed to inflame American
public opinion and to precipitate a military collision between America and Iraq.

Given the bitter personal enmity between the Syrian and Iraqi leaders, or in
view of reports of Israeli fears that America may opt for a peaceful outcome to
the crisis, not to mention Iranian fundamentalist passions, it is also quite
possible that outside parties may set in motion events that derail the peaceful
strategy. Last but not least, there is the possibility that Saddam Hussein,
fearful of being strangled by the international embargo, will himself initiate
hostilities.

Finally, it must be admitted that the peaceful strategy cannot in any case
resolve the third issue, that of Iraq's military power; at best it can probably
yield only a partial success on the status of Kuwait, a success certainly short
of ''unconditional surrender'' by Iraq. More likely, the eventual success of the
peaceful strategy will require, at some point, quiet, behind-the-scenes
negotiations regarding the issues that precipitated the Iraqi aggression.

In other words, once a sustained embargo had succeeded in convincing Saddam
Hussein that he must concede, some confidential discussions, either through Arab
intermediaries or perhaps through Soviet ones (and Mikhail Gorbachev
deliberately positioned himself in the Helsinki talks with President Bush to be
an eventual mediator) would ensue. They would address the adjudication -
following an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait - of the Iraqi financial and
territorial claims (not all of which were unfounded), which will have to take
place.

If much of the international community were willing to accept such an outcome,
it would be difficult for the United States alone to oppose it. Moreover, it is
likely that by then the peaceful strategy would have imposed substantial
financial costs on all parties, even though it would have spared everyone from
potentially massive bloodshed. Thus there is bound to be some international
predisposition to settle, even if the outcome were to be not quite as
unconditional as currently some desire. However, any such outcome would still
leave major issues pertaining to regional security and Iraqi military power
unresolved.

This is why some argue that the peaceful strategy cannot work and that the
crisis must be resolved by force of arms. The peaceful strategy - the critics
point out - would resolve satisfactorily the first issue only, the second
perhaps partially (and, at best, only after a very prolonged effort), and the
third not at all. In contrast, the military strategy would deal with both the
second and the third at the same time, while perhaps also enhancing Saudi
security for the longer term.

Accordingly, proponents of the military strategy argue that force should be used
once the necessary preparations have been completed. Given the pace of the
American troop and weapons deployments, that could be as soon as late October
(thus before the American Congressional elections) but in any case no later than
late winter. The reason for the latter deadline is that the onset of the fierce
sandstorms that follow the winter season would adversely affect the
technological performance of weapons and impose additional difficulties on the
American and other forces not accustomed to desert warfare.

The military option would have to deal simultaneously with the goal of
liberating Kuwait and of destroying Iraqi military power for the simple reason
that it is not possible to do the first without the second. A conventional
ground attack on Kuwait would be prohibitively costly in casualties and perhaps
even impossible to execute without a deployment of forces vastly larger than
even the currently projected deployment of some 200,000 American troops.

Military action will therefore require an all-out air assault on Iraq's
political and military command centers, key military concentrations and
principal industrial-military targets, in addition to some unavoidable ground
fighting. Particularly intensive efforts will have to be made to destroy,
pre-emptively, any Iraqi capacity to retaliate through missile strikes with
chemical warheads.

A particular complication pertaining to the air assault is that its
effectiveness would be greatest if it came as a sudden bolt out of the blue. But
that could only be the case if it was undertaken solely on the American
initiative, since only American airpower would be capable of undertaking this
task effectively and alone.

The decision to initiate hostilities through a decapitating air attack would
thus have to be made solely by Washington, without any genuine consultations
with the other powers that are participating in the anti-Iraq coalition,
especially Arab ones. That could breed political resentments and even pose the
danger that America would eventually find itself increasingly isolated in the
world arena.

THERE is also a domestic American complication to be noted here. An American
bolt-out-of-the-blue attack would not only strain allied relations. If the
resulting hostilities were to become costly and prolonged, the U.S. Congress
might be outraged that its constitutional prerogative of declaring of war was
not respected. Yet a declaration of war would be incompatible with any surprise
attack.

In any case, the military operations, to be effective, will have to combine
major air and ground initiatives, the former to paralyze Iraq's capacity to
respond and the latter to drive the Iraqis out of Kuwait. The effort will thus
have to be massive in scale. It will probably involve the infliction of
thousands, and maybe even tens of thousands, of deaths on the Iraqi civilian
population.

And it will involve inevitably heavy fighting against an Iraqi Army that is
battle-tested and experienced in defensive fighting. Since it is almost certain
that the brunt of the military effort would have to be undertaken by American
forces, one must expect therefore also thousands of deaths among American
servicemen.

One should not entertain in this connection any illusions that air attacks by
themselves will force the Iraqis to capitulate. Total and prolonged U.S. control
over the air did not terminate promptly the Korean and Vietnam Wars, nor did it
force either Germany or Italy to capitulate. Moreover, it is not possible to
predict precisely what course the combat will take and how long it will last.
Iraq is not a Panama. The fighting could prove to be heavy and prolonged.

Moreover, even massive air attacks may be unlikely to deprive Saddam Hussein of
some capacity to react. One cannot exclude the possibility of sporadic Iraqi gas
attacks on Israeli cities and perhaps even a deliberate invasion of Jordan, in
an effort to widen the war by drawing in the Israelis. That then could have the
effect of transforming the war, in Arab perceptions, into a struggle against an
American-Israeli coalition.

Not only the military but also the geopolitical dynamics are unpredictable. At
some point the war could also expand in other directions. Syria, Iran and even
Turkey (following perhaps a Kurdish uprising within northern Iraq) might all be
tempted to pursue their own territorial interests. Iraq might be partitioned;
Jordan might be the victim of an Iraqi or Israeli military initiative; and the
entire region subsequently Lebanized.

The conflict would thus become regionally destabilizing, on a scale that is
difficult precisely to define but that could become also impossible to contain.
Moreover, if Arab emotions were to become aroused by military action against
Iraq that is seen as largely American in origin, the ensuing radicalization of
the Arab masses could eventually even produce upheavals in those more moderate
Arab states that the United States is currently seeking to protect.

THE COST OF WAR

All of that could produce potentially devastating economic consequences. One
would have to anticipate the serious possibility of at least a temporary cutoff
in much of the flow of oil from the Persian Gulf. Military action would probably
result in the destruction of most of Kuwait's and Iraq's oil facilities, while
sabotage could also affect the installations in other gulf states. The price of
oil could easily climb to $65 per barrel or even more.

The financial costs of the war by themselves would also be extraordinarily high.
It has been estimated that for the United States the costs of large-scale combat
could amount to about $1 billion per day. An economic and financial world crisis
might thus prove difficult to avoid.

It is hard to predict whether the American public, after the likely initial
surge in patriotic emotions, would long support such an operation. Parents and
others would almost certainly begin to ask whether American lives should be
sacrificed for the sake of the wealthy rulers of Kuwait. Arguments about the
sanctity of the international order might cease to have much appeal once
American fatalities begin to rise into the thousands. There is also the risk
that at some point the public might blame Israel for allegedly having pressed
America to go to war against Iraq for the sake of Israeli interests.

The military strategy thus suffers from fundamental liabilities. Its costs could
prove to be prohibitive, its success is not easy to define in terms of the time
involved and the scope of the required effort, and its dynamic consequences,
could have a regionally destructive ripple effect.

On balance, therefore, the better part of wisdom is for the existing
international coalition to pursue the strategy of sustained pressure, and to
apply that pressure under the protection of credible military power that deters
any Iraqi military countermoves. To put it simply, a policy not of preventive
war but of punitive deterrence is the most sensible.

That strategy must be given time to prove effective, and it must be openly
conceded that its success may not be compatible with the notion of an Iraqi
unconditional surrender regarding Kuwait. More specifically, one should not rule
out a priori the acceptability of some arrangement that combines an Iraqi
withdrawal with the eventual adjudication of the financial and territorial
issues that precipitated the unacceptable act of Iraqi aggression. Nor should
quiet mediation by some third parties, either by the Arabs themselves or by the
Europeans (such as President Mitterrand), or even perhaps by the Soviets, be
discouraged.

As noted, a nonviolent resolution of the Kuwait issue will not resolve the
region's security problem. In any case, for some time to come, to insure
longer-range regional security, some separate American-Saudi military
arrangements will be required.

These might include some provision for the continuing presence of an American
security tripwire in Saudi Arabia, designed to insure against any future Iraqi
aggression. American naval and air offshore power will probably also have to be
enhanced on a continuing basis. At a later stage, it might then prove possible
to convene an international conference that deals with the wider issue of
regional security. In that setting, the destabilizing and unacceptably ambitious
Iraqi military programs could be subjected to some agreed limitations.

In the context of any eventual regional accommodation regarding security, it
will probably also be necessary for Israel to finally accept the
nonproliferation treaty and to place its own nuclear weapons program under some
similar restraints.

OBVIOUSLY, the resolution of these tangled and complex issues will require
prolonged negotiations. For these negotiations to succeed, some progress toward
peace on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict may also be needed, given the obvious
connection between Israeli and Iraqi military buildups and the persisting
possibility of renewed Israeli-Arab hostilities. But all of that represents an
agenda for the more distant future. The wider issue of regional security and the
Israeli-Arab conflict cannot be and should not be linked directly to the
current, more immediate crisis.

To be sure, there are those who argue that Saddam Hussein's military potential
must now be pre-emptively destroyed before he acquires nuclear weapons. But the
advocates of preventive war, for some of whom the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait is
a convenient excuse, have yet to make a compelling case in terms of the American
national interest for such a reckless undertaking.

America has lived for 40 years under the shadow of Soviet nuclear weapons, and
Stalin or Khrushchev had no compunctions about killing those weaker than
themselves. But deterrence worked, and America surely has the power to deter
Iraq as well. And so does Israel, which has already acquired nuclear weapons.

The bottom line is this: there is no easy solution to the crisis. The peaceful
strategy of sustained pressure suffers from obvious limitations and has its
costs. Moreover, it will not resolve fully all of the central problems generated
by the Iraqi aggression. But it imposes enormous punitive pains on Iraq, at a
cost and a risk to America that is incomparably lower than the costs and risks
of preventive war.

Hence patience and prudence are to be preferred over the leap into the abyss of
warfare. The basic fact is that the overall situation in the region is so
unstable that no military solution can be confidently postulated as assuring the
productive termination of the ongoing crisis at a cost that is predictable and
reasonable. Destroying Iraq but possibly blowing up the Middle East can hardly
be advocated as a rational calculus.

Given the stakes, it is particularly urgent that the leaders of the advanced
democracies - with America having already successfully assured the deterrence of
further Iraqi aggression - sit down together, carefully analyze their options
and recommit themselves to a sustained strategy of punitive deterrence - without
dangerous illusions about military solutions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Plan: Best Hope for Cambodia

BYLINE: By STEPHEN J. SOLARZ; Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, is
chairman of the House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs.

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 863 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The agreement by the U.N. Security Council's five permanent members on a
framework for a settlement of the Cambodian conflict, and the plan's adoption by
the four Cambodian factions, does not mean the millenium has arrived in that
benighted country. It does mean that, at long last, there are grounds for
genuine hope that the Khmer Rouge can be prevented from returning to power and
that the Cambodian people will be able peacefully to determine their own
destiny.

The Security Council proposal calls for a cease-fire, a substantial U.N.
peace-keeping force, the termination of all external military support, the
disarmament of the four Cambodian factions and U.N. control over the existing
administration to create conditions for an internationally supervised, free and
fair election.

Driving this approach has been the belief that the battle-hardened and well
supplied Khmer Rouge are likely to come to power if the current civil war
continues. Conversely, if the U.N. framework results in an agreement among the
Cambodians themselves, and China and Thailand end their support for the Khmer
Rouge, it will be much easier to contain Pol Pot and his murderous minions.

Despite the extraordinary progress of the last month, critics of the framework
cannot resist the urge to carp and cavil. They say it will cost more than the
international community is willing to pay. They warn that the Khmer Rouge will
use a U.N. settlement to take power again in Phnom Penh. They object that the
Khmer Rouge are included in the settlement at all. They would even have the Bush
Administration abandon the framework accepted by the Security Council and the
Cambodian factions.

Instead, the nay-sayers want the Administration to embrace the Phnom Penh regime
led by Hun Sen, to urge the non-Communist factions to participate in
internationally observed elections under the Hun Sen Government's aegis and to
pressure China and Thailand to end their assistance to the Khmer Rouge.

The critics' objections to the U.N. approach are readily answered. Underwriting
a peace-keeping force, an internationally supervised election and the overseeing
of several strategic ministries will be expensive. Yet all the countries that
have participated in the negotiating effort - the five permanent members
themselves, Japan, Australia and others -understand that they have to support
diplomacy with money. And after all the hand-wringing and teeth-gnashing in the
U.S. about the Khmer Rouge, it begs credulity that we would not contribute our
fair share.

To be sure, the Khmer Rouge have not given up their objective of regaining
power. Pol Pot will first try to win the elections. But there is every reason to
believe he will fail. Opponents of Pol Pot, a man with more than a million
deaths on his record, won't need the services of Roger Ailes to prepare negative
campaign ads.

After they lose the elections, the Khmer Rouge may indeed decide to resume an
armed struggle. Yet their chances of success will be severely diminished if, as
the result of an international agreement, their forces have been demobilized and
disarmed, and Thailand and China are no longer providing them sanctuary and
support. Surely, the government that emerges from a U.N.-supervised election
with domestic legitimacy and international support will be better able to
contain the Khmer Rouge than is the current Phnom Penh regime.

Objecting to the inclusion of the Khmer Rouge in a settlement made sense so long
as the Bush Administration was supporting the resistance coalition's demand for
a four-party interim government in which the Khmer Rouge would have been given
an important role.

But the U.N. approach is designed to deprive the Khmer Rouge of any operational
responsibility in the transitional authority. It does provide for Khmer Rouge
participation in the election. Yet if they are not even given an opportunity to
contest the election, however dismal their chances, there will be no agreement.
Under these circumstances, Pol Pot will fight on with Chinese support and
probably win a military victory. The perfect would have defeated the good.

Now that the quest for a U.N.-based diplomatic solution is bearing fruit, it is
inconceivable that the U.S. would walk out on an agreement it had worked so hard
to forge.

Nor should we risk undermining the whole negotiating process at this delicate
juncture by cutting off our nonlethal assistance to the non-Communist
resistance. That would greatly diminish the pressure on Vietnam and the Hun Sen
Government to make the concessions needed to achieve a settlement. Moreover, if
elections are held, it would deprive the Cambodian people of a democratic
alternative to Khmer Rouge Maoists and Phnom Penh Leninists.

Of course, the whole effort could still fall apart because of disagreements
among the Cambodians. Yet the Security Council formula has already exceeded the
expectations of its proponents. It is, in truth, the last best hope for peace in
Cambodia. We cannot now change course or abandon those who depend on us.
Repudiating the U.N. framework and embracing the Hun Sen regime would be
tantamount to snatching defeat from the jaws of victory.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Urged To End Hanoi Trade Curb

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1176 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 8


As Washington's diplomatic relations with Hanoi begin to thaw, the
Administration is under increasing pressure to end the 15-year-old trade embargo
that excludes American business from the country that many economists and
business executives say could become Asia's next industrial tiger.

Since Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and the Vietnamese Foreign Minister,
Nguyen Co Thach, met in New York on Sept. 29 for the first high-level encounter
between officials of the Governments since 1973, speculation has increased that
trade normalization may come soon.

Groups Pressing for Shift

The pressure is coming from lawmakers and business executives who argue that the
sanctions are of diminishing foreign policy importance and are hurting the
long-term economic interests of the United States.

The United States Chamber of Commerce notes that other countries are expanding
their trade and investment in Vietnam, while American business is kept out. The
board of the business organization unanimously passed a resolution in early
summer calling for normalization.

''It's time,'' said William T. Archey, the chamber's international vice
president.

While State Department officials are sympathetic, they point to the still-bitter
issue of 1,678 American servicemen lost in Vietnam whose status has not yet been
resolved.

The Baker-Thach meeting set up a process for further accounting by Hanoi of the
American personnel. Mr. Thach is expected in Washington around Oct. 17 and will
see Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., the former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
who is the special Presidential negotiator on the issue of the prisoners of war
and those missing in action.

Mr. Thach is also expected to meet with the Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
several of whose members want to lift the sanctions, which have been in effect
since the United States pulled out of Vietnam in 1975. The committee is
preparing hearings on the issue early in the next session of Congress.

Supported by economists of the World Bank, many business officials see Vietnam,
which has adopted ambitious enterprise-oriented measures, as a market about to
take off.

New Growth Market

The World Bank has completed studies showing that Vietnam bears an uncannily
similar economic profile to South Korea of 1965, which was then just emerging
from a long period of economic stagnation after the Korean War. For instance,
the gross national product per capita for Vietnam in 1988 was $109, compared
with $106 for Korea 25 years ago. Exports as a percentage of national output
were 10.3 percent for Vietnam, compared with 9.5 percent in Korea.

Korea today is one of a group of Asian industrial nations that are known as the
tigers because of their great economic strength surging out of market-oriented
policies. Other tigers include Taiwan, Singapore, Malyasia and Hong Kong.

World Bank and other economists say Vietnam, in efforts to attract foreign
capital, has gone even further than new democracies in Eastern Europe in writing
liberal investment and banking laws in the last year. Vietnam's new investment
law, for example, provides both for joint ventures and for 100 percent foreign
ownership of local property.

Now Exporting Rice

A former rice-importing nation, Vietnam has now become a rice exporter, thanks
to new agricultural policies. About 80 percent of its farm economy is in private
hands, according to World Bank economists, and about half of its food market is
privately operated.

Steven K. Baker, Citicorp's division head for North Asian Countries, said the
economic conditions in Vietnam could offer even greater market potential in the
coming decade than China.

But while the sanctions remain in effect, advocates of rapprochement say, the
United States risks losing out to Japanese, European and other Asian
competition.

Before Vietnam's withdrawal of an estimated 300,000 troops from Cambodia last
year - a condition set by the United States for normalization -American allies
grudgingly supported the embargo.

Requirements Are Met

But today most of these countries say that Vietnam has satisfied fundamental
requirements for trade relations. Japan announced last week that it was allowing
its banks to operate in Vietnam for the first time since 1975.

The Bush Administration, on the other hand, now says that before normalization,
Vietnam must cooperate on a comprehensive peace settlement for Cambodia. Some
American businessmen and lawmakers say the imposition of this new condition is
equivalent to moving the goal posts.

The President's advisers, however, are divided on how to proceed. Mr. Baker,
according to Administration officials, is more eager to repair the economic
links with Vietnam than the national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft. Their
deputies, Robert Kimmitt and Karl Jackson, have clashed repeatedly on the issue.

Hotels and business centers in Vietnam, meanwhile, are described as full of
non-Americans ready and willing to do business.

War Zone to Trade Zone

Thailand has taken the lead in efforts to transform Indochina from a ''war zone
into a trade zone,'' as Thai leaders like to put it.

Through the end of last year, Vietnam had approved 106 foreign investment
projects with a total registered capital of $1 billion. Hong Kong, French,
British, Australian and Thai concerns completed the most agreements.

The biggest losers may have been American oil companies. Off-shore oil drilling
and exploration leases for what are considered especially promising tracts in
the South China Sea went to such foreign companies as Shell, British Petroleum
and Total of France.

To assess the pent-up demand for expanding into the Vietnam market, Citibank
recently canvassed 162 companies involved in commerce in Asia. Seventy-five
percent expressed an interest in doing business right away, 85 percent over the
longer term.

Fifty-seven of the 87 participating American companies indicated an interest in
Vietnam business.

Loans Being Sought

To support its market-oriented policies and help raise capital, Vietnam, as a
member of both the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, is pressing
to borrow from both institutions.

For the time being, it cannot, because it is running $140 million of past due
debts with the I.M.F. Arrears bar a country from any dealings with the twin
organizations, which offer loans to support market-oriented economic policies in
third world countries.

Yet later this month, according to international monetary officials, the Vietnam
arrears are likely to be paid off, making Vietnam once again eligible for
bank-fund assistance.

This would create thorny problems for Washington. Should the Administration try
to block the aid, it could antagonize allies the United States has courted in
the Persian Gulf crisis.

Should the aid go forward, American business would complain that it was being
shut out of a country being aided by American-supported international
institutions, further increasing the pressure for a lifting of the sanctions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

About New York;
In the Bronx, An Amerasian Finds His Roots

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 772 words


As people of different races clash in the United States' largest city, small
rays of hope are precious. Hence, this story about a child of a long ago Asian
war and an immensely caring black couple in the Bronx.

Hai Nguyen never met his Vietnamese mother or his American father, a black
serviceman. His early years were spent in Roman Catholic orphanages in Vietnam.

In 1980, when Hai was about 7 years old, the Communist government took the
children away from the nuns. Each day, he was forced to make baskets from bamboo
and clean a soldiers' graveyard. He slept on the floor in a roomful of children,
subsisted on meager bowls of rice and lived in fear of beatings.

''Some days I wondered why I was not dead,'' said Hai, now 17.

One day, strangers came to the orphanage. ''All of a sudden everything
changed,'' Hai said. ''I was being treated nice. I started to feel like somebody
important. I didn't know why.''

The visitors were American Government representatives in search of Amerasians,
children of Vietnamese mothers and American fathers. One thing quickly led to
another.

The tiny orphan arrived at Kennedy Airport on March 26, 1984. He wore short
pants and no shoes. He had lice, worms and ugly sores on his head. On his feet
were egg-sized calluses that had burst open.

But he was a lucky boy. As his sore little feet touched American ground, Hai was
met by Harold and Paula Blackwell, his new foster parents. ''It was a love story
from then on,'' Mrs. Blackwell said. Not that anything was easy for Hai, who was
assigned to the Blackwells by Sheltering Arms Children's Service, a foster-care
agency.

For weeks, he cried inconsolably. He kept falling out of bed. He could only eat
the tiniest bits of meat.

Over time, the larger problems had to do with identity. It had been so even in
Vietnam, where children fathered by American blacks face prejudice. Hai had
combed and combed his hair to make it straighter.

He arrived here scared because he had been told that black and white people are
kept absolutely separate in the United States. Just before he left, somebody
remarked that he looked Indian. ''I wished I was going to India instead of
America,'' he said.

Once here, it turned out that some fellow Asians were the cruelest. Hai would
see a yellow face and run up and start chattering. Invariably, he was ignored.
''I felt so hurt when I saw that happen,'' Mrs. Blackwell said. ''They could
have at least talked to him.''

She tried to take the boy to a Catholic Church with an Asian priest. When she
called, the priest said, ''Who gave you my name?'' and hung up.

In school, Hai asked a Vietnamese girl who spoke good English what something
meant. She snapped, ''I'm not your translator.'' Such rejection made the
Blackwells all the more determined to reinforce Hai's identity as a black. Mrs.
Blackwell taught him about the civil rights movement and struggled to transmit
her strong sense of African-American identity. A question echoed in her mind:
''How would you feel if you had no roots?''

Becoming foster parents again was not an easy decision for the Blackwells, who
had taken in a number of children over the years. Their own three children were
adults. Mr. Blackwell, now 71, was then on the verge of retirement from his job
with the United Auto Workers. Mrs. Blackwell, now 68 and still working as a drug
counselor in public schools, had returned to college for a master's degree.

D'Ann St. Paul, the Blackwell's daughter, recalled her feelings. ''What are you
doing?'' she demanded. ''I've never heard of Amerasians. You've raised your own
children. This is a bit much.''

Indeed, some things were a bit much. The fish sauce that Hai poured over his
food smelled so foul even people down the hall complained. Out it went.

But some experiences were grand. Mr. Blackwell relishes the first time he took
Hai to play baseball. And Hai mightily pleased the Blackwells by excelling
academically, winning plaques for graphic arts. The high school junior now
dreams of becoming an architect and helping to rebuild a free Vietnam.

His determination was manifest four years ago when Sheltering Arms - on the
premise that adoption is always better than foster care - arranged to have Hai
go to another couple. But Hai, then 13, flatly refused to stay with his new
parents. He took a bus back to the Blackwells. ''How could we refuse?'' said the
woman he calls mother.

The Blackwells have never adopted Hai because they feel too old. But their name
may live on with him. ''I owe my life to them and can never repay them,'' he
said. ''The only way might be to name my first child for them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Rivals of Weicker Ask: Could He Govern Alone?

BYLINE: By NICK RAVO

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1040 words


When Lowell P. Weicker Jr. began his independent campaign for governor of
Connecticut in March, his Democratic and Republican opponents dismissed it as a
political Pet Rock, a novelty whose popularity would fade by fall.

But now that the former United States Senator continues to hold a large lead in
polls, both parties have begun raising questions about the implications of a
Weicker victory on Nov. 6.

Mr. Weicker's candidacy has been built not so much on specific issues as on an
assault on the major parties, but his opponents are raising the specter of
governmental chaos if Connecticut elects a governor without a party.

''It is the most important issue of the campaign,'' said the Republican,
Representative John G. Rowland of Waterbury. ''How could Lowell Weicker govern
without the support of either party?''

'Detached and Removed'

The Democrat, Representative Bruce A. Morrison of Hamden, said Mr. Weicker would
be ''detached and removed from the process of government, which is very much
driven by party structure.''

Mr. Weicker contends that political parties are obsessed with self-interest,
hinder effective government and perpetuate themselves through patronage.

A liberal Republican who created his own party, A Connecticut Party, primarily
to meet a state law that requires unaffiliated candidates to have a party name,
Mr. Weicker believes that any disadvantages he may face as governor would be no
greater than those of any governor whose party does not control the General
Assembly.

Though few legislators have endorsed him, Mr. Weicker predicts that many
Democratic and moderate Republican lawmakers will offer support if he becomes
governor, especially if he wins by a large margin.

''We're not used to the idea of a third party,'' Mr. Weicker said. ''But why
shouldn't the monopoly of politics be changed?''

As a governor without a substantial party apparatus, however, Mr. Weicker could
face greater challenges than those that would confront a Democrat or a
Republican.

His Connecticut Party would hold no seats in the House of Representatives and at
most one State Senate seat. That would go to State Senator Emil V. Benvenuto of
Greenwich, a registered Republican, if his re-election race on the Connecticut
Party ticket is successful. Democrats are expected to retain control of both the
36-member Senate and the 151-member House of Representatives.

Such an imbalance might make it difficult for Mr. Weicker to lobby for his own
initiatives and budget plans.

Legislative Hurdles

Mr. Weicker would even lack a party member to introduce bills for him in the
House, forcing him to seek out a sympathetic Democrat or Republican for the
task.

He would also be unusually vulnerable to having his vetoes overridden by the
General Assembly. And his political appointments might face difficulty winning
legislative confirmation.

''The likelihood for chaos is tremendous,'' said State Representative Jonathan
W. Pelto of Storrs, a deputy majority leader and the political director of the
state Democratic Party.

Should Mr. Weicker become governor, though, some political factors would benefit
him. His Connecticut Party would have the top line on the ballot in all
elections for the next four years, which could benefit others who chose to run
under his banner.

His political position would be strengthened even more should either the
Democrats or the Republicans fail to muster 20 percent of the vote in the
election for governor. Falling under that level would strip them of major-party
status, and that would make it more difficult for the party's candidates to get
on the ballot for any office.

Mr. Pelto, however, predicted that building coalitions would be costly and
cumbersome for Mr. Weicker because he would not have the currency of party
loyalty and party discipline.

Morrison Sees Stalemate

Mr. Rowland said of Mr. Weicker: ''There is no way in the world he could govern.
It would be a disaster for him to try and get legislation passed. First of all,
he is an egomaniac, so that makes it difficult for him to even work with one
party. And two parties will not work with an independent governor.''

Mr. Morrison predicted that Mr. Weicker ''would find himself very badly
isolated,'' and said, ''We will have either government by the legislature, with
the governor having little influence, or government by stalemate, in which the
legislature and the governor are at constant war.''

Mr. Weicker has aggressively tried to defuse the issue, which he believes is
being raised mainly because he is leading in statewide polls.

Mr. Weicker said that if Democrats and Republicans were unable or unwilling to
work with an independent governor, it would prove that the parties place their
own needs above the state's.

''No Republican idea sees the light of day in a Democratic administration,'' he
said. ''Why shouldn't it? No Democratic idea will see the light of day in a
Republican administration. But why shouldn't it? Isn't the quality of the idea
important?''

Mr. Weicker, who has attracted support from many Democrats in past elections,
became an independent candidate rather than mount a party challenge against Mr.
Rowland, a leader of the party's conservative wing, which took control of the
party after Mr. Weicker lost his bid for a fourth Senate term to a Democrat,
Joseph I. Lieberman of New Haven, in 1988.

Building Coalitions

James W. Dull, the chairman of the political science department at the
University of New Haven, said Mr. Weicker would find both Democrats and
Republicans to work with. ''Weicker has or will have allies in both parties,''
he said.

Mr. Dull, added, though, that Mr. Weicker's reputation for arrogance could haunt
him in his relations with the General Assembly.

But Mr. Weicker's campaign co-chairman, Peter W. Gold, said that Mr. Weicker,
who at 60 years old may be nearing the end of his political career, would be
much more likely than Mr. Morrison, 46, or Mr. Rowland, 33, to act without
considering his own political future. Indeed, he has mentioned that he may be a
one-term governor.

''What is exciting,'' Mr. Weicker said, ''is that finally maybe we have found
the key to why people are being turned off by the system.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lowell P. Weicker Jr., an independent candidate for governor of
Connecticut, continues to hold a large lead in the polls. He spoke with Vietnam
veterans last month at the Apple Festival Parade in Southington. (Bill Burkhart
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Myth of Classnessness

BYLINE: By Benjamin DeMott; Benjamin DeMott, professor of humanities at Amherst
College, is author of ''The Imperial Middle: Why Americans Can't Think Straight
About Class.''

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 920 words

DATELINE: AMHERST, Mass.


This country is in shackles, its thought, character and public policy locked in
distortion and lies. The deceit stands at the root of Federal and state
budgetary chaos and corrodes every aspect of national life. It causes the chief
executive to expatiate on the defense of ''our life style'' - our life style -
as though the way of life of the privileged were universal. And that
obliviousness is but a minor symptom of a vast, country-wide self- deception.

Several hallowed concepts - independence, individualism, choice -are woven into
the web of illusion and self-deception. But presiding over the whole is the icon
of classlessness.

George Bush asserts that class is ''for European democracies or something else -
it isn't for the United States of America. We are not going to be divided by
class.'' The forces behind this icon of classlessness range from the media to
the national experience of public education.

The myth of classlessness has a history, of course. Caught up in that history,
the Framers of the Constitution refused to impose land and property
qualifications for Federal office; and 8 out of 10 Americans, in the Depression,
claimed to be middle class. In our time, the myth not only lives deep in
people's our nerves, but exerts an ever more destructive influence on public
policy.

The myth is in tens of thousands of hours of sitcoms watched by tens of
millions, young and old. On ''The Cosby Show,'' black Princeton grads win
admission to the law and medical schools of their choice - then chuck it all,
preferring to start at the bottom as busboys and waitresses.

On ''Designing Women,'' elegant, expensively coiffed Southern businesswomen talk
for a second or two with striking curtain factory employees and at once become
partisans of the strike: ''We are all labor!'' the ladies cry. In the Harvard
alumni magazine, a recent graduate genially avers that ''we're all working
class.''

And the myth directly affects the distribution of privileges, bounties and
hazards in every sector of life.

Every year, a Federal housing donation of close to $40 billion is awarded to
millions earning more than $50,000 annually. The donation takes the form of tax
abatements, such as the mortgage interest and property tax exemptions, and the
capital gains deferral on housing sales.

The handout to these $50,000-plus neediest comes at a time when the fair market
price of rental housing in all 50 states exceeds the means of families in which
two wage-earners work full time for the minimum wage, and when New York City
alone has 170,000 families on the waiting list for public housing. Only the
faith that America is a classless society prevents this charity to the
propertied from being recognized for what it is: an indefensible class ripoff.

And the myth of classlessness figures in corporate decisions that strip the
workforce of its dignity and skills by killing off one industry after another,
from steel to semiconductors. The assumption is that workers aren't shaped by
their skills; when quality jobs disappear, workers can just do - and be -
something else.

Classlessness functions as the ultimate unspoken excuse for a range of
inequities stretching from regressive Social Security taxes to pauperization
requirements for care for the disabled, from Attorney General Dick Thornburgh's
rejection of guidelines mandating prison terms for white collar criminals to the
denial of proper medical care to heart disease patients lacking private
insurance and wholly dependent on Medicare.

The Vietnam ''draft,'' the upper income ''bubble,'' tracking in the public
schools, ''vocational'' education - all these episodes of state-administered
injustice reflect the influence of the myth of classlessness.

And always that influence is masked, obscured, downplayed. Work-related
accidents and illnesses kill 70,000 a year - but those people are nearly
invisible. ''Most occupational risks are blue collar,'' says Peter Sandman,
director of the Environmental Communication Research Program at Rutgers, ''If
most risks were professional level they'd get more [media] coverage.''

Gov. James Florio dared to present a fresh, pertinent vision of New Jersey - a
vision of a state prepared to acknowledge the realities of our class system and
committed to broadening educational opportunity and narrowing the gulf
separating rich and poor. The protest against his program is strongest in the
richest suburbs, but it has significant working class backing. How could it be
otherwise, given the huge resources that have been poured into the campaign to
persuade us that we're all one, that each has access to all, that serious
inequities simply don't exist?

An immense weight of subsidized opinion has gathered on the side of social
untruth, and the means available to those who try to contend against the untruth
are fragile. Social wrong is accepted because substantive, as opposed to sitcom,
knowledge about class has been habitually suppressed, and the key mode of
suppression remains the promotion of the idea of classlessness.

We shall not shake the monster in our midst until we take serious account of the
idea of difference - differences between, for one more example, youngsters for
whom opportunity means college and youngsters for whom opportunity can only mean
the Army. The task is nothing less than that of laying bare the links between
the perpetuation of the myth of social sameness and the perpetuation of social
wrong. We have all too little time in which to get on with it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 11, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Says 38 Expatriates Tried to Topple Government

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 167 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Oct. 10


Vietnam charged 38 men with treason or other acts of subversion in Supreme Court
today. Prosecutors said that they got help from Thai intelligence and Vietnamese
in the United States to try to overthrow the Government.

The defendants, wearing baggy blue prison uniforms and rubber sandals, were led
handcuffed into the four-story French colonial building by more than 40 special
security police.

The prosecutor said the men all left Vietnam separately and had been living in
refugee camps in Thailand when they were recruited to join a California-based
Vietnamese group organized to topple Hanoi's Communist Government.

The prosecution said a former naval official, Hoang Co Minh of the former South
Vietnamese Government, founded the military group of Vietnamese exiles in
California on April 4, 1980, and called it the National Front for the Liberation
of Vietnam. The defendants were said to have been captured by Laotian forces,
mostly in September 1989, and later handed over to Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 11, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Max Bloom, 81, Judge; Led the Liberal Party

SECTION: Section D; Page 21, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 229 words


Max Bloom, a retired associate justice of the Appellate Division of the New York
State Supreme Court and a founder of the state's Liberal Party, died yesterday
at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan. He was 81 years old and
lived in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.

He died of a neurological disorder, his daughter, Lydia Parnes of Washington,
said.

Justice Bloom was first appointed to the Criminal Court bench in 1962 by Mayor
Robert F. Wagner and served there until 1969, when he was elected to the State
Supreme Court in the Bronx and Manhattan. In 1979, Gov. Hugh L. Carey appointed
him an associate justice of the Appellate Division and he remained there until
his retirement in 1986. He was then elected as state vice chairman of the
Liberal Party.

Before he became a judge, he and his wife, Sylvia, were founders of New York's
Liberal Party in 1944.

Justice Bloom attended DeWitt Clinton High School and graduated from Fordham
University Law School in 1931.

In 1972 Justice Bloom issued an injunction barring a group of students and
faculty members opposed to the Vietnam War from disrupting classes at Columbia
University. But in 1985, he upheld a lower court ruling forbidding Columbia to
'improperly' use the police to break up an anti-apartheid protest on campus.

Besides his wife and daughter, he is survived by two grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 12, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

House Approves Compromise Bill To Continue the Arts Endowment

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 11


After hours of emotional debate over what is art and what is pornography, the
House of Representatives tonight overwhelmingly approved a bill to extend the
life of the National Endowment for the Arts for three years and leave judgments
about obscenity to the courts.

The vote of 382 to 42 came after the House rejected proposals to abolish the
endowment and to severely restrict what artworks would be eligible for Federal
grants.

The bipartisan compromise approved today would, however, substantially overhaul
the way the endowment distributes grants. It would eliminate current
restrictions on making grants but would require grant recipients to return the
money if they were convicted of violating obscenity standards.

Similar to Senate Bill

The action followed months of often contentious public debate, fueled largely by
the Republican right, over the politically sensitive issue of what constitutes
obscene art and what role the Government should play in encouraging art and
helping pay for it.

Considered the most significant overhaul of the endowment in its 25-year
history, the measure is similar to a bill that is awaiting action on the Senate
floor. White House officials said they would not comment on the proposals until
they are enacted by both chambers. But they have suggested that the
Administration will go along with the compromise.

Conservative groups that have lobbied for restrictions on arts grants attacked
the measure, saying it did not go far enough to restrict granats for art that
could be considered distasteful. Artists' organizations that oppose restrictions
on Federal grants said the bill was more acceptable than the suggested
alternatives, but voiced concerns about the new restrictions.

Under the measure, applicants would have to give detailed descriptions of their
proposed works and provide interim reports on their progress. In addition,
advisory panels that include people outside the art world would make
recommendations to the endowment about which projects to support.

The money state art councils receive would rise to 35 percent of the endowments
grants from the current 20 percent by Fiscal Year 1993.

The measure also eliminates the anti-obscenity restrictions that Congress
imposed on the endowment last year at the urging of Senator Jesse Helms,
Republican of North Carolina.

The compromise was approved after the House beat back an alternative by
Representative Dana Rohrabacher, a California Republican, that called for
specific restrictions on the types of projects the endowment could support, from
child pornography to desecration of the flag. The vote was 249 to 175. By an
even wider margin, 361 to 64, the House defeated a proposal by Representative
Philip M. Crane, Republican of Illinois, to abolish the endowment altogether.

Representative Pat Williams, a Montana Democrat and the chief sponsor of the
bill, said after the vote: ''I was surprised with the depth of support for
protecting pluralism in American and avoiding the dimunition of artistic freedom
of expression. This is a terrific vote for those Americans who were concerned
with the creeping threat of censorship.''

Anne G. Murphy, the executive director of the American Arts Alliance, a
consortium of arts groups, was not satisfied with the restrictions in the
measure but said ''it is a good vehicle for the next step of negotiations'' once
the Senate acts and the legislation goes to a conference committee.

The Backers' Arguments

Supporters of the compromise accused conservative opponents of stirring public
emotions by inaccurately portraying the endowment as having paid mostly for
distasteful works of no redeeming artistic value. The endowment's foes, they
argued, based their campaigns on the furor over provocative photographic
exhibitions by Robert Mapplethorpe and Andres Serrano.

''I believe that the far right, when they lost the Communist boogeyman, had to
search long and hard for a new enemy,'' said Representative Thomas J. Downey, a
Long Island Democrat. ''Mapplethorpe and Serrano appeared just in the nick of
time. How convenient. We could offer a variety of mistruths, present them as the
whole truth and get our constituents inflamed with the idea that the N.E.A. is
busy worrying about pornography, obscenity and sacrilege. What nonsense. What
tripe.'' His voice rising with anger, Representative Sidney R. Yates, an
Illinois Democrat and backer of the endowment, said: ''How many outrages are
there? In all the 85,000 grants of the N.E.A., there have been a handful of
mistakes. All you hear from the other side is Mapplethorpe and Serrano.
Mapplethorpe and Serrano. As if those two were the only grants the National
Endowment for the Arts ever did.''

The Respectable Projects

Representative Williams, who sponsored the compromise with Representative E.
Thomas Coleman, a Missouri Republican, ticked off respectable projects that the
endowment has helped - from the Vietnam War Memorial in Washington to the
Broadway show ''A Chorus Line'' to a traveling show of the art of Paul Gauguin.

''That's what N.E.A. funds,'' Mr. Williams said. ''Not pornography. Not
obscenity.'' Representative Paul B. Henry, a Michigan Republican, said the
endowment unjustly got ''caught up in a vindictive smear.''

''We can try to kill it,'' he said, ''punish it, abolish it, or we can try to
make it better.''

And Representative Peter H. Kostmayer, a Pennsylvania Democrat, almost shouted
in declaring: ''These people would have turned down William Faulkner and William
Shakespeare. This is book burning in America in 1990! That's what this is all
about.''

But opponents of the compromise said it did not go far enough in getting the
Federal Government out of the business of using taxpayers' dollars to pay for
what they view as obscene art.

A Smoke Screen'

''The legislation before us is a smoke screen,'' said Representative Ron
Marlenee, a Montana Republican. ''It's a smoke screen that lets the junkies
peddle their depraved, sadistic wares.''

To punctuate their arguments visually, lawmakers on both sides sought to display
works that had been paid for by the endowment. But Representative John P.
Murtha, a Pennsylvania Democrat who was presiding over the chamber, ruled that
such displays would violate standards of decorum.

Representative Robert S. Walker, a Pennsylvania Republican and foe of the
endowment, sat at his desk during much of the floor debate thumbing through a
book of photographs of Mr. Mapplethorpe.

Mr. Walker said he simply wanted to show a Mapplethorpe photograph of irises in
a bowl. ''They're so fearful of showing what taxpayers are paying for that
they're stopping us from showing a bowl of flowers,'' he said. ''That's
censorship.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Pat Williams; Dana Rohrabacher (The New York Times) (pg. C3)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 12, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Church Leaders Voice Doubts on U.S. Gulf Policy

BYLINE: By PETER STEINFELS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1192 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 11


Protestant and Roman Catholic leaders are beginning to raise moral questions
about American policy in the Persian Gulf, edging away from the general support
they voiced for it two months ago and opening up a gap with their Jewish
counterparts.

Virtually all American religious groups have condemned President Saddam
Hussein's invasion of Kuwait and continue to support the economic embargo aimed
at forcing him to withdraw Iraqi forces. But in recent weeks many church leaders
have warned against further military actions, against including food and medical
supplies in the embargo, against a long-term American military presence in the
gulf and against a way of life at home that leaves the nation so dependent on
Middle Eastern oil.

They have also argued that a resolution of the gulf crisis demands steps toward
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, linkage that the Administration
and Jewish leaders disavow.

If this attitude runs counter to the historic tendency of churches to bless the
weapons and the war aims of their governments, it fits with a strong pacifist
strand in American Christianity that flourished after World War I, died down
with the war against Hitler and the Cold War, and has been reinvigorated in the
years since Vietnam.

Church leaders' questioning of America's gulf policy still falls short of
outright opposition, and no one knows how widely these concerns are shared by
average clergy members. But the movement is not limited to the traditional peace
churches like the Quakers or to antiwar groups.

Last month the generally liberal National Council of Churches, which brings
together 32 Protestant and Eastern Orthodox churches, spelled out many of these
strictures on United States policy in a long resolution.

The Roman Catholic Archbishop of Los Angeles, Roger M. Mahony, who is chairman
of the Catholic bishops' international policy committee, told Secretary of State
James A. Baker 3d that Iraqi civilians should not be deprived of ''essentials,''
especially food and medicine, by the economic sanctions. The United Nations
embargo allows Iraq to acquire as much food, medicine and medical spare parts as
it needs, so long as it meets United Nations conditions.

Several influential Catholic moralists sharply condemned the statement by Gen.
Michael J. Dugan that led to his dismissal as Air Force Chief of Staff: that
''the cutting edge'' of American military plans would be heavy bombing of
''downtown Baghdad.''

The Quiet Evangelicals

Perhaps more suprising, leaders of conservative evangelical churches, often a
source of vocal support for American military intervention, have instead been
subdued, either echoing some of the same cautions or simply appealing for
prayer.

At a news conference here today, some Protestant and Catholic church leaders
went further. Calling the gulf policy precipitate and dangerous, they urged
withdrawal of American troops in favor of a multinational force and proposed a
mobilization of public opinion to oppose any heightening of the conflict. ''The
alleged national consensus of support for U.S. policy must be disrupted,'' said
Jim Wallis, editor of the radical evangelical magazine Sojourners, which was the
conference's sponsor.

Other participants were Edmond L. Browning, Presiding Bishop of the Episcopal
Church; Thomas Gumbleton, Roman Catholic Auxiliary Bishop of Detroit, who heads
Pax Christi, a Catholic peace group; Bishop Dale White of the United Methodist
Church in New York; Patricia Rumer, general director of Church Women United, an
interdenominational group; the Rev. James Forbes, senior pastor of the Riverside
Church in Manhattan, and Joan Campbell, director of the American office of the
World Council of Churches.

They criticized American policy, saying it relied on military power rather than
diplomacy. Several contrasted the willingness to spend money on the Persian Gulf
buildup with the limits on health and housing programs discussed in the current
budget negotiations.

Between this stance and that of other church leaders is a complicated overlay of
agreement and disagreement. The Rev. J. Bryan Hehir, for example, an adviser to
the Catholic bishops on international affairs, calls the deployment of the
forces in Saudi Arabia ''justified politically and morally.''

Writing in the coming issue of Commonweal, a liberal biweekly edited by Catholic
lay people, Father Hehir says that by deterring further Iraqi aggression, the
rapid deployment forestalled war and provided time for diplomacy and economic
sanctions to work.

But the priest, who also teaches ethics and international affairs at Georgetown
University, argues strongly against a military effort to liberate Kuwait, saying
it would risk destruction out of proportion to any legitimate gains. ''War
undertaken to vindicate state boundaries in the Middle East,'' he writes,
''could end by erasing most of the borders which today define the region.''

Threat of a 'Sawdust Hitler'

Though they disagree on the military deployment in Saudi Arabia, Bishop
Gumbleton and Father Hehir forcefully condemn the idea of air attacks on Iraqi
cities. Both say Catholic moral teaching would require believers to refuse
orders to engage in carpet bombing or other direct attacks on civilians.

A wide range of Orthodox, Conservative and Reform Jewish rabbis and lay leaders
have voiced strong support for the Administration's actions in the gulf. They,
too, say they prefer a multinational force. But they support military action if
necessary to counter what Rabbi Alexander M. Schindler called the ''real,
immediate and ongoing'' threat posed by a ''sawdust Hitler.'' Rabbi Schindler is
president of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations, the association of
Reform synagogues.

Unlike many Christian leaders, Jewish spokesmen argue that Iraq's threat to its
neighbors demonstrates that the conflict between Palestinians and Israelis
conflict is not the main threat to peace in the region.

Staff members at the National Association of Evangelicals, the largest
association of evangelical Protestant churches, say their leaders have been
conspicuously quiet about the Gulf crisis. Brian O'Connell, who directs the
association's educational program on international issues, said this silence
might reflect tacit support for the Government's military policy, but might also
reflect evangelical leaders' awareness that their members are divided.

A Call for Prayers

In August, the Rev. Billy Graham, the most respected of evangelical preachers,
called the situation in the gulf ''potentially one of the most dangerous threats
to world peace and stability since World War II'' and called for prayers. In
late September, he called the crisis ''far more sinister and far more
difficult'' than the conflicts in Korea and Vietnam.

Christianity Today, the leading evangelical weekly, will publish its first
comment on the crisis on Oct. 22. The editorial issues no policy prescriptions
but warns strongly against anti-Arab feelings: ''When international disputes
escalate to this extent, the church has a special responsibility to douse the
flames of hatred.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 12, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Will Interview Dancers Of Cambodia on Defecting

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 797 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Oct. 11


The State Department said today that it had demanded that a group of Cambodian
dancers on tour in the United States be interviewed by the Immigration and
Naturalization Service to determine if more of them may want to defect.

Four of the dancers, currently performing in New York, defected last week, amid
angry charges that the troupe's American hosts had tried to intimidate them into
not defecting and countercharges that the defections were the work of the Khmer
Rouge.

A State Department official said that the 32 remaining members of the troupe,
the Cambodian Classical Dance Company, would be interviewed on Friday at the
offices of the Immigration Service in New York. But John McAuliff, the director
of the U.S. Indochina Reconciliation Project, the dancers' American sponsor,
said that a decision on interviews should be up to the Cambodians and that they
do not want to talk to United States officials.

Pressure 'Is Suspicious'

''All this pressure to see the dancers is suspicious,'' Mr. McAuliff said. He
has been accused by Cambodian refugees in America and by some Americans of
trying to block access to the dancers and intimidating them by warning that they
would not be eligible for political asylum.

The dispute has taken on unusual significance because the visit by the dancers
is the first cultural exchange from Cambodia since the end of the Indochina war
in 1975.

Moreover, dance is one of the great traditional arts of Cambodia and was almost
wiped out in the period the Khmer Rouge controlled the country between 1975 and
1979. The Khmer Rouge carried out a brutal reorganization of society that caused
the deaths of more than a million Cambodians.

'Survivors of Khmer Rouge'

The dancers, members of the Cambodian Classical Dance Company, have arrived at a
time when relations between the United States and Cambodia have just begun to
thaw as Phnom Penh has agreed to take part in a United Nations-supervised peace
settlement calling for free elections.

But John McAuliff, the director of the U.S.-Indochina Reconciliation Project,
which is sponsoring the troupe's three-week tour of the United States, said the
defections and threats made against the dancers had left many of the remaining
dancers in tears. ''They are all survivors of the Khmer Rouge and they think the
Khmer Rouge is behind all this,'' he said.

Mr. McAuliff, whose organization has friendly ties to the Governments in both
Hanoi and Phnom Penh, said this had undermined the purpose of the tour, to
improve reconciliation between the United States and Cambodia.

''The only people it benefits are the Khmer Rouge or the K.P.N.L.F.,'' he said,
referring to the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, a non-Communist
anti-Goverment movement aligned with the Khmer Rouge.

But several Americans and Cambodians who have talked with the defectors say that
Mr. McAuliff had tried to intimidate them into not leaving the dance group and
had kept the other members of the troupe isolated.

An Overheard Conversation

Owen Olsen, a car salesman in St. Paul who works with Cambodian people there,
said he had been present in a hotel room where the dancers were staying when Mr.
McAuliff ''told the dancers it was hopeless to defect, that they could not get
jobs in the United States, that they would not be given asylum and that the
police would arrest them and deport them back to Cambodia.''

Mr. McAuliff acknowledged today that he had issued these warnings, based, he
said, on conversations he had with officials in the State Department.

Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn and chairman of the House
Foreign Affairs Committee subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs, said Mr.
McAuliff's actions were ''an absolute outrage'' and might be a violation of the
dancers civil rights while in the United States.

''No one in the State Department can make a determination about asylum in
advance, particularly in a country with a repressive human rights record,'' Mr.
Solarz said. Interviewed by Lawyer Glenda Potter, a lawyer with Southern
Minnesota Regional Legal Services who interviewed the three dancers who defected
in St. Paul, said she believed they had ''a valid claim for asylum'' based on
the dangers they faced back in Cambodia.

The troupe's tour has turned into a political contest between Cambodian refugees
still hostile to the Government in Phnom Penh, who believe the dance troupe has
been sullied by Vietnamese influences, and other Cambodians and Americans who
want a reconciliation.

The in-fighting has been made even more intense because of the division among
Cambodian refugees between backers of the non-Communist anti-Government
movement, supporters of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and a few suspected agents of
the Khmer Rouge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 12, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Drive Mounted for Environment Vote

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1039 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Oct. 11


Amid signs that a far-reaching environmental measure on the California ballot is
faltering, three national leaders of the environmental movement declared today
that the state faced an environmental crisis. They announced the start of a
door-to-door drive for the measure.

They charged that eight oil and chemical companies that have contributed nearly
$3 million to an advertising campaign to kill the voter-initiated measure were
among the worst polluters in California and the nation. The measure would impose
the strictest environmental controls in the country, banning many common
pesticides and requiring drastic reductions in carbon dioxide emissions, among
many other things.

While none of the environmental leaders would concede the measure, which they
call Big Green, was in trouble, many in the movement fear a loss would seriously
slow the national political momentum for ecological causes. The vote is shaping
up as a major test of whether the public's general desire for a cleaner
environment is matched by willingness to pay for it.

Opponents Tell of Job Loss

Industry groups have mounted a withering advertising drive against it, charging
that the measure tries to do too much and will raise water and power rates and
cost jobs in manufacturing and agriculture. While there have been no recent
statewide polls on the measure, political experts believe its once huge margin
of support has eroded substantially in recent weeks.

''Much is at stake in this fight, both for California and the entire nation,''
John Adams of New York, president of the Natural Resources Defense Council, said
at a news conference at the Sierra Club's headquarters in San Francisco. ''Big
Green is perhaps our best chance to translate the shift in public consciousness
about the environment into political change.''

He was joined by Jay Hair, president of the 5.8-million-member National Wildlife
Federation, from Washington, and Michael L. Fisher, executive director of the
Sierra Club, which has 200,000 members in California. Absent from the
conference, and a similar one in Los Angeles, was Assemblyman Tom Hayden of
Santa Monica, chairman of the steering committee running the campaign. Opponents
have tagged the measure ''the Hayden initiative'' in the hope that voters will
tend to oppose it if it is linked to the former anti-Vietnam War leader.
#750,000 Members Alterted Expecting to be greatly outspent, the environmental
leadership said it was mounting a statewide effort to get out the ''green'' vote
with the help 750,000 members of environmental groups. The Sierra Club said it
would call on its 11 chapters to man telephone banks, hand out leaflets at
shopping centers, movie lines and street fairs and participate in local debates.

At the same time, the natural resources council released a report stating that
the fast-growing state faced alarming environmental degradation. ''California's
environment and quality of life are in serious peril from the combined and
continuous pollution of our air, drinking water, food supply, rivers, lakes and
coastline,'' said the report, compiled by council staff members. It asserted
that 227 million pounds of chemical pollutants are released annually in
California.

In a telephone interview, Mr. Adams said that a direct voter measure was the
only way to tackle these problems because ''special interests'' had thwarted
efforts to pass laws in Congress and the State Legislature.

The environmental leaders said major contributors to the campaign to defeat
Proposition 128, as it appears on the ballot, are makers of pesiticides and
other toxic chemicals. They said the Monsanto Company, which has contributed
$405,000, is the sole manufacturer of the pesticide alachlor. They said alachlor
was ''a probable human carcinogen'' that had contaminated ground and surface
water in the Midwest. E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, which has given
$365,000, released 1,084,000 pounds of toxic chemicals in California in 1988,
they said.

The other six companies the environmentalists said had paid for the advertising
were the Chevron Corporation, Dow Elanco Inc, Rhone-Poulenc S.A., Ciba-Geigy
International AG, ICI Americas and ARCO and its sister company, the ARCO
ChemicalCompany.

Don Schrack, the spokesman for the chemical-industry backed group called ''No on
128,'' said the backers of the referendum had made a strategic decision to avoid
discussing its lack of merit.

The measure, which runs nearly 30,000 words, would substantially rewrite
California environmental law, cobbling together an array of loosely connected
laws. Among other things, it would phase out pesticides - just how many is at
issue - that cause cancer or birth defects, strictly limit discharges of
pollutants into coastal waters and phase out chemicals believed to deplete the
earth's protective ozone layer. It would create an elected ''environmental
advocate'' with special legal powers and require a state plan to cut carbon
dioxide emissions by 20 percent by the year 2000 and 40 percent by 2010,
adjusted for population growth as necessary.

Study Cites High Costs

Critics maintain the law is grounded in no reliable science and asks voters to
impose huge costs on local governments and businesses. The critics also contend
the measure would even undermine American competitiveness in international trade
by establishing different food standards for the huge California market.

According to a study by DRI/McGraw-Hill a Boston-based economic consulting
concern, complying with the carbon dioxide provision would raise gasoline and
diesel fuel taxes by 50 cents a gallon, require an investment of up to $50
billion to build high-speed trains between major cities, increase the use of
nuclear power and slow California economic growth to about 65 percent of the
national average from 150 percent.

''Clearly these numbers generate a great deal of concern,'' said Victor F.
Weisser, president of the California Council for Environmental and Economic
Balance, a coalition of industry and labor groups that commissioned the study.
The council has not taken a formal position on the proposition.

Backers of the referendum say claims of huge costs are overblown.dEli Lilly(Dow
Elanco)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 12, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Robert L. White, Ex-Head of Kent State, 81

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 116 words

DATELINE: KENT, Ohio, Oct. 11


Robert L. White, who was president of Kent State University when National
Guardsmen shot to death four students and wounded nine during a protest against
the Vietnam War, died Wednesday at Robinson Memorial Hospital in Ravenna, Ohio.
He was 81 years old. The cause of death was not disclosed.  Mr. White's career
at the university spanned 44 years. He was president from 1963 to 1971 and
retired in 1975.

On May 4, 1970, during a protest against the Vietnam War, guardsmen called in by
Mayor Leroy Satrom fired on demonstrators. The deaths touched off a wave of
protests at college campuses around the nation.

Mr. White is survived by his wife, Edna, and a son, Ronald, of Dearborn, Mich.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 12, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Keep Our Powder Dry

BYLINE: By McGeorge Bundy; McGeorge Bundy was special assistant for national
security affairs for Presidents Kennedy and Johnson.

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 659 words


As they move into the third month of their shared response to Saddam Hussein's
aggression, the governments of the U.S., most Middle Eastern countries and most
members of the U.N. Security Council deserve applause. Together they have
established a winning position. Unless they become divided in ways that none can
desire, the Iraqi aggression, sooner or later, will fail.

Oddly, the principal threat to this prospect is that one or more members of this
extraordinary coalition may not appreciate the strength of their present
position and so may lose patience. Because the Americans are the linchpin of the
coalition, it is America's patience that matters most, and it is precisely among
Americans that there are voices calling for moving from blockade to ''decisive''
combat. These voices are wrong in three ways.

First, if the U.S. takes the lead in escalation, it will put heavy strains on
the unity and steadiness of the coalition it has done so much to bring together
and will gravely threaten the blockade constructed under our leadership.

Second, there is no need for escalation because the blockade itself, over time,
is a winner. There can be no durable success for Saddam Hussein while the
blockade remains in force, and his strength, military and political, is bound to
decline month by month as it continues.

Already he is weaker than he was, and his behavior shows he knows it: his
threats get thinner and his search for a political escape more frantic. Because
it is necessarily slow, the blockade can easily be underestimated. Iraq is
unusually vulnerable to blockade. Large-scale imports and exports are vital;
they are readily blocked; the necessary participants in this process are few,
and all are deeply interested in success.

We can't be sure a cornered Saddam Hussein will never strike out, but it is
reasonable to expect that the allies will be able to turn any such act into a
clear defeat for him.

A third error is the assumption that because it was wrong in Vietnam it is wrong
now to use force in a limited and graduated way. This assumption is entirely
understandable to me, because I know at first hand what we tried to do in
Vietnam and how it ended in disaster. It was a disaster, not because we did too
little, but because we tried to do too much. We tried to do with our own forces
what in the end could be done only by the Vietnamese. Tragically, there was a
persistent and eventually fatal imbalance of effectiveness between the
Vietnamese Communists and their opponents.

It makes no sense to let an honorable but deeply mistaken view of the American
tragedy in Vietnam be misapplied in the wholly different situation of Iraq and
Kuwait.

This time, as a result of quick and excellent work by our own leaders, we and
our friends are doing enough to prevail - a position we never reached in Vietnam
- and we need not do more unless Saddam Hussein makes war. A blockade has daily
costs, but even a year of blockade will be cheaper for both sides by every
measure of cost than even a week of war.

It is true that blockade will not by itself do more than bring independence back
to Kuwait. It cannot settle the political future of that country or insure a
stable peace between Iraq and its neighbors.

As President Bush made clear at the U.N., there will be much to work out after
the Iraqis leave Kuwait. In particular, there are other dangers in the Iraq of
Saddam Hussein, notably a deep preoccupation with the acquisition of weapons of
mass destruction. But these are not matters to be settled by warfare - at least
not by warfare of American choice.

We shall do better on these larger problems if we keep to what President Bush
has described: a course that does only what we must to restore the independence
of Kuwait. Once that goal is attained, there will be a new political and
military balance of power in the region that will help in larger matters - as an
open war begun by the Americans will not.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 12, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

LAW;
Free Speech and Civil Rights Clash in Racism Trial

BYLINE: By ROBB LONDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1546 words

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore., Oct. 10


Six years after winning a lawsuit in Alabama that literally bankrupted a major
faction of the Ku Klux Klan, civil rights lawyers who brought that case are
waging a similar battle here in search of an even bigger damage award. This time
they are trying to ruin the leaders of the White Aryan Resistance, a loosely
knit group of several thousand white supremacists and skinheads who advocate
racial separatism and anti-Semitism.

Lawyers for the Southern Poverty Law Center and the Anti-Defamation League of
B'nai B'rith began putting on their case this week in a $10 million civil
lawsuit filed on behalf of the family of an Ethiopian man who was beaten to
death with a baseball bat in 1988 by three skinheads here. The killers, who
pleaded guilty last year, said they were followers of the White Aryan
Resistance, which is headed by a father and son: Thomas Metzger, a 52-year-old
television repairman from Fallbrook, Calif., and his 22-year-old son, John.

No one contends that the Metzgers participated in the choice of a victim or in
his bludgeoning, or that they were anywhere nearby. Instead, lawyers for the
plaintiff assert that the Metzgers incited their followers to go out and kill,
making them liable for the victim's death under Oregon law.

''This case won't be easy to prove because there are many elements that need to
be demonstrated in linking the leaders to the acts of their followers,'' said
Professor Caroline Forell, who teaches tort law at the University of Oregon Law
School in Eugene. ''But it's been done before and could very well happen again
here.'' Support From A.C.L.U.  Civil rights advocates nationwide are watching
the case closely, optimistic that it will cripple the group that many say has
become the heir apparent to the influence that was once the Klan's.

''As a tactic, we'll see more and more attempts to get at the assets of these
groups,'' said Leonard Zeskind, the research director of the National Center for
Democratic Renewal, a group based in Atlanta that tracks white-supremacist
groups. ''This case is important because in the last 10 years, the White Aryan
Resistance has gained much of the momentum lost by parts of the Klan, especially
by its use of cable TV and by recruiting members from new groups such as
skinheads and other disaffected youth.''

Members of the White Aryan Resistance say the suit is simply an attempt to
persecute them for exercising their right of free speech. And they are receiving
partial support from the local chapter of at least one national organization
concerned with First Amendment issues, the American Civil Liberties Union.

Lawyers for the A.C.L.U.'s Oregon chapter, in a friend-of-the-court brief, argue
that certain aspects of the suit may violate the First Amendment rights of the
two defendants.

Through newsletters, rallies and a cable television program, ''Race and
Reason,'' the White Aryan Resistance has disseminated its beliefs nationwide,
regularly excoriating blacks and other groups. Adding further interest to the
case, the presiding judge is Circuit Judge Ancer L. Haggerty, the most decorated
black Marine in the Vietnam War.

A Crippled Klan

Judge Haggerty is not expected to rule on the First Amendment issues until the
plaintiffs have finished presenting their case. If he finds that the suit
infringes on the Metzgers' free-speech rights, he could keep the jurors from
assessing costly punitive damages, although he could allow more modest
compensatory damages. Lawyers for the plaintiffs said they expected all
testimony to last three weeks.

Six years ago in Mobile, Ala., Beulah Mae Donald, the mother of a black
teen-ager who was lynched by a mob at the behest of Ku Klux Klan members, was
awarded $7 million in a wrongful death suit brought against the Klan faction,
the United Klans of America, by the Southern Poverty Law Center, based in
Montgomery.

Because the Klan's treasury could not cover the damage award, Ms. Donald was
also awarded the deeds to the national headquarters of the United Klans of
America and even to the home of the Klan organizer who ordered the lynching.

Law enforcement officials say the 1984 judgment has greatly restricted the
Klan's ability to mount organized campaigns until it can rebuild its financial
base. The lawyers who brought the Alabama suit say they intend the same fate for
the White Aryan Resistance. Were Recruits Incited? The lawyers for the family of
Mulugeta Seraw, the Ethiopian man who was in Oregon as a resident alien and
would-be college student, are asking for more than $10 million in combined
punitive and compensatory damages, sums the Metzgers say neither they nor their
organization possess.

The civil suit alleges that the Metzgers sent members of their group to Portland
just a few weeks before the killing to recruit new members and to incite them to
commit violence against minorities. The complaint states that Mr. Seraw's
killers were among those recruits, and it asks the jury of nine men and three
women -including one Asian-American woman and a Hawaiian man, but no blacks - to
find that the Metzgers meant for harm to occur, even if they did not single out
Mr. Seraw as a victim.

If the jury is unable to conclude that the Metzgers intended that violence
occur, it will be permitted to find that the Metzgers were nonetheless reckless
or negligent in their selection of the recruiters who went to Portland. The
complaint alleges that the Metzgers knew or should have known that the
recruiters had records of violent crimes against minorities and would therefore
be prone to committing such acts.

Link With Slayers

To prevail on any of these theories, the plaintiffs must convince at least nine
of the 12 jurors that the evidence makes the Metzgers' liability ''more likely
than not.''

During jury selection, the Metzgers, who are acting as their own lawyers, hinted
that part of their defense will be that they did not send recruiters to
Portland, or at the very least that any recruiters they may have sent were
acting beyond the authority conferred upon them.

This week, as police helicopters hovered overhead and cordons of security
officers watched for confrontations between racist and anti-racist groups
gathered outside the old Multnomah County Courthouse, lawyers for the Southern
Poverty Law Center began their attempt to link the Metzgers to Mr. Seraw's
death.

Morris Dees, the lead lawyer for the plaintiffs, said he would produce telephone
records and witnesses to contradict any claim by the Metzgers that there was
little or no connection between them and the killers.

Shrewd Metzger Defense

The senior Mr. Metzger, who sat with his son at a table surrounded by six
bodyguards, repeatedly told the jury that he is a modern-day David up against
the Goliaths of the nationwide civil rights groups.

''I believe individuals are not equal and races are not equal so we have to get
that all out,'' he told the jury. But he added an appeal ''that four or so of
you can put the flim-flam out of your minds and be fair.''

Lawyers observing the trial said they were generally impressed by his
presentation, saying it was politically shrewd and less amateurish than they had
expected. Some said they believed he was receiving behind-the-scenes legal
advice.

And, observers said, in the first two days of the trial he had succeeded in
getting his main point across: that he and his son are being sued not because of
anything they have done, but because of the things they have said. The suit, he
has charged, is really an attempt to silence him and his unpopular message.

Mr. Dees vehemently rejected this in court. ''This case is not about free
speech, burning a flag,'' he said. ''It's about killing an innocent human being
by men incited and motivated by the third-highest-ranking official of the White
Aryan Resistance, sent to Portland by the Metzgers to organize the skinheads.''

Punishing Recklessness

But Mr. Dees will not be able to wave away the free speech dimension of the
case. Noting that the suit seeks to hold the Metzgers liable not just for
intentionally inciteful speech, but also for reckless or even negligent remarks,
the A.C.L.U. said it would be wrong to punish the Metzgers for such speech even
if it unintentionally caused a death.

''The Supreme Court has held quite clearly that only intentional incitement of
imminent racial violence does not deserve the protection of the First
Amendment,'' said Michael H. Simon, a Portland lawyer who helped draft the
A.C.L.U. brief.

But the A.C.L.U. brief was answered by one from the Portland chapter of the
National Lawyers Guild, a nationwide group of nearly 7,000 lawyers interested in
civil rights issues. It said the A.C.L.U. had based its view on a line of
criminal cases in which the right to free speech was found to keep the speaker
from being charged with a crime. The Metzger case is a civil suit, the Guild
noted, so a different standard should apply.

''While it might be right that the Metzgers' right to free speech should keep
them from being charged with a crime,'' said David Sugerman, the Portland lawyer
who helped draft the Guild's brief, ''it's not right that the Seraw family
should not be able to hold them liable for the damages their words caused.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Judge Ancer L. Haggerty, above, listening in Portland, Ore., as
Thomas Metzger, standing at left, defended himself and his son, John, in a $10
million suit stemming from the murder of a black man; Morris Dees, a lawyer for
the Southern Poverty Law Center, made opening statements against the Metzgers,
who are leaders of the White Aryan Resistance (Pool photographs via Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 12, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At the Movies

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1138 words



Sorvino the Don

Maybe Paulie Cicero croaked in stir, but Paul Sorvino, the versatile actor who
portrays the neighborhood don in ''Goodfellas,'' Martin Scorsese's account of
high times among lowlifes in the New York City mob, is very much alive. And
headed back for a life of crime - on the screen, of course.

Mr. Sorvino is in the midst of filming ''The Rocketeer,'' in which he plays a
racketeer.

''But this character is a tough guy, not a stately, imperious don,'' Mr. Sorvino
said. ''He is an up-front go-get-'em 30's tough guy, Eddie Valentine.'' The
film, a Disney production scheduled for release next summer, co-stars Timothy
Dalton and Alan Arkin and is directed by Joe Johnson, who found box-office
splendor in the grass when he made ''Honey, I Shrunk the Kids'' for Disney in
1989.

''The Rocketeer'' is about ''this aviator who finds a strap-on-your-back rocket
and sees a way of performing at these aviation shows to recoup the money he lost
when his plane was destroyed,'' Mr. Sorvino said. ''But this rocket is the
property of other and nefarious characters, and that's where the chase begins.
It's a kind of 1930's entertainment movie, an adventure.''

Mr. Sorvino said the day after ''The Rocketeer'' wraps up on Dec. 10, he expects
to move deeper into rocketry by taking on the role of a rocket engineer - a
physicist - in an independent production titled ''Life in the Food Chain.'' He
is to play the father of a little boy who develops a disease that ages him
prematurely.

''It's a comedy with a heart,'' he said, adding that his co-stars will be Rita
Moreno and Robert Prosky. ''So it's not chopped liver.''

About Paulie Cicero, mentor of the gangster Henry Hill in ''Goodfellas,'' Mr.
Sorvino said: ''As far as displaying an Italian-American from Brooklyn's speech
and mannerisms, that's not difficult. That's what I am. The lethality,
remorseless and sociopathic nature, along with the love and nurturing qualities
he shows his family and Henry - well, this was a job indeed.

''My preparation was all internal. I didn't have to find a voice, a speech, a
walk. I knew all of that instantly. What I didn't know, and what I wasn't sure I
would find was that kernel of coldness and absolute hardness that is
antithetical to my nature except when my family is threatened. And that took two
months, and I never thought I'd get it.'' Then, he added, ''One day I passed a
mirror and startled myself.''

As for how he got the role, Mr. Sorvino, with more than a hint of Paulie Cicero
in a good-humored vein, said: ''Marty's people got in touch with my people.''

Immigrants a Specialty

For the German actor Armin Mueller-Stahl, Sam Krichinsky was no stranger.

Sam, a Russian immigrant who comes to the United States in 1914, is the central
character in ''Avalon,'' the new autobiographical film that is the latest
installment in the Baltimore trilogy of Barry Levinson, whose previous accounts
of life in his hometown include ''Diner'' and ''Tin Men.''

''He reminds me a lot of my own grandfather,'' Mr. Mueller-Stahl said of Sam.
''He came over from Russia, too, in 1914. But he took only the first step - to
Germany.

''If he had only taken the second step, to America,'' Mr. Mueller-Stahl said,
setting up his punch line, ''I would have been a great American star.''

As it is, he is a German star, and for someone who has made only two American
films - last year's ''Music Box'' with Jessica Lange, and now ''Avalon'' - Mr.
Mueller-Stahl is, as Mr. Sorvino might put it, hardly chopped liver.

Mr. Mueller-Stahl, who began to learn English by memorizing his lines for
Costa-Gavras's ''Music Box,'' said he had admired Mr. Levinson's films ''Rain
Man'' and ''Good Morning, Vietnam'' and was eager to play Sam when the director
approached him about the assignment. But after a couple of meetings, abroad and
in New York, Mr. Mueller-Stahl, who was concerned about the quality of his
English, resigned himself to being turned down.

''I would have liked to play the part, but sometimes it happens,'' he said. So
one night in New York he left his hotel for the evening. When he returned, he
was told at the desk that there was a message for him. Unfortunately, it was
missing.

So he went up to his room, and a few minutes later, he received a call: the
message had been found. ''Please have breakfast tomorrow morning with Barry
Levinson,'' it said.

It was then, Mr. Mueller-Stahl said, that the director told him: ''Let's do
it.''

Mr. Mueller-Stahl said he worked up to six hours a day to learn the Yiddish
accent required for the role of Sam Krichinsky. ''It was not so difficult to
play Sam as it was to play in 'Music Box,' '' he said, referring to the role of
Mike Laszlo. Laszlo, an immigrant from Hungary living in Chicago, is defended by
his daughter, a lawyer, against charges that he committed war crimes in his
homeland as a pro-Nazi member of the secret police.

''It was very difficult to play this part because I didn't like to convince the
audience I'm a Nazi,'' Mr. Mueller-Stahl said. ''I tried to convince the
audience I'm a good actor.

''From my point of view, both parts belong together,'' he added. ''Mike Laszlo
could have killed Sam Krichinsky.''

Broadway Bugs

It's enough to raise the hare. Yes, Bugs Bunny has been elevated to Broadway
stardom. The medium of this ascent is a vehicle titled, fittingly enough, ''Bugs
Bunny on Broadway,'' honoring the raucous rabbit on the occasion of his 50th
birthday. This show, which opened Oct. 4 at the Gershwin Theater for a limited
engagement and is now returning there from Tuesday through Oct. 21, is a
compilation of some classic Bugs Bunny films, accompanied by a 40-piece ensemble
that goes by the name Warner Brothers Symphony Orchestra.

And the show - with such cartoons as ''What's Opera, Doc?'' and ''The Rabbit of
Seville'' - includes not only the music of such composers as Wagner, Johann
Strauss the elder and Rossini, but such Looney Tunes cartoon characters as Daffy
Duck and Elmer Fudd as well.

For devotees of animation, it is also the opportunity to study the achievements
of such famed practitioners of the art as Chuck Jones, Tex Avery and the
84-year-old Friz Freleng. ''We were all pioneers,'' said Mr. Freleng, who worked
for Walt Disney in the 1920's and spent more than 30 years at Warner Brothers
before creating the Pink Panther and running his own studio. ''I made the first
Looney Tunes in 1930 and did the last one in about 1962.''

Comparing the Warner Brothers cartoons to Disney's, Mr. Freleng said, ''He did
the cutey stuff, and we did the rowdy.''

And of state of the art today, he said: ''They're doing animation as good as
they ever did, but I don't think the creative input is there. It's like you
can't replace Chaplin; you can't replace Jolson. You can only imitate them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Paul Sorvino (Warner Brothers)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 13, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Not All Smiles at the Endowment

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 827 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 12


Propped against a television set in one of the offices at the National Endowment
for the Arts today was a picture of St. Jude, patron saint of hopeless causes.
Its presence symbolized both the faith that sustained the agency through 18
months of trauma and the hope that the House of Representatives vote on Thursday
for its continued existence would not fade or be substantially altered by
political craftsmen still chiseling out its future.

''We've been calling on all our respective faiths,'' said Jack Lichenstein, the
public affairs director of the agency, whose chairman is John E. Frohnmayer.
''It's a little premature to be celebrating, though.''

Staff members had gathered in his office to watch the House proceedings on
television and see whether conservative opponents would be able to attach their
restrictions to the spending measures the restrictions they had lost in the
reauthorization bill. They were met with Baroque music on C-Span that rolled
over a roll-call on the military authorization bill.

''We've had to cope with a lot of misunderstanding and distortion,'' said Mr.
Lichenstein. ''There will be a sense of relief when it is all over. This is just
a first hurdle.''

One Is Apprehensive

''Cautious, that's what I am,'' said Sali Ann Kriegsman, director of the
endowment's dance program, one of 16 arts programs the agency operates. ''I
would have preferred a totally clean bill. Right now the language has an awful
lot of fear in it. I've already heard people saying they fear self-censorship,
question themselves: Am I going to get in trouble if I do this? Should I exhibit
this?''

The dance director had just returned from the International Dance Biennial in
Lyons, France, and was distressed by the impression the obscenity charges
against the agency had provoked among her European dance counterparts.

''They think we've lost our way,'' she said. ''They're looking to Eastern
Europe, where everything is opening up, where the arts are exciting and,
frankly, they always thought of the arts in America as being open and free, and
now they see us getting nervous and scared while Eastern Europe. . . . Well, you
can see that they would be confused.''

Big Shift in One Year

Drew Oliver, who heads the endowment's museum program, said he was heartened by
Congressional activity on the reauthorization bill and not discouraged by the
restrictions on arts grants.

''I'm not saying that some people won't think twice before they present
something,'' he said, ''but I don't think it will make an enormous amount of
difference.''

Mina Berryman, the acting director of the design program, was less sanguine.

''A year ago, even a mention of restrictions would have caused an outrage,'' she
said. ''Now the bill looks pretty good compared with what we were threatened
with. I'd like to feel relief because it has been so tragic around here for a
year, but to be honest, I don't.''

Mrs. Berryman imagined an artistic piece that featured the life of a fetus, and
speculated on its fate under some of the more restrictive provisions that some
Congressional legislators had envisioned. Representative Dana Rohrabacher,
Republican of California, offered a proposal that included many specifics on
what types of images could not be used in work paid for by the Government.
Fetuses were forbidden.

''It's not like you have Renaissance paintings with embryos, but I could imagine
Georgia O'Keeffe painting something like that and making it beautiful,'' she
said. ''You couldn't do that under Rohrabacher.''

'I'm Elated'

Robert Kubli, a program specialist on art in public places in the visual arts
program, has been at the endowment for 16 of its 25 years.

''I'm elated at yesterday's vote,'' he said, referring to the House vote of 382
to 42 to extend the endowment for three years. ''I thought it was wonderful. I
believe that the endowment, if there are going to be some changes made, that we
can help them, and be the better for it.''

On his desk was a yellow legal pad on which Mr. Kubli was listing art that
originally offended the public that paid for it.

The list included the Eiffel Tower, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial and an
Alexander Calder sculpture in Grand Rapids, Mich.

Housed in the elegant, Romanesque- style Old Post Office Building on
Pennsylvania Avenue, the endowment's fifth- and sixth-floor offices open on a
huge atrium. On the fifth floor Sara Vogan, a novelist and short-story writer
from San Francisco, was taking a break from the literature panel that is
selecting writers for grants.

''We've been here for three days and we haven't focused on the debate,'' she
said. ''We just assumed that there would be an N.E.A. Why it would be almost
like not having a Liberty Bell.  ''I'm thrilled that the vote was so positive.
Some countries don't support the arts, and I'm glad for so many reasons, not the
least for patriotic ones. It shows just how democratic we are. I'm proud of
Congress.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John E. Frohnmayer, chairman of National Endowment for the Arts.
(NYT)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 13, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Beliefs

BYLINE: By Peter Steinfels

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 941 words


It was once the case that when a nation went to war, religion, too, signed on
for the duration. But during the Vietnam War and the drawn-out conflicts in
Central America, America's religious leaders split. Some blessed the
Government's ventures, while many were active in anti-war organizations.

The volunteer Army and rapid mobilization have put religious leaders at a
disadvantage. Two months ago, the largest military buildup since Vietnam took
place without America's religious leaders doing much more than nodding in
somewhat tentative acquiescence. If they had doubts, these were overcome by
recognition of the brutality of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq and his
country's invasion of Kuwait, and by the international consensus that President
Bush put together in support of his policy.

Now Christian leaders of many denominations are seriously discussing the moral
issues raised by the our Persian Gulf intervention. Not a moment too soon, goes
one reaction. Let's only hope that morality survives, goes another.

Both reactions are right. In the Persian Gulf, the United States faces
excruciating moral decisions, and it needs all the guidance it can get. It faces
an adversary who has proved himself ready to ignore whatever rules of warfare
have managed to establish themselves. The temptation for the United States to do
the same will be great.

But whether the churches are well equipped to give sound moral leadership is
another matter.

Some of the positions staked out in recent weeks are grounded in established
religious tradition. Catholic moralists took sharp objection, for example, when
several top miltary officials suggested that American action against Iraq might
open with a virtually unrestrained bombing campaign.

The principle that civilian populations should not be the target of military
strikes was widely violated in terror bombing during World War II as well as at
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. But it remains a central point in ''just war theory,''
the tradition that tries to distinguish between just and unjust warfare. It is a
tradition that Catholic moralists have kept alive but one with strong secular
roots and with parallels in other religious traditions.

By no means does everyone accept ''just war theory.'' And applying its
principles involves judgments about concrete circumstances that are inevitably
debatable. Is military force being used only as a ''last resort,'' for instance,
or are the likely benefits of a military action ''proportional'' to the likely
harm? But the theory's premises and its implications have been thoroughly
spelled out over centuries of both religious and secular discussion.

Not so some of the other approaches that church leaders are now offering to
testing the morality of the Persian Gulf policy. Consider three of the themes
running through many critical examinations of that policy. One is the history of
Western colonial powers and the United States in dominating and exploiting
regions of the Middle East - and even of arming Saddam Hussein himself as a
counter against Iran. Another is America's greedy, oil-guzzling and
energy-wasting life style. A third is America's reliance on military might
rather than diplomacy and economic sanctions.

One could debate some of the particulars of these indictments, but supposing
that in very important respects they are true, it remains unclear what follows.
In religious terms, the United States should repent its past and amend its
present. But what does that mean specifically, here and now, for actions in the
gulf?

Should awareness of past failings make us more self-critical about our present
motives, more understanding of the way our presence is perceived as a threat -
or should these failings perhaps disqualify the United States morally from
acting in the region at all?

Presume that remedying energy overconsumption, and all the other things wrong
with American society, is an overdue but nonetheless complicated and long-term
process. Should America suspend efforts to insure oil supplies until those goals
are achieved? Is the oil issue in the gulf a matter primarily of a few cents on
a gallon of gas or of guaranteeing Americans a luxurious life style? Is the
potential control of nearly half the world's petroleum supply by a ruthless
dictator a legitimate matter of national interest and international order?

There are different plausible answers to these questions. But if themes like
Western dominance in the Middle East or America's life style are to contribute
to the moral discussion of gulf policy, then these further questions must be
asked and the answers spelled out. One cannot slide by implication to a
conclusion about the gulf crisis without making the intervening arguments
explicit.

Two characteristics seem to mark the more outspoken religious critics of the
gulf policy. The first is a deep revulsion, both moral and visceral, from any
use of military force. The second is a deep distrust of the United States's
capacity to act constructively overseas.

Both of these are defensible positions, especially in the face of a potential
conflagration in the Middle East. But holding to them may not always or
necessarily coincide with the most effective measures for countering Saddam
Hussein - and when that looks like the case, the critics should candidly admit
that they face a hard choice. They, above all, should know that this is not the
best of all possible worlds.

Politicians already offer emotional appeals and short-hand conclusions. The
churches can contribute disciplined moral reasoning that acknowledges premises,
spells out arguments and confronts hard choices.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 13, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Senate Votes Open Aid For Cambodian Rebels

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 223 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 12


The Senate today approved $20 million in new American humanitarian aid to
Cambodians, an apparent replacement for the previous policy of covert aid to
rebels fighting the Vietnamese-backed Government.

The Democratic chairman of the Senate intelligence panel, David L. Boren of
Oklahoma, argued that aid to non-Communist resistance forces should be provided
openly, and through humanitarian channels. ''This is a policy question that
should not be discussed behind closed doors,'' he said.

The committee voted earlier this year to end a $13 million program of covert aid
to the non-Communist resistance, which is aligned with the widely feared
Communist Khmer Rouge in seeking to oust the Government. As many as a million
Cambodians died under a brutal reorganization of society by the Khmer Rouge,
which governed from 1975 until early 1979. Vietnam installed a new Government
after invading in 1978.

''There is a strong likelihood that in the past some of the funds from the
United States may have been used, directly or indirectly, to benefit the Khmer
Rouge, and it's time we had restrictions that are enforceable,'' Mr. Boren said.

Senators added the directive to a $15.3 billion foreign aid bill for the 1991
fiscal year. When the bill is completed, it must go to a House-Senate panel that
will combine competing versions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 82 words



A Savings Industry Bailout, And the President's Son Jeb

After Jeb Bush and a partner bought a Miami office building using money an
associate had borrowed from a local savings and loan, the institution failed and
the Government repaid most of the loan. Page 28.

Le Duc Tho Dies at 79

As North Vietnam's negotiator he was awarded, and refused to accept, a Nobel
Peace Prize. Page 32.

 News Summary, Page 2

 Obituaries, Pages 32-34

 Weather, Page 33

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Le Duc Tho (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: SUMMARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Le Duc Tho, Top Hanoi Aide, Dies at 79

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 32, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1681 words


Le Duc Tho, the chief North Vietnamese negotiator at the Paris talks that led to
the 1973 Vietnam cease-fire agreement and the withdrawal of the last American
troops from Vietnam, died yesterday at Army Hospital 108 in Hanoi, the press
attache of the Vietnam's United Nations mission, Le Dong, said yesterday. Mr.
Tho was 79 years old.

The spokesman said the mission had received information that Mr. Tho had died of
a serious illness, but he did not elaborate.

A Japanese news agency, Kyodo, in a dispatch from Hanoi quoted by The Associated
Press, said Mr. Tho died of cancer of the throat and had been hospitalized in
Vietnam since his return in April from medical treatment in Paris.

Mr. Tho, a hard-line Communist, was a member of Hanoi's Communist Party
Politburo from 1955 to 1986, when he resigned in a party reshuffle, having risen
to be one of the three most powerful Vietnamese leaders. He still influenced
Vietnamese politics afterward. The spokesman at the United Nations mission said
Mr. Tho was an adviser to the party's Central Committee at the time of his
death.

Long and Secret Talks

Beginning in 1969, Mr. Tho held recurrent secret negotiating sessions in Paris
with Henry A. Kissinger, then national security adviser to President Richard M.
Nixon. The two men initialed the armistice accord on Jan. 23, 1973, after
working out its terms, and President Nixon called it ''an agreement to end the
war and bring peace with honor.''

Mr. Tho and Mr. Kissinger were jointly awarded the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize for
that work, though fighting between Vietnamese forces continued. Mr. Tho, the
first Asian chosen for the honor, refused it, saying that ''peace has not yet
been established.''

An expert on South Vietnam, he was later sent there from from Hanoi to oversee
the final, victorious Communist offensive in 1975 that brought the fall of the
Saigon Government and the merging of North and South Vietnam into a single
Communist-ruled state. Since then, peace has prevailed in Vietnam, though many
Vietnamese have fled or tried to flee.

Robert Shaplen, an American expert on Asia who interviewed Mr. Tho in 1984 in
Hanoi, reported that he also directed the initial invasion of Cambodia by
Vietnam in 1978.

A Truce That Did Not Last

The 1973 agreement, made possible by concessions from both Hanoi and Washington,
provided for an in-place cease-fire, with North Vietnamese troops staying where
they were in the south and Hanoi acknowledging Gen. Nguyen Van Thieu's role as
the South Vietnamese President, pending elections.

In the meantime, Mr. Thieu's Government was to preside over the parts of South
Vietnam held by the South Vietnamese Army, and Vietnamese Communists were to
govern those areas where they held sway.

Other provisions of the accord included the prompt withdrawal of the
23,700-member American force in South Vietnam. Washington had cut it back, from
a level of 540,000 at the end of 1968, under the policy known as the
Vietnamization of the war.

The final American pullout was duly executed, but no armistice took hold on the
South Vietnamese battlegrounds. As the months passed, fighting continued between
the two Vietnamese sides, with each blaming the other. Further talks between Mr.
Tho and Mr. Kissinger in 1973 proved fruitless.

Own and Historians' Verdicts

Recalling the talks and the fall of Saigon in 1975, Mr. Tho said in 1985 on
American television that the Communist side had ''wrested total victory.'' But
Mr. Kissinger, in a 1982 book, ''Years of Upheaval,'' said that at Paris the
American side had ''forced a tenuous compromise.''

Summarizing the secret negotiations, he wrote that Mr. Tho ''stonewalled
ingeniously for three years. And when the occasion to settle had been imposed''
by military defeats suffered by North Vietnam in 1972, ''he did so with
flexibility and speed.''

Other appraisals have varied. Stanley Karnow, another expert on Asia, wrote in
his 1983 book ''Vietnam: A History'' that dissension in the United States gave
Mr. Tho an inherent advantage over Mr. Kissinger. ''With tolerance for the war
dwindling in the United States, Kissinger could not negotiate forever,'' Mr.
Karnow observed, while ''the North Vietnamese, untrammeled by domestic
dissidence, were prepared to talk endlessly.''

And Mr. Shaplen contended in a 1986 book, ''Bitter Victory,'' that Mr. Tho had
''craftily outnegotiated Kissinger and, by ultimately gaining permission for
North Vietnamese troops to remain in South Vietnam after the Americans withdrew,
in effect set the stage for Hanoi's final stunning victory.''

A Pseudonym

The name Le Duc Tho (pronounced lay dook toe) is a pseudonym that Mr. Tho is
said to have assumed decades earlier in his political career. An aura of
ideological vehemence still clung to him at Paris: Mr. Kissinger, in ''Years of
Upheaval,'' described him as a ''dour, dedicated revolutionary.''

Mr. Tho cut a somber figure during their talks, in his habitual black Mao suit.
But he was capable of merry laughter when relaxing.

He spurred mixed feelings in Mr. Kissinger, who wrote that his adversary's
''subtlety, his acumen, his iron self-discipline,'' were admirable, and ''in all
the years of negotiation with me he never lost his poise; he never made a
mistake.''

''As a professional Leninist he despised the bourgeois values of compromise I
put forward,'' Mr. Kissinger observed, ''and the effrontery of his deceptions
inside and ouside the conference room could be enraging.''

Mr. Kissinger has also complained that Mr. Tho ''would drop cryptic remarks'' to
American correspondents ''who would then criticize their Government for not
seizing the opportunity for peace.'' He has contended that, at the time, the
North Vietnamese ''were working on psychology even more than they were working
on a military solution.'' Declaration by L.B.J.  It was when President Lyndon B.
Johnson decided to stop the American bombing of Vietnam north of the 20th
Parallel, and said he was not a candidate for re-election in 1968, that Hanoi
accepted his earlier proposal of talks toward an accommodation on Vietnam.

At the Paris negotiations, which got under way later that year, another North
Vietnamese Communist leader, Xuan Thuy, was the country's permament
representative. But members of its delegation paid obvious deference to Mr. Tho,
whom Hanoi chose to be its head negotiator.

Public negotiating sessions went on and on, but proved fruitless. Meanwhile, the
secret talks between Mr. Kissinger and Mr. Tho were held in villas in and around
the French capital. Their existence was kept secret until Mr. Nixon disclosed
them in January, 1972, in a speech criticizing Hanoi for what he termed delaying
tactics.

The war heated up, and Mr. Tho and Mr. Kissinger went back to talking, again in
secret. A breakthrough was achieved in October, resulting in a nine-point draft
agreement.

But Mr. Nixon asked for more meetings to firm up its terms and to meet
objections from the Saigon Government. Talks were resumed but broke down in
mid-December.

Mr. Nixon then ordered B-52 bombing raids in the areas of Hanoi and Haiphong.
They were halted after 11 days, the talks began again, and the agreement was
signed after being initialed.

Mr. Tho bore other large responsibilities through much of his long political
career, which began when he was a teen-ager and included helping found the
Indochinese Communist Party in 1929, while France ruled Vietnam.

He went on to become a party executive in the south and the senior official
there of the Vietminh organization, which fought French rule in the French
Indochina War, lasting from 1946 to 1954.

Mr. Tho also had high-level responsibilities for Communist policies and
operations in South Vietnam in later years. He was assigned to oversee the
Communist rebel activities that began against the independent Government of
South Vietnam in 1957. During 1974, he favored caution in the planning of what
proved to be the final phase of the Communist war against South Vietnamese and
American forces.

From Middle-Class Background

Mr. Tho was born on Oct. 10, 1911, Mr. Le Dong, the press attache, said. He was
born to a middle-class family in what became North Vietnam.

A childhood friend said his name at birth was Phan Dinh Khai. After attending
French-run schools, he became a minor postal official and also helped fellow
Communists stir up riots.

Seized by the authorities, he spent several years in prison. During this and a
subsequent time behind behind bars, his comrades included numerous Vietnamese
Communist leaders.

Mr. Tho was set free in 1936 and then engaged in what an official North
Vietnamese biographical sketch later called ''semi-open activities,'' becoming a
regional Communist press and propaganda chief. It was in 1939 that he was jailed
again. By some accounts he escaped, but the official account said he was
released, in 1944. He then rose in the Communist Party leadership.

Vietnamese uprisings against the French began in 1945, and the sketch said Mr.
Tho became deputy secretary of the central office of the party in southern
Vietnam. He went on to become the senior Vietminh official there.

Division of Vietnam

The French Indochina war led to the defeat and withdrawal of the French, and
Vietnam was provisionally divided into what became the independent North and
South Vietnamese states.

The sketch of Mr. Tho said that in 1955, he went back to the North and joined
the Politburo.

At the time of the cease-fire agreement it was said that Mr. Tho had been
married twice, but little else was known about his personal life. His several
immediate relatives included a brother, Dinh Duc Thien, who retired as a major
general in the North Vietnamese Army.

Mr. Dong, the press attache, said a tribute-paying service for Mr. Tho would be
held at 8 A.M. Tuesday in the Ba Dinh conference hall in Hanoi, and a memorial
and funeral service would be held Wednesday morning, also in that conference
hall. Burial will will be in the Mai Dich cemetery on the outskirts of the
capital.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Le Duc Tho, the chief North Vietnamese negotiator, with Henry A.
Kissinger, chief foreign policy adviser to President Richard M. Nixon, after
working out an armistice accord in Paris in 1973. (Associated Press)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi's Foreign Minister Works the U.S. Circuit Seeking End to Trade Ban

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1205 words


Like a salesman opening up a new territory, Nguyen Co Thach, Vietnam's
peripatetic Foreign Minister, is knocking on doors and seeking friends among
America's members of Congress, diplomats, scholars and bankers, in the hope of
ending Washington's trade embargo against his country.

A 66-year-old member of Vietnam's ruling Politburo and one of its main
proponents of economic reform, Mr. Thach is visiting the United States for a
meeting scheduled for Wednesday with Gen. John W. Vessey, the special
Presidential adviser on issues involving American servicemen missing or taken
prisoner in Vietnam.

At the same time, Mr. Thach is telling Americans that it is time to end the
hostile aftermath of the Vietnam War and get on with normal relations. He feels,
moreover, that an end to the long estrangement is finally in sight. In his
words, ''there is light at the end of the tunnel.''

In vernacular American English salted with parodies of Washington cliches
popular during the Vietnam War, Mr. Thach told listeners last week that no
substantive issues remain to bar diplomatic relations between the United States
and Vietnam.

'Can Be Settled Easily'

''Cambodia and the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue were the two thorniest obstacles, but I
think those issues can be settled easily now,'' he said in an interview.

''I'm going to tell General Vessey that he can have anything he wants,'' he
said. ''He can go anywhere he wants in Vietnam to investigate the M.I.A.
question. The only places he might not be welcome would be inside our Defense
and Interior Ministries.''

Vietnam and the United States agree on keeping foreign troops out of Cambodia,
he said, adding: ''At the same time, both your country and ours want to make
sure that Cambodia never again experiences the genocide committed by Pol Pot's
regime. We have to be sure of that. We must rely on the Cambodian people
themselves to make sure the terrible slaughters of the late 1970's never recur.
We Vietnamese cannot go back a second time. We have done enough to save the
Cambodian people.''

The Khmer Rouge Government of Pol Pot were ousted by an invading Vietnamese Army
in 1979, which established a pro-Vietnamese Government in Phnom Penh. After a
decade of fighting rebel forces - including rival factions supporting Pol Pot
and Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's ruler from 1953 to 1970 - the bulk of
Vietnamese forces left Cambodia last year.

Mr. Thach said Vietnam would have no objection to Prince Sihanouk's return to
power, ''provided the Pol Pot butchers were not part of the arrangement.''

Sees Big Changes in Vietnam

He told a group of foreign affairs specialists meeting at the Asia Society in
New York on Thursday that major changes are under way in Vietnam.

''We realized that without large reforms we could go nowhere,'' he said, ''but
in this rapidly changing world, we have learned some important lessons both from
China and the countries of Eastern Europe.

''From China and the Tiananmen incident, we learned that you cannot have
economic reform without political reform. From the troubles we see today in
Eastern Europe, we learned that you cannot have political reform without
economic reform. These reforms must go together.''

To guide Vietnam in its transformation, he said, both he and Prime Minister Do
Muoi have come to rely on a Vietnamese translation of ''Economics,'' a standard
college textbook written by Paul Samuelson, an American economist who won a
Nobel prize in 1970. ''We keep it on our night tables as bedtime reading,'' he
said.

''In 1986 we were on the brink of economic catastrophe,'' he said. ''Today we
still have formidable problems, but we have turned things around. For the first
time, Vietnam has begun to export rice instead of importing it. Because we
devalued our currency, we are now exporting much more than we did. And partly
thanks to Paul Samuelson's book, we found loopholes in your trade embargo.''

'Government of the People'

Asked if Hanoi's reforms might soften the harshly authoritarian style of its
Communist Government, he replied: ''That's an interesting question. After 40
years we have come to realize that government cannot be simply of and for the
state.

''What we are trying to do is have a government of the people, by the people and
for the people. Before, decisions were made by only 100 people, and some of
those decisions were nonsense. What sense is there is an economic decision that
makes one duck egg equal in value to five kilograms of steel? We are ending the
governmental compartmentalization that led to such rules. We know now that
decisions must be made by 65 million people, not just 100.''

In fact, the structure of the Vietnamese Government remains that of a
traditional Marxist-Leninist dictatorship, although its economic policies have
changed markedly in the last four years.

But Vietnam's bureaucrats sometimes have difficulty adjusting to customs in
free-market societies, he said.

Asking Beggar for Receipt

''The other day a Vietnamese driver from our United Nations Mission here was
stopped by one of those people in the street who ask for money,'' Mr. Thach
said. ''The driver gave him something, but then insisted on having a receipt,
because at home, we must account for everything. Things are done differently
here.''

Asked about the Soviet military presence in Vietnam, notably the American-built
naval base at Cam Ranh Bay, Mr. Thach replied: ''The big powers want military
disengagement at this point, and it's not in anyone's interest to stress
military involvement. The Soviets withdrew from Cam Ranh Bay last year, and we
don't intend to ask them to stay on.''

Mr. Thach met on Sept. 27 and 29 with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d. It
was the first high-level encounter between the two Governments since the 1973
peace agreement. The Vietnamese Foreign Minister did not disclose details of his
conversations, except to say they had been friendly.

But he added: ''Americans must understand that international agreements go two
ways, not like the streets in New York City. In any case, we can wait a bit
longer for trade and diplomatic relations if we must. International relations
don't work like fast-food restaurants. It's been many years already, and we can
finally see light at the end of the tunnel.''

His Movements Limited

Despite the importance attached to Mr. Thach's visit by many officials and
economists, his movements in the United States have been strictly limited by the
State Department, since the United States does not recognize the Hanoi
Government.

Mr. Thach is permitted to visit New York since Vietnam is a member of the United
Nations, but he may not travel beyond 25 miles of the United Nations
headquarters. As a result, he was unable to go to an informal meeting of foreign
affairs specialists arranged last weekend by a Vietnamese-American friend, Dao
Spencer, at her home in East Hampton, L.I.

For his meeting with General Vessey, Mr. Thach has been cleared by the State
Department to travel to Washington, but only for one day.

He dismissed such inconveniences with a smile, saying: ''One way or another, we
get to talk to our American friends. That's certainly progress, isn't it?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, who is seeking friends for
Vietnam among America's political and business leaders. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1010 words



INTERNATIONAL/3-21



The U.N. vote to condemn Israel for the violence in Jerusalem averted a split in
the coalition against Iraq's annexation of Kuwait. But the action by the
Security Council may lead to another test of the coalition's solidarity later
this month.          Page 1



Israelis promise no help for U.N.           10



Kuwait will become a democracy once it is liberated from Iraqi troops, the
exiled Crown Prince of Kuwait pledged. He promised to reinstate the defunct
Parliament, to hold free elections and to allow women a larger role in public
life.          1



Iraq children in anti-embargo march to embassies           11



King Hussein of Jordan conferred with Iraq's Foreign Minister about the
continuing diplomatic effort by some Arab states to persuade President Saddam
Hussein to withdraw peacefully from Kuwait.          12



The Christian rebel chief in Lebanon, Gen. Michel Aoun, surrendered after Syrian
attacks forced him to seek safety in the French embassy. General Aoun led his
troops against the Government for two years.          12



Intensifying conflicts in Yugoslavia among its antagonistic republics are
bringing the country dangerously close to the breaking point, say people who
favor the process as well as those who fear it.          14



Kohl's party favored in voting in the eastern Germany today           14



Claims by Nazi victims proliferate           20



Communist leader in Prague has no portrait of Lenin           14



Nurturing Eastern European thought in a Czech castle           15



Street children in Guatemala City are the target of a police crackdown on crime
in which 40 children have been killed this year. The tombstone of one reads: ''I
only wanted to be a child and they wouldn't let me.''          3



Menem's reforms in Argentina provoke backlash           17



The Foreign Minister of Vietnam, Nguyen Co Thach, is visiting the U.S. in the
hope of ending Washington's trade embargo against his country. He is telling
Americans it is time to end the hostile aftermath of the Vietnam War.
16



A Japanese minority group disrupts distribution of a book           4



Bhutto's foes step up Punjab campaigning           9



Old torment revived in Italy: the Moro killing           8



National/22-28



Economic fears are at their highest in a decade and support for President Bush's
commitment of American troops in the Persian Gulf has begun to erode in recent
days, the latest New York Times/CBS News poll has found.          1



Democratic leaders in the Senate are committed to blocking a deficit plan that
would raise taxes for the wealthy, despite the plan's broad support among party
lawmakers.          1



Washington Talk: House Republicans try, as always, to matter           24



Jeb Bush, a son of the President, and an associate bought a Miami office
building using money the associate had borrowed from a savings and loan. When
the institution went bankrupt, the Federal government wound up paying most of
the loan.          28



Conferees near accord on farm bill to save $13 billion           24



Vice President Quayle is a mystery to much of the American public even after two
years in office. He has been unable to escape questions about his qualifications
and political future, especially as they apply to 1992.          26



San Franciscans still feel dread over the earthquake that rocked the city almost
a year ago. These days people startle if a tea cup rattles, and drivers hang
back if a stoplight turns red beneath an underpass.          1



Shifts in California shake congressman's footing           26



Ruling sets off money rush in California governor race           26



Disabled people say home care is needed to use legal rights           22



East breathes easier as threat of three storms recedes           23



Two top editors leave Omni to protest ad on cover           27



Gov. Douglas L. Wilder of Virginia, with the fervor of an evangelist and with
his eyes seemingly on a larger prize, has embarked on a nationwide crusade for
the political moderation that helped him become the country's first black
elected governor.          22



Regional/29-31



New York City's fiscal problems seem painfully familiar 15 years after its
costly and humiliating brush with bankruptcy. But unlike his predecessors, Mayor
David N. Dinkins will not be able to look to state and Federal funds for help.
          1



Dinkins aide tries to reassure union leaders on city finances           30



A livery-cab driver was shot and seriously wounded when he tried to help another
driver who was being assaulted by a gang on a crack-ridden street in the Bronx.
          29



Church leaders declare ''holy war'' against drugs           30



The new anti-smoking campaign in New York City is being hailed by health groups,
derided by tobacco lobbyists and greeted with a wait-and-see chorus from other
groups.          31



The Fresh Air Fund plans a Career Awareness Camp           31



Obituaries


Le Duc Tho, top Hanoi aide           32


Douglas Edwards, television news's first anchorman           33


Samuel M. Brownell, ex-U.S.

Commissioner of Education           34



Arts/Reviews          54, 56



Campus Life          39-42



Fashion          48-49



Life Style          44



Pastimes          55-56



Weddings          50-54


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SUMMARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 36, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 859 words


Here are some notable releases of the last few months.

ALL DOGS GO TO HEAVEN - Don Bluth's film for very young viewers ''is so
overcomplicated that it becomes difficult to follow.'' (Janet Maslin) 1989.
MGM/UA. $24.98. 1 hour, 25 minutes. Closed captioned. G. BAD INFLUENCE - As a
charming drifter who takes over the life of a Los Angeles yuppie (James Spader),
Rob Lowe helps make this ''a refreshing exercise in glossy decadence.'' (Vincent
Canby) 1990. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. Laser disk, $34.95. 1:39. CC. R. BORN ON THE
FOURTH OF JULY - Ron Kovic returns from Vietnam a bitter paraplegic. Oliver
Stone's film has ''enormous visceral power'' and is ''stunning when it is most
specific.'' (Canby) 1989. MCA/Universal. $91.95. LD, $39.98. 2:25. CC. R.
CRY-BABY - John Waters's story of 50's high-school America is a new Presley
movie made ''in the manner of a teen-crazed Cecil B. DeMille.'' (Canby) 1990.
MCA/Universal. $91.95. LD, $34.98. 1:26. CC. PG-13. FAMILY BUSINESS - Sean
Connery, Dustin Hoffman and Matthew Broderick make up a three-generation crime
family in a film that doesn't leave the stars much to work with. (Canby) 1989.
RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD, $34.95. 1:53. CC. R. FIRE BIRDS - Taught to fly
helicopters, Jake (Nicolas Cage) and Brad (Tommy Lee Jones) fly off to confront
the drug crowd in a film that ''looks as if it were patched together between
midnight and 3 A.M.'' (Canby) 1990. Touchstone. $89.95. LD, $39.99. 1:26. CC.
PG-13.

THE GODS MUST BE CRAZY II - Xixo the bushman lopes cross country amid various
elementary, unrelated subplots. ''As the sun sinks slowly, everyone shares a
disappointed yawn.'' (Canby) 1990. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD, $34.95. 1:38. CC.
PG.

GLORY - Edward Zwick's film about a black regiment in the Civil War ''celebrates
in a manner that insists on acknowledging the sorrow.'' (Canby) 1989.
RCA/Columbia. $91.95. LD, $39.95. 2:02. CC. R. THE HANDMAID'S TALE - Volker
Schlondorff's adaptation of Margaret Atwood's novel, starring Natasha
Richardson, has a ''clear and insidious visual scheme.'' (Maslin) 1990. HBO.
$89.99. LD, $39.95. 1:49. CC. R. HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER - John
McNaughton's ''intelligent, revolting, artistically made look at a murderer
comes close to cinema of pure technique.'' (Caryn James) 1990. MPI. $79.98.
1:30. No rating.

IN THE SPIRIT - In this nervous new-age comedy about a Beverly Hills couple in
New York, the camera is ''never allowed to linger where a performer might be
shown to good advantage.'' (Maslin) 1990. Academy. $89.95. 1:34. R. HARD TO KILL
- As a pony-tailed Los Angeles cop out for revenge, Steven Seagal is the
''latest inheritor of the Charles Bronson-Chuck Norris-Bruce Lee action-film
mantle.'' (Maslin) 1990.

Warner. $92.95. LD, $24.98. 1:36. CC. R.8/12

HOUSE PARTY - Reginald Hudlin's effervescent first feature is a ''buoyant,
perceptive comedy of teen-age manners.'' (Canby) 1990. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD,
$34.95. 1:40. CC. R. INTERNAL AFFAIRS - Richard Gere and Andy Garcia star in a
dizzying police thriller by Mike Figgis, a ''master of steamy sex appeal and
brooding, nocturnal murk.'' (Maslin) 1990. Paramount. No price listed. LD,
$34.95. 1:55. CC. R. THE LITTLE MERMAID - The Hans Christian Andersen story is a
marvel of skillful animation. ''The best animated Disney film in at least 30
years.'' (Maslin) 1989. Disney. $26.99. LD, $29.99. 1:23. CC. G. LORD OF THE
FLIES - In William Golding's classic story of mayhem among castaway schoolboys,
''there is almost nothing to keep the mind from wandering.'' (Maslin) 1990.
Nelson. $89.98. LD, $34.98. 1:30. CC. R. MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON - Bob Rafelson's
film about the African explorations of Sir Richard Francis Burton and John
Hanning Speke is big in technical ways, but the principals look ''somewhat
smaller than life.'' (Canby) 1990. Nelson. $89.98. LD, $34.98. 1:30. CC. R. NUNS
ON THE RUN - Two London hoods join the Missionary Brides of Christ in a genial
farce with ''something of the licentiousness of 'A Fish Called Wanda.' ''
(Canby) 1990. CBS/Fox. $89.98. 1:30. PG-13.

PETER PAN - The inventions in the animated version of the J. M. Barrie classic
are as ''skillful as they have ever been in Disney films.'' 1953. Disney.
$24.99. LD, $29.99. 1:16. CC. G. Q & A - Nick Nolte is the grand, bigoted center
in Sidney Lumet's film, which ''explores corners of the city that no director
has ever set foot in before.'' (Canby) 1990. HBO. $92.99. LD, $44.95. 2:12. CC.
R. ROSALIE GOES SHOPPING - Brandishing bad credit cards, Marianne Sagebrecht is
the ''shrewd, beatific center'' of Percy Adlon's film about merchandise-mad
America. (Maslin) 1989. Vidmark. $89.95. 1:34. CC. PG.

TEEN-AGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES: THE MOVIE - The movie ''is itself a mutant of
sorts, an unsightly hybrid of martial arts exploitation films and live-action
cartoons.'' (Maslin) 1990. Family Home Entertainment. $24.99. 1:36. PG.

WHERE THE HEART IS - John Boorman's film about a New York demolition king and
his children has an ''undeniable grandeur even in the midst of its broadest
lapses of sense, taste and style.'' (Maslin) 1990. Touchstone. $89.95. LD,
$29.99. 1:47. CC. R.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
In Some Fights, Quitting Is Harder Than Joining In

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 917 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Of the panoply of issues the United States and the Soviet Union still face if
they are to put the Cold War completely behind them, none appear more nettlesome
than resolving the longstanding civil wars fought by their clients in
Afghanistan, Angola and Cambodia.

The superpowers have agreed that it is time to end the conflicts, because
neither wishes to spend billions of scarce dollars to prolong anachronistic wars
that seem unwinnable anyway. But having resolved their own fundamental
differences, they still face a difficult problem: pacifying the very factions
they once helped inspire to fight. All too frequently, the clients have their
own intractable interests, disputes and weaknesses. ''We are finding that it was
easier to get into the wars as enemies than it is to get out of them as friends,
even as we sit on the same side of the negotiating table,'' said an American
military official.

The Afghan civil war, which froze American-Soviet relations when Moscow
intervened with 115,000 troops in 1979, is the regional conflict the two
superpowers most want to resolve. The Soviets fear that the war between the
Government it installed and Islamic fundamentalist insurgents could spread ill
will to nearby Soviet Muslim republics. And some Bush Administration officials
privately question the wisdom of sending $300 million a year to fundamentalists
who do not share Western values, now that the Soviet Army has withdrawn.

When the Soviets pulled their forces out of Afghanistan two years ago, many
officials in Washington expected the Government of President Najibullah to fall
quickly. But the rebels splintered into factions and the Government survived.

Rumors of a superpower agreement on organizing elections and an interim
Government peaked in August, when Mr. Najibullah arrived in the Soviet Union for
what was described as a month-long health check-up - only a day before Secretary
of State James A. Baker 3d and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A.
Shevardnadze, were to meet in Siberia. American officials noted with interest
suggestions in the Soviet press that Moscow was ready to cut aid to Mr.
Najibullah and press him to negotiate in earnest with the guerrillas. But Mr.
Najibullah returned home pledging to stay in power, and the rebels have
expressed little enthusiasm for elections.

American officials insist they are near an agreement with the Soviets, with the
role for Mr. Najibullah in an interim Government the only major issue not yet
resolved. ''We and the Soviets are interested in responsible disengagement,''
said a senior State Department official. ''They want Najibullah's departure to
be part of the process, but they don't want to pull the rug out from under
him.''

American and Soviet officials have made the most dramatic progress in their
attempts to negotiate an end to the 15-year civil war in Angola, where the
United States is still covertly sending $60 million a year to the Unita
guerrillas fighting a Soviet-backed Government. A worsening famine has persuaded
the superpowers to actively nudge their clients to find a settlement; three
weeks ago American and Soviet officials directly took part in the peace talks
for the first time, and agreed in principle to jointly lead an international
monitoring group to supervise a future cease-fire and elections.

But before that can happen, the Angolan sides must negotiate an enforceable
cease-fire, and deep resentment and distrust stand in the way. Jonas Savimbi,
the rebel leader, insists on immediate recognition of Unita as a political party
and the holding of elections next year. President Jose Eduardo dos Santos,
however, says full recognition of Unita would have to await an amendment of the
Angolan Constitution to permit a multiparty system; he also says the country
will need years to rebuild before elections can be held.

Of the three conflicts, the superpowers share the most similar goals in
Cambodia. Both are trying to prevent a return to power by the Khmer Rouge, the
violent Communist rebel group that is held responsible for the deaths of more
than a million people while it ruled in the late 1970's. It was overthrown in
1978 by a Vietnamese invasion force that quickly installed a less radical
Communist Government with Soviet support. Vietnam's troops left Cambodia last
year, but the Government, under Hun Sen, remains in power.

Over the last four months, the Bush Administration has begun to talk to Hanoi
and Phnom Penh, regimes it had shunned, as part of a multi-pronged effort to end
the war. With the other members of the United Nations Security Council, Moscow
and Washington together have persuaded the Hun Sen Government, the Khmer Rouge,
and the two other guerrilla groups to agree to establish a council that would
share power with the United Nations until elections can be held. So far,
however, bickering among the four sides has stalled the formation of the body.

One reason Cambodia has proven so difficult for the United States and Soviet
Union is that their influence there is limited, in part because China plays a
vital role in the conflict and continues to support the Khmer Rouge. Economic
depression, corruption and ideological divisions appear to weaken the
Soviet-supported regime month by month, and this has only added momentum to the
Khmer Rouge march.

''Neither of us can wash our hands and neither of us has overwhelming leverage
to dictate solutions,'' said the senior State Department official. ''All we can
do is point the way.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: American-backed Unita rebels with an armored vehicle destroyed
in May during fighting with Soviet-backed Angolan government troops. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Call of the Wildmen

BYLINE: By Trip Gabriel; Trip Gabriel writes frequently on the outdoors.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 37, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4521 words


It was Spring in the Emerald Hill country of North Texas, a region of rolling
fields clotted with purple asters, mustard and black-eyed Susans. Signs that
hung beside the white-rail fences of prosperous-looking ranches boasted of the
breeds of cattle raised there, Brangus and Herefords and Santa Gertrudis. One
sign, as vast as a billboard, said, ''Polled Herefords: the Big Bold Breed.'' At
a freshly plowed field, I turned off the blacktop onto a muddy ranch road,
following directions to something called the Wildman Gathering, a weekend of
outdoor living that, the brochure promised, would put me in touch with my ''deep
masculinity.''

Around the nation, increasing numbers of men have been gathering at similar
retreats to discover an earthier, more self-assured version of themselves. The
workshops are part of a loosely organized but rapidly growing phenomenon known
as the men's movement. Adherents claim that there is a gruff, elemental
''wildman'' lying deep inside every regular guy. This wildman, who can be freed
by such activities as drumming and dancing around bonfires, has long been
suppressed by industrialization, the corporate culture and 20 years of feminism.

Certainly, I was in the right place to shuck off civilization. I was 50 miles
south of Fort Worth, in the heart of Texas, home of that masculine icon, the
cowboy. Arriving at the Bosque Creek Ranch, a scrub-covered spread with a modest
cabin and corral, I parked my car alongside many others. A man checked me off a
registration list that included more than 130 names. He turned out to be Marvin
Allen, the weekend's organizer and director of the Austin Men's Center. When
Allen helped start the center in 1988, he noted, Austin had more than a dozen
resource centers for women, but not one for men. Today the men's center offers a
support group for new and expectant fathers, a Men's Codependency and Emotional
Release Therapy Group, men's poetry evenings and the Wildman Gathering, which
takes place here three times a year and is so popular it is booked up months in
advance with participants from many states.

The growing men's movement has spawned magazines like Wingspan and Man!, and
workshops along the lines of Allen's, some lasting a day and others as long as a
week, have been held in Boston, Seattle, Minneapolis, Mendocino, Calif., and the
mountains of New Mexico. By one estimate, the gatherings have attracted 50,000
men. Situated at the intersection of the personal growth movement and the new
age, the phenomenon for years was known almost exclusively to adherents of
holistic healing or crystal collecting. But recently it has come up from
underground and is attracting mainstream attention. Interest was stirred this
year by a 90-minute Bill Moyers television program on the poet Robert Bly, the
granddaddy, so to speak, of the men's movement.

Marvin Allen created the Wildman Gathering so males could come together in
semiwilderness, apart from women, to get in tune with their bodies and their
feelings. Or, as he had told me on the phone, ''We work on joy and exuberance
and fierceness.'' Now he said I could set up my tent wherever I chose. Beside
some brushy trees, I pounded in the tent stakes, while from a short distance
away I heard the clang of pitched horseshoes.

At dusk came a steady drumbeat from a wooded grove a few hundred yards away.
Though no one had told us ahead of time, we all seemed to understand this was a
signal to head toward the trees with the drums we'd each been asked to bring. A
drum not being the sort of thing one has lying around the house, before flying
down from New York I'd hastily visited a 48th Street music store, where I was
persuaded to buy a dusty silver instrument lying forgotten in a corner. It was a
type of drum used by old mambo bands, and for the next two days, whenever I
thumped it, I could not remove the image from my mind of Ricky Ricardo leading
his band at the Tropicana nightclub.

Inside a grove of Spanish oaks, we assembled. Hay bales were arranged in a large
circle, and a fire burned at the center. Soon we would learn to call this the
Sacred Grove. Tribal masks hung in trees to inspire us with their fierce,
primitive maleness. The mask closest to me was a scowling African face with slit
eyes, cow horns and a fringe of snakeskin.

The drumming ended with a burst of whistles and cheers. At the center of the
circle, Marvin Allen asked us to introduce ourselves to our immediate neighbors,
and to ''tell them if you were afraid to come tonight.'' The man to my left,
Jim, who was from Houston, confided at length and with much feeling that he'd
been fearful of showing up.

Allen turned over the proceeding to his co-leader for the weekend, John Lee, the
author of one of the best-selling books of the new masculinity, ''The Flying
Boy.'' In the book Lee relates how he once ''overvalued the feminine'' side of
himself, cultivating a sensitive nature and wearing his hair long like a girl.
He became a Peter Pan-like figure unable to make commitments to women or begin a
career. To get on in life, he had to embrace the ''deep masculine'' side of his
personality.

Striding around the grove in calf-high mud boots, Lee indeed cut a rugged
profile. He wore jeans and a denim shirt. He had a salt-and-pepper beard and he
now wore his hair in a Marine cut. He spoke confidently in a rich Southern
accent.

Lee told us his father, a machinist, was a ''tough s.o.b.'' who would think what
we were doing this weekend was ''a crock.'' Lee said his dad had been an angry
alcoholic who was always emotionally and physically absent. He never taught his
son how to have close male friends, and he never showed him that it was all
right to express his feelings. ''And,'' Lee said, drawing out the words for
effect, ''he never taught me how to cry.''

''Ho,'' said many men, uttering the American Indian word we'd been told to use
to signal our assent or understanding.

Lee told us to close our eyes and imagine our fathers standing 100 yards behind
us outside the circle. ''They're mad at us,'' Lee said. ''They're scared we're
leaving them out.'' He said he was going to try something. He told us to take
slow, deep breaths. Then, as if intoning a mantra, he said, ''Dad.'' He repeated
it: ''Dad.'' Then he said, ''Father.'' He paused. ''Father. Daddy.'' Remarkably,
men began to break down. At first, with eyes closed, I didn't recognize the
sound. How often had I heard men weep? Almost never. It began like a strangled
cry, as if the men were gargling. Then their anguish burst forth in heaving sobs
that rolled through the grove. Beside me, Jim cried freely. A couple of places
to my right, a man gasped, ''Hug me!'' and he was embraced by the man next to
him. I was surprised and somewhat confused. What depths of sorrow did these men
feel, what scars could they be carrying associated with their fathers?
Furthermore, who were they who could, at the incantatory mention of a parent,
spill over in such showy, if nonetheless sincere, emotions? I felt distant from
the public expression of grief. Dry-eyed, I returned to my tent. That night I
slept restlessly and had vivid, disquieting dreams.

The concept of the wildman was introduced by Robert Bly, a National Book
Award-winning poet, about 10 years ago. Bly looked around in the early 80's and
decided the nation was populated by many wimpified men, whom he labeled ''soft
males.'' These soft men, influenced by the cultural upheaval of the women's
movement, could read poetry and talk to their wives and girlfriends. But they
lacked energy, assertiveness and the ability to make commitments. Bly did not
believe that men should look to John Wayne or Arnold Schwarzenegger as role
models. He spurned these caricatures of masculinity. Rather, he noted that
almost every pre-industrial culture, from ancient Greece to the Middle Ages,
projected in its myths and poetry an image of an ideal man as a forceful,
spontaneous, primal being. ''What I'm proposing,'' Bly once said, ''is that
every modern male has, lying at the bottom of his psyche, a large, primitive man
covered with hair down to his feet. Making contact with this wildman is the step
the 70's man has not yet taken: this is the process that still hasn't taken
place in contemporary culture.''

The men's movement says it's not a reactionary response to feminism. Rather, it
sees itself as a parallel development. While feminism has often dealt with
politics and the outward conditions of women's lives, the men's movement is
about internal issues, about men's psyches. At the Wildman Gathering I figured
I'd hear a lot of grousing about wives and mothers, but in two full days women
were hardly mentioned. Men were too busy talking about themselves.

Bly, 63 years old, is a white-haired paterfamilias whom many in the men's
movement regard as a guru. They buy his audio tapes and his volumes of poetry,
and invariably, whether they've met him or not, refer to him as ''Robert.'' At
one point in our weekend someone mentioned that Bly was lecturing in Portland,
Ore., at that very moment, whereupon John Lee encouraged everyone to shout over
the tops of the trees, ''Hello, Robert!''

A stirring storyteller and poetry reader, Bly has spread his message in weeklong
workshops and weekend lectures that draw huge crowds (and earn him up to $20,000
a pop). One event in San Francisco in May attracted 700 men, plus a waiting list
of 700. Bly bars TV cameras from these gatherings and has been known to tell
members of the audience not to take photographs or make recordings. The reason,
a participant says, is that these are intrusions into the ''ritual space'' of
the gatherings.

A major theme of Bly's is that men feel a great sense of grief and loss, often
unacknowledged. On the subject of what, specifically, men have to grieve over,
Bly can be vague. ''It's as if grief is impersonal with men,'' he told Bill
Moyers. ''It's always present. You don't know if it's about the absence from
their father, or it may be about all of the animals that we were in touch with
all the millions of years we were hunters, and all the animals that died. . . .
Men have lived for centuries out there, and they feel that terrific grief of
nature and the out-of-doors and pine trees.''

John Lee and Marvin Allen, who are both trained psychotherapists, are much more
specific: the grief men feel is for the wounds inflicted on them by their
fathers. Men feel a sense of loss that their fathers were never the kind of
fathers they wished them to be, or needed.

Saturday morning in the Sacred Grove, Allen said: ''Probably every way a man
could be wounded by his father is represented here. Fathers have shamed us and
criticized us. Some of our fathers have whipped us.'' Quietly, several men
answered, ''Ho.'' Allen told of his own father, a fighter pilot, and the image
that came to mind was of the swaggering Robert Duvall in ''The Great Santini.''
Allen's father sounded distant and disapproving, and he passed onto his son the
image of a man as someone who never felt pain or fear.

Allen is slight, with dark eyes and a neatly trimmed, professorial beard. He has
a gentle, unthreatening manner. If one were to picture him as a high-school
athlete, the last sports that would come to mind are football and boxing. Yet to
win his father's approval, Allen said, those are the sports he took up. ''I got
into Golden Gloves boxing, and I never lost because I had a burning desire to
win,'' he told us. ''But never once did he come to watch or tell me he was
proud.'' ''Ho,'' responded many men. ''So I got into high-school football, and I
was the skinniest guy on the team, 125 pounds. Every time I got tackled I got
hurt.'' Once, he said, he tried extra hard because his father was attending a
game. He made a couple of big plays and heard his name announced on the
loudspeaker. ''I knew he was up there hearing my name, which was his name too:
Allen.'' The son came home thinking that now, certainly, his father would give
him the love and praise he thirsted for. But the father only grunted as the son
entered the house. ''Out of all the times he beat me and criticized me, that was
the worst,'' Allen said in a voice thickening with emotion. ''I realized seven
or eight years ago that I spent most of my life trying to get him to appreciate
me and validate me. Later he was able to. But it didn't mean that much by then.
The little boy had already grown up.''

Around the grove, several men were sniffling sympathetically. Others had put
their arms around one another as they listened. If there was concern the wildman
would turn out to be just another male brute, unable to express his feelings or
to nurture, it was not in evidence here.

It seemed that many men listening to Allen had heard their own stories told.
Indeed, over the weekend, I heard a surprising number of accounts of men who'd
had outstanding athletic careers, primarily, they said, to win the love of
distant fathers. It may have been that because we were in Texas, home of
overvalued college and high-school sports, that father-son dynamics had worked
themselves out this way. One burly man, who said he'd been a state-champion
wrestler, said: ''My father instilled a competetive fierceness in me. Somehow it
wasn't good enough to be second. I loved him and he loved me, but that's not all
there is to it.''

Another man, whose dad, like Allen's, was a fighter pilot, recalled: ''My father
always told me of all the things I could do in this world, if I didn't fly a
fighter, I'd failed. But I never flew a fighter and I don't want to.''

The men were largely in their 30's and 40's, healthy and presentable-looking
guys. With only a few exceptions, they didn't strike me as life's losers. Most
had weathered the traditional rites of passage for American males - college or
the military, marriage, a successful career - but these passages left them
somehow uncertain of their masculine identity. A Vietnam veteran, a survivor of
the hoariest tradition of all for forging men, said, ''I went to Vietnam a boy,
and I came back an emotional baby.''

There was a minister present, two judges, psychologists and entrepreneurs with
their own businesses. The gathering included many lawyers. One confessed a
desire to switch careers because, after 20 years of adversarial dickering, he
realized he'd only been ''re-enacting the kind of abusive relationship I've
always had with my father.''

What men were saying was that the traditional images of masculinity had failed
them, especially as represented by a hard-boiled figure who might be a football
coach, a litigator or a fighter pilot. Many men spoke of having had distant
fathers like Allen's, prone to wound themselves and their families with alchohol
or workaholism. A surprising number of men indicated they had received frequent
beatings.

Allen said he wanted everyone to go off by himself for a while. ''Go and draw a
circle, get inside it, and invite your father in,'' he said. ''Tell him what
you've always wanted to, the fear, the anger.''

We left the grove and headed to the far corners of the ranch. I walked a few
hundred yards and sat down in front of a half circle of pine trees, with a view
of a marshy frog pond. Behind me, I heard a man's tormented voice shouting at an
imaginary father, ''I hate your violence!'' Another man, below me near the pond,
whacked the trunk of a tree over and over with a branch.

I tried to zap some hostility onto an image of my dad. Although there'd been
plenty of times I'd been angry in his presence, I found that in such a warm,
sunny spot, with crickets and frogs making a chirpy racket, it was impossible to
feel bitter about much of anything.

My father had not hit or neglected me, and if he was sometimes insensitive and
unable to express his feelings, I could be equally insensitive and mute around
him. I did not think he'd wounded me to the degree that other men described in
moving terms.

I was uncertain what to grieve over. I tried to sense the more general ''grief
of pine trees'' that Bly referred to. The problem was, I've always felt upbeat
around pine trees. I have always liked the outdoors. I'd sometimes wished for a
more outdoorsy father, one who might have taught me to identify trees and animal
tracks and to survive in the wilderness. As it happened, his back-country lore
was pretty much limited to barbecuing in our suburban yard. One of the few
nature skills he did teach me was how to blow on a blade of grass to make a
whistle. Thinking of my father, I yanked a blade from the ground, stretched it
between my thumbs, and blew into them to make the blade vibrate in a low,
mournful whistle.

People in the men's movement believe there was once a golden age of masculinity,
when strong men hugged, expressed their feelings, honored their elders and
served as mentors to younger men. This era is sometimes said to have existed
during Arthurian times, when kings, warriors and wise magicians served as role
models. These ancient societies offered men clear road maps of how they ought to
behave through myths, legends and poetry. There were ceremonies to show respect,
and rites to initiate adolescents into adulthood.

In modern times, rites and myths no longer exist to set men right, and thus many
are deeply confused. A major focus at men's retreats is to enact latter-day
rituals to replace the old ones. Saturday afternoon and evening was to be our
time to recover the rituals our post-industrial age denied us. I came to think
of it as our time of Dungeons and Dragons After a lunch of rabbit stew, we
returned to the Sacred Grove, where Allen and Lee had spread an inner circle of
dry hay around the fire. ''I'd like to take this time to bring up and honor the
elders,'' Lee said. He invited all the men over 50, about 15 in all, to step
forward and be seated on the dry hay. ''These men know secrets, mysteries,
truths,'' Lee said solemnly. ''I bet if you ask them over the weekend they'll
share some things we in our 30's and 40's don't know.'' He paused. ''We're going
to drum for these men. And drum for the lost fathers.''

We pounded our drums. After many minutes the drumming had a lulling effect that
lent a kind of gravity to what struck me as a frivolous ritual. When we stopped,
it was determined the oldest man present was 73. He was helped to his feet by
the others. ''We honor the eldest of the eldest,'' Lee said. We drummed
furiously.

Our co-leaders spoke often of the wildman inside us, but they regularly insisted
that the wildman is not hostile, insensitive or full of rage. That creature, Lee
and Allen said, is known as the savageman. The savageman represents the macho,
aggressive side of masculinity, which is what women and others may fear is what
the men's movement has in mind when it speaks of getting in touch with ''deep
masculinity.'' This fear is erroneous, say the men. In order to feel the
difference between the savageman and the wildman, we were to act them out in a
pair of improvisational dances. We paraded from the Sacred Grove to a large
pasture doing the ''king walk,'' striding with chests puffed out, expressing
pride without arrogance. Once in the pasture, we were encouraged to do a
savageman dance. At first most men stood looking embarrassed, a perfectly normal
reaction to being told to express oneself spontaneously. When Allen suggested
''you might want to growl to express the savagery within'' more than 100 men
suddenly began running through the field snarling like rabid dogs. Most were
enthusiastic savages. My own snarling left me hoarse the rest of the day.

Then it was time to dance like wildmen, and here many seemed at a loss. One man
skipped. Another jumped from side to side across a tractor rut. I picked up
heavy rocks and threw them into the next pasture, thinking the gist of the
wildman might lie in the primitive expression of strength and control. When
Allen suggested we might wish to raise our arms in praise of the rosy sunset,
many men took his suggestion. Whatever this wildman was, I thought, he still
seemed to be an abstraction. We'd been far more convincing as savages.

All day, two mysterious structures had been taking shape beyond the ranch
corral. They were built of wood boughs bent in the skeletons of Indian lodges,
which were heavily covered with blankets. The structures were sweat lodges,
natural saunas that in some American Indian tribes are used for rituals of
renewal and rebirth.

As night fell, we stripped off our clothes and lined up to enter the lodges. A
smoldering fire heated rocks for our natural saunas. A man named Lance conducted
the ceremony in the lodge I entered. He compared the cave-dark enclosure to the
womb of Mother Earth. Inside, we were squeezed together shoulder to shoulder and
hip to hip, the great sweaty brotherhood of naked men that stretched back
ritualistically, if not to a golden age, at least to the locker rooms of junior
high.

Lance ordered the glowing rocks to be shoveled in. He sprinkled them with water
and cedar chips, and lung-scalding steam boiled up. Soon it was hot and
claustrophobic. Earlier Lance had warned us that the sweat lodge could be an
ordeal. ''Pain is a powerful teacher,'' he said. ''In a way, in the lodge we
suffer a little bit. It takes that to open us up.''

Lance, who is part Sac and Fox Indian, sang Indian prayers in a fine, soft
voice. I scooped up cool mud from the ground to smear across my face, as a
cricket crawled over my bare leg. After 40 minutes or so, the ceremony was over.
I stumbled out beneath a brilliant starry sky and immediately found a cattle
trough to use as a cold plunge. When I emerged, I indeed felt very good. But was
I spiritually cleansed? Was I now a born-again wildman? I wasn't sure. My body
hummed all over, but I've felt a similar uplift after a day's skiing and a hot
tub.

It seems to me there is a problem with the search for latter-day rituals by the
men's movement. In themselves, rituals performed outside a cultural context
don't mean very much. The power of a rite, be it a Christmas Mass or an Indian
sweat lodge, comes from what the participants bring to it, which is a result of
a long history of beliefs and expectations. It may be that American culture
fails to respect the earned wisdom of its elderly, but 10 minutes of drumming
isn't going to redress the hurt feelings of the oldsters. Enacted without a
pre-existing system of beliefs, the drumming, dancing and vision-questing of the
new masculinity feel pretty silly - at least they do to this camper.

The rituals were only part of our weekend, however. They provided a rough
structure, but in between times, in what seemed to me ultimately a subtle
subversion of the wildman agenda, men would stand up spontaneously in the grove
and tell chapters from their life stories. That's what these men apparently
wanted to do most, just talk. The format derived from self-help groups where
participants identify themselves by first names only and share their
experiences. Many of the men were veterans of A.A. or groups for adult children
of alcoholics or child-abuse victims, so they knew the program. The others got
with it pretty quickly.

What emerged in the testimonies of men was a deep confusion at having to live up
to conventional expectations of masculinity. Men said they'd tried to be
fearless, invulnerable, all-knowing. Their fathers and their culture had taught
them this was the way to act manly. But no one had prepared them for real life,
for the breakup of a marriage and the sadness they would be unable to express.
No one had prepared them for the emptiness of growing old without having gained
maturity and wisdom. No one had showed them how to face death.

On Sunday morning, with a sense that time was running out, various men stood up
to address the group. One took a step into the circle, an athletic-looking man
in his mid-30's who was bare-chested in the sun. ''I'm Randy,'' he said in a
deep Southern accent. His voice was shaky but he held himself rigidly erect, as
if hoping to control powerful emotions through his posture. ''I buried my father
about a week ago,'' he said, choking out the words. ''Before he died, I saw a
scared old man. And I don't want to die that way.'' ''Ho,'' a few men said very
softly. ''And like a lot of y'all,'' he went on, ''I have the fear that I don't
know what's. . . . I don't know how. . . . I don't know what to do with it. He
didn't know a damn thing about feelings. See, I don't know if I grieved enough.
It was all so fast. He died Wednesday. We bought the coffin Thursday. And we
buried him Friday. Come Saturday I shut the hell down. Sunday I wished I was
here. The rest of the week I was scared I wasn't going to come.''

Randy paused to take several breaths. All around the circle, men had inhaled
sharply when he began to speak of burying his father only the week before. Now
there was silence.

He struggled to continue. Tears were running freely down his cheeks. ''Now I
don't want what he gave me. I still remember him walking like a child among men.
I don't want to walk like a child among men. I want to stand up and walk. . . .
I don't remember feeling this feeling before. . . . Yeah, I think I was alone
all of my damn life.'' ''Ho.'' Many others had been moved to tears.  ''Thank
you,'' Randy said in conclusion.

Lee commanded him, ''Walk around the fire.'' Randy did so, his posture as
rod-straight as when he had begun to speak. The Wildman Gathering was at an end,
and for me it was ending on a note of pitched emotion and some confusion. On the
one hand, there seemed a patent foolishness in the rituals we enacted - the
drumming and dancing. But on the other hand, who could not be moved by stories
like Randy's? The men around the fire had seemed at times ridiculous, but they
were ridiculous and real. Many were struggling to overcome the image of a man,
passed down by their fathers, as someone who is miserly with his feelings and in
whom any sign of vulnerability is a sign of weakness. They had bought into this
code of masculinity, and in all cases, they said, it had stunted them.

I didn't know how the concept of a fierce, elemental wildman fit into this
realization. Nor, I suspect, did many others. The wildman weekend hadn't made
men fierce so much as it had tenderized them. The men's movement hardly needs
its sweat lodges and sacred groves. What most men seem to want are more forums
in which they can talk directly to one another, a kind of recovery program for
victims of errant notions of masculinity, a sort of Men's Anonymous.

Around the fire, there was applause and drumming in support of Randy, and then
Lee said: ''Look at this man. God. When he was standing there, you just saw it,
a man feeling his feelings. As strong as the goddamn Rock of Gibraltar with
tears running down his face.''

He embraced Randy, and then, one after another, other men got up to join in,
until almost the entire group was standing in a kind of huddle around the man,
swaying slowly like a rugby scrum, or a many-legged ameoba, while wood smoke
rose through the sunlight in the grove.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: In an early morning warm-up, the men at a Wildman Gathering, left, give
one another a massage. Above: As the men express their feelings, hugging is
encouraged. Tribal masks, the author says, were used ''to inspire us with their
fierce, primitive maleness.'' If you couldn't roll in the mud as a boy, you can
as a wildman. The gathering had tenderized the men, not made them fierce. The
weekend's leaders, left, say men grieve over wounds by their fathers. Marvin
Allen is a leader of the rapidly growing men's movement. (Danny Turner for The
New York Times); Robert Bly introduced the concept of the wildman a decade ago.
(Dan Miller)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Apes and Us Together

BYLINE: By JOHN NOBLE WILFORD; John Noble Wilford reports on science for The New
York Times and is the author of ''The Riddle of the Dinosaur'' and, most
recently, ''Mars Beckons.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 919 words



OTHER ORIGINS
The Search for the Giant Ape in Human Prehistory.
By Russell Ciochon, John Olsen and Jamie James.
Illustrated. 262 pp. New York:
Bantam Books. $22.95.

Several hundred thousand years ago, Homo erectus, an early human ancestor,
migrated out of Africa and reached the eastern fringes of Asia. There he must
have had his first encounter with his distant relative in the primate family,
the 10-foot-tall, half-ton Gigantopithecus, the largest ape that ever lived. The
evidence for this prehistoric meeting comes from Vietnamese and Chinese
paleoanthropologists who in recent years have discovered fossil specimens of the
extinct giant ape in the same caves that hold fossil remains of Homo erectus.
This is the stuff that fires the imagination of scholars and inspires new field
expeditions, not to mention more books about the human past.

''Other Origins'' is one such book. ''A sense of wonderment,'' the authors
write, ''must have struck our ancestors the first time they confronted
Gigantopithecus. . . . They had seen other, much larger animals - the elephants
and stegodons, for instance, and the rhinoceros are several times more massive
than Giganto. Yet when Homo erectus met the great ape, the confrontation must
have resonated on a deeper level than merely that of marveling at the creature's
great size.'' Imagining that moment, the authors are reminded of what the Comte
de Buffon, an 18th-century French naturalist, wrote about the orangutan: ''It is
a brute of a kind so singular, that man cannot behold it without contemplating
himself.''

In this way, the authors set the stage for this absorbing account of their
expeditions to Southeast Asia in 1988 and 1989 and their attempt to piece
together what they believe was a critical juncture in human prehistory. Russell
Ciochon, a paleoanthropologist at the University of Iowa, and John Olsen, an
archeologist at the University of Arizona, led the explorations and were
accompanied by Jamie James, a science journalist, who was the team's writer.

Their book is fascinating and informative for a number of reasons. Not least of
these is the authors' account of their long negotiations and logistical
nightmares involving Vietnamese bureaucracy. A certain delicacy was required
because this expedition was the first cooperative American-Vietnamese
anthropological venture since the end of the Vietnam War. But the bureaucratic
pitfalls and petty graft the American researchers endured had nothing to do with
politics. The price of winning the cooperation of Vietnamese scientists was a
bundle of electronic equipment including one photocopying machine and one
videocassette recorder, which was last seen being used to show a kung fu movie
at Hanoi's Institute of Archeology.

In spite of the logistical snags, the team did manage to do their fieldwork.
Their explorations of the Lang Trang caves of northern Vietnam produced the
first firmly dated specimen of Homo erectus in Southeast Asia and a clearer
picture of the time when the Lang Trang Man and the giant ape were
contemporaries. The researchers' findings show that the apes, like pandas today,
subsisted on a diet mainly of bamboo, which suggests that the humans there may
also have depended on bamboo for food and implements. Indeed, the authors
hypothesize that the abundance of bamboo for making tools - and not, as was once
suspected, the mental inferiority of Homo erectus - could explain why early
humans in eastern Asia left so few stone tools. The authors speculate further
that the overharvesting of bamboo by Homo erectus may not only be the first
widespread destruction of a natural habitat by humans, but also the reason for
Giganto's eventual extinction (much as the loss of bamboo habitats today is
endangering the panda).

Going one speculative step further, the authors wonder whether prehistoric
encounters between early humans and the giant apes may be the origin of the
almost universal myth of the great, hairy manlike creature, such as the yeti, or
Abominable Snowman, of the Himalayas and Bigfoot in North America. Did these
myths begin in the collective memory of the human race back when Homo erectus
met Giganto? Such a question is irresistible but unanswerable. Unfortunately,
the authors conclude their book with a long discussion of myths about hairy
giants which detracts from their more serious purposes and their measured
treatment of current theories of human evolution.

The authors of ''Other Origins'' are to be saluted, however, for demonstrating
that solid research and compelling writing in paleoanthropology can focus on
subjects other than the earliest known fossils and places other than Africa.
Without disputing the prevailing wisdom that early humans emerged first in
Africa, the authors show how unwise it is to neglect research into human
evolution on other continents. Indeed, their accounts of early 20th-century
expeditions in China and Mongolia are useful reminders that most scientists once
were sure Asia was the birthplace of mankind.

Even when ''Other Origins'' begins to veer off into fantasy, the authors rein
themselves in and adopt a tone more in keeping with their own sobering
definition of paleontology ''as an attempt to piece together a mosaic.'' They
write, ''We are missing almost all of the tiles, though we do not know exactly
how many; we do not even know which side is up on the tiles that we do have; and
we have no clues as to what the design of the mosaic will ultimately turn out to
be.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

An Immigrant's Pain in Concrete

BYLINE: By CAROL STRICKLAND

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 8, Column 3; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1390 words


''I DIDN'T plan to be a writer,'' said Pietro Di Donato, the author of 50 short
stories and 6 books, including the 1939 best seller ''Christ in Concrete.''

''One day I wandered into the library and met my true friends - Zola, Balzac,
Turgenev - and said: 'This is where I belong. I can do this, too.' ''

Soon after, using a borrowed typewriter, Mr. Di Donato pounded out the story of
the gruesome death of his father, a man buried alive in liquid concrete in a
construction accident on Good Friday in 1923.

''The book was hailed as a masterpiece, not just of ethnic literature, but of
English literature,'' said Mario Mignone, chairman of the French and Italian
department at the State University at Stony Brook.

The overnight sensation created by the autobiographical novel, a
Book-of-the-Month Club Main Selection, transported Mr. Di Donato, a bricklayer
working on the 1939-40 World's Fair in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens,
''to another world,'' he said, ''a world of sugar kings, movie actresses,
multimillionaires, Popes and presidents.'' The author took to international
celebrity like a child to chocolate. ''Strangely enough, I fit in everywhere,''
the writer, 79 years old, said in an interview at his home in Setauket. ''I
guess I was just born author material.''

On Thursday at 8 P.M., as part of an Italian-American film festival, the New
Community Cinema in Huntington will show the 1949 film based on Mr. Di Donato's
novel. Its name is also ''Christ in Concrete.'' After the screening, the writer
will discuss both his life and work. Although it won the Grand Masterpiece Award
at the 1949 Venice Film Festival and the Paris Press Prize for direction, the
film is not well known in this country.

Its director, Edward Dmytryk, who was one of the ''Hollywood 10,'' was
blacklisted for refusing to cooperate with the House Un-American Activities
Committee.

Although the film was not shown in the United States, its message is far from
subversive.

First Chapter Is Dramatized

The movie dramatizes the first chapter of the novel, lyrically transforming the
immigrant experience from stereotypic to stereophonic as it hits all the notes
from beauty to pain in working-class life.

In the film, the lead character, Geremio, a bricklayer like Mr. Di Donato's
father, is corrupted by greed and forsakes his Old World morality and pride in
workmanship. Realizing his error, Geremio makes peace with his conscience and
his friends, announcing:

''Man does not live for himself alone.''

In the powerful conclusion, Geremio dies when a building's shoddily constructed
walls collapse.

The novel itself is ''the premiere work for the Italian-American immigrant
experience,'' said Anthony De Franco, professor of English at Suffolk County
Community College. Gov. Mario M. Cuomo, an ardent fan of the book, keeps it on
his desk in Albany, next to the Bible.

Explaining the significance of the title, Mr. Di Donato spoke of the time he
addressed mental patients at the Veterans Administration Hospital in Northport
and was asked, ''What do you mean by Christ in concrete?''

''Before I could marshal my palaver,'' Mr. Di Donato recalled, ''a patient
answered, 'Don't you realize that any good man is a concrete Christ?'

''That was it. There's lots of bull about religion. Give me a good man or a good
woman, someone we can smell, taste, kiss, embrace, hear and see. The spirit is
within us.''

Stomachs Become Wounds

The book's lyrical style matches the elevated view of the dignity and divinity
of the common man. The poetic prose is completely dissimilar, however, from the
vernacular of other Depression-era novels of blue-collar life.

''In the home of Geremio, stomachs have become wounds,'' Mr. Di Donato wrote.
''In the home of Geremio, hearts have become swollen vessels and eyes ceaseless
falls.''

The author of ''Christ in Concrete'' also differed from other ''proletarian''
novelists like John Steinbeck and John Dos Passos in his consistent concern for
the poor. Whereas the youthful idealism of those two writers gave way to
conservatism, Mr. Di Donato retained his sense of outrage at economic
inequality.

''They never broke stone,'' he said of once-fiery radicals who lost their
fervor. ''They all have women's fingers.'' Far from mellowing, Mr. Di Donato
said: ''The older you get, the more you must become a dangerous element in
society. My mind is never at rest.''

A pacifist who joined the Young Communist League the night ''the establishment
murdered Sacco and Vanzetti,'' Mr. Di Donato still fulminates against the
''monstrous massacre of the Vietnam War.''

He Knew His Subject

In contrast to theorists and intellectuals who described working-class life
without experiencing it directly, Mr. Di Donato knew his subject intimately.
Only 13 when his father died, he became the sole support of his mother and seven
brothers and sisters.

''I knew all about being homeless,'' Mr. Di Donato said. ''I was introduced
starkly to the realities that the school or church wouldn't support us. The
paesanos were all poor. We had to survive somehow or die.''

The family moved from Union City, N.J., where Mr. Di Donato was born, to the
Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn. In 1930, when he was working on the
construction of Pilgrim State Hospital in Brentwood, he moved to Long Island.

''Northport was really idyllic,'' Mr. Di Donato recalled of the colony of
political radicals, including the late I. F. Stone. ''I brought Thornton Wilder
out there and said, 'This is our town.' ''

With the success of ''Christ in Concrete,'' Mr. Di Donato gave up bricklaying to
become a full-time writer. He moved to Setauket after Mayor Fiorello H. La
Guardia had performed the ceremony in which Mr. Di Donato married Helen Dean,
now deceased.

'Mixture of Every Nationality'

The writer's acquaintances included Che Guevara and Fidel Castro, President John
F. Kennedy, Ernest Hemingway, Federico Fellini and Popes John XXIII and Paul.

Always he remembered his roots, growing up in a tenement that was ''a polyglot
mixture of every nationality, so close that you could reach out and touch Ellis
Island,'' Mr. Di Donato said. ''When I was a kid,'' he recalled, ''everything
was larger than life. The streets were like tribal city-states, with one section
from Abruzzi, another from Sicily. There wasn't this dependency on television.

''People are becoming sedentary troglodytes today. Back then, you celebrated
your own tragedies and your own comedies. Life and death took place right in
your own railroad flat.''

Mr. Di Donato recalled the frozen underwear, chamber pots under the bed, drying
tomato paste on the tenement roof and canvas diapers. Streets turned into
carnivals at religious festivals.

Resonance of Urban Life

''Christ in Concrete'' resonates not only with these sights, but also the sounds
of urban life. As one passage puts it:

''The snoring children, the cats moaning, the milk wagons over cobblestones, the
rattling Els, the whistle-rumble of the river boats.''

Mr. Di Donato renders reality without damp-eyed sentiment, unblinkingly
portraying the pain of hard labor: ''The fine sharp brick dust'' that bruised
the fingers, ''the hot lime mortar'' that ate into the hands, the frequent
accidents on the job.

''I saw a man go flying through space,'' he reminisced of a scene the book
viscerally depicts of a friend's falling from a 20-story skyscraper, his body
exploding on the pavement like ''human fruit'' into a ''brilliant red wet
overalled pulp.''

''I wrote it as fiction, but it's all history,'' Mr. Di Donato said.

The author, however, calls himself ''more of a missionary than a fictionist.''

''I want to impart to another human being the depths beneath the sea,'' he said.
''It's the unwritten duty of the artist to instruct his listeners so that they
go away with something.''

Mr. Di Donato attributes his empathy with the downtrodden to his early role as
family breadwinner.

''Being a father, brother and mother to all those kids,'' he said, ''made me
extend that compassion to the underdogs of the world as though I were a god who
could change injustice.

''That's the strength of my writing. There's no room for trivia or shamming. But
the subject matter has to have gravity. It cannot be cotton candy. It has to be
good solid bricks.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo; Pietro Di Donato in his yard in Setauket last week, left, and
working as a bricklayer in Queens in 1939, above (Maxine Hicks for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Life Savings During Wartime

BYLINE: By JOSEPH NOCERA; Joseph Nocera is writing a history of personal
finance.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 713 words

DATELINE: NORTHAMPTON, Mass.


''The crisis,'' screamed the cover of Time magazine a few weeks ago: ''What to
Do With Your Money.'' Imagine that: what to do with my money. Saddam Hussein had
invaded Kuwait; America was rushing troops to Saudi Arabia. And someone was
going to tell me where to put my money.

The story turned out to be written by that guru of personal finance, Andrew
Tobias, who explained that if you had been smart enough to take advantage of the
crisis by shorting stocks, you would have made a fortune. ''In July,'' he wrote
breezily, ''you could have bought I.B.M. October 100 puts for $25 each and sold
them for $560 when the Middle East tension was at its height a month later.
Twenty times your money in a month!''

Although Mr. Tobias didn't take this thought to its logical conclusion, it's not
hard to do: If you can make this much when there's only ''tension,'' imagine how
rich you can get if an actual war breaks out!

The Tobias article is part of an emerging genre that has developed since Iraq
invaded Kuwait. ''Money- management-in-wartime,'' you might call it. And you see
it everywhere.

''Within hours of the first gunfire,'' predicted one magazine, ''look for stock
prices to fall 150 points or more on the Dow.'' I got a mailgram from Shearson
Lehman Brothers. ''Mid East Crisis'' it began, ''how will it affect your
investments.'' I ran a computer search on news articles that contained both the
phrases ''Saddam Hussein'' and ''stock market.'' There were well over 500
entries.

It is difficult to read this new genre without feeling that our priorities have
gone terribly askew. To be sure, the bear market is here. But even so, it's
amazing that we can obsess about money at a time like this without even a hint
of remorse. Has there ever been a time when so many people have been so
unabashed about viewing the possibility of war through the prism of their own
personal finances? I think not.

Why is this happening now? It's happening because of two trends. The first has
to do with the markets, which have become part of the daily life of the middle
class. As recently as 20 years ago most Americans kept their money in the bank,
where it earned a federally regulated (low) rate of interest.

Today, the situation is different. The raging inflation of a decade ago, the
deregulation of interest rates, the 1980's bull market, the rise of the mutual
fund industry have all forced the broad middle class to become investors. For
instance, 60 million Americans have money in a mutual fund, up from 12 million
only 10 years ago. The affect on the stock market of a war, should it come to
that, will hurt millions of people.

That those millions will talk about this out loud speaks to a second, far more
lamentable, trend: the continuing division of America into haves and have-nots.
It's not much of an exaggeration to say that one large segment of society owns
mutual funds while the other fights wars.

It's a commonplace view by now that the Vietnam War was fought by the poor while
the rich evaded the draft. But at least there was a draft then: at least people
from all classes were forced to confront the consequences of war. Yes, the war
brought inflation, but the national agenda was dominated by the more compelling
issues of the war's purpose. Americans may have disagreed about the answer, but
there can be no doubt that that's what they thought about.

And now? Now, with no draft the haves no longer really have to think about
purpose, or death, if they don't want to. The growing insularity of Americans
also comes into play here: most of the mutual fund class not only have no
connection to the military themselves, they don't even know anybody who does.
For them, war has entered the realm of the theoretical, except in one area:
their personal finances. So that's what they talk about, never reflecting about
how cruel all this money talk must sound to those who have sons and daughters
stationed in Saudi Arabia.

It's probably true that the Dow Jones average will drop 150 points if fighting
breaks out. But so what? If it does come to that, what will matter is that
Americans will be fighting and dying. Common decency alone would suggest that
that's the only thing that should matter. To our everlasting shame, that is no
longer the case.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Ike's Foreign Policy Wasn't Always Open

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 140 words


To the Editor:

When William Bragg Ewald Jr. (''What Ike Would Do in the Gulf,'' Op-Ed, Sept.
30) suggests President Eisenhower's foreign policy respected ''cultural
differences'' and the ''rights of the powerless,'' he shows symptoms of
historical amnesia. Has the former Ike aide forgotten his boss's use of covert
operations in overthrowing the Government of Jacobo Arbenz in Guatemala and the
regime of Mohammed Mossadegh in Iran, or his misguided plan to topple Fidel
Castro?

While Mr. Ewald is correct that Ike did not send combat forces to fight in
Vietnam, doesn't he recognize Eisenhower's decision to assume responsibility for
military and economic support to an unpopular South Vietnamese government as a
significant escalation of American involvement in Southeast Asia?

SETH FEIN
  Austin, Tex., Sept. 30, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 16, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cut the Defense Budget

BYLINE: By William A. Niskanen; William A. Niskanen, chairman of the Cato
Institute, was a member of the Council of Economic Advisers in the Reagan
Administration.

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 644 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


At a meeting with some war hawks several weeks ago, one of them told me that
''We owe Saddam Hussein a favor. He saved us from the peace dividend.'' That was
no favor. Unless there is a war, the major cost of the risky new venture in the
Middle East is the failure to reduce our defense budget in response to the
dramatic developments of the past year.

The Soviet empire has collapsed. Soviet troops are scheduled to leave
Czechoslovakia and Hungary in a few months and East Germany in a few years.
Germany is unified and will substantially reduce its military forces. The
outcome of this process is uncertain and may still be dangerous in different
ways, but the cold war is over and we won!

Yet the defense budget included in the revised budget resolution approved last
week would spend nearly $300 billion dollars in response to the threats of a
world that no longer exist. Indeed, real defense spending for fiscal year 1991 -
which specifically excludes all present and future expenditures for the Persian
Gulf operation - will be about 10 percent higher than total defense spending at
the peak of the Vietnam War.

All of the major weapons programs are continued, and only small reductions are
scheduled for the U.S. forces now stationed in Europe and Asia. A failure to
make major phased reduction in the defense budget is the primary reason why our
political ''leaders,'' for the first time in U.S. history, have agreed to a
large tax increase after a major war.

A more responsible post cold war defense budget would reduce real annual defense
spending by 50 percent by the end of the decade.

At least three of the four new strategic systems in the current budget should be
scrapped: the B-2 bomber, the MX and Midgetman missile system and the new D-5
missile for the Triton submarines.

President Bush has proposed to maintain 195,000 troops in Europe and more than
100,00 in the Far East against a threat that is rapidly disappearing. We should
remove and demobilize all of our forces in Europe, Japan, Korea and the
Philippines sometime before our good friends ask us to go home.

There is no longer any reason to race to develop an advanced tactical fighter or
a space-based missile defense system; on the other hand, we need a good
close-support aircraft and some limited defense against strategic missiles. None
of these opportunities and problems have been addressed.

There is broad bipartisan support to cut the defense budget. While people may
differ on how the peace dividend should be spent, that issue requires both peace
and a peace dividend, the prospects for both of which have been threatened in
the past several months.

Yet even some of those who most ardently support our new Persian Gulf venture
recognize that the current defense budget is not responsive to the new political
and military realities. Deep defense cuts can be made, and my own preference is
to commit all defense savings to some combination of deficit reduction and, not
only no new taxes, but a reduction of those taxes that most limit economic
growth.

The reason for my preference in a new reality of our own making - the Federal
deficit was about four percent of GNP in the eighth year of economic recovery.
The growth of productivity has been slow for 17 years. And the economy is now in
a period of negative to slow growth, increasing inflation and falling dollar -
at a time when our financial institutions are unusually vulnerable and our
ability to borrow abroad has been seriously reduced. Our defense budget should
be based on the new economic realities at home.

There is still time for leadership. In a world that has turned upside down in
the pursuit of individual freedom and a market economy, an expansive and
expensive vision of the American role abroad and of Federal Government at home
is neither good economics, good politics nor good sense.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 16, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Japan on the Rise, Partly by Accident

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 612 words


''Power in the Pacific'' is an uncommonly sophisticated documentary about
America's role, not always clearly planned out, in creating a new center of
power in the Far East. The locus, of course, is Japan, and this four-part series
tells of the calculations and miscalculations that brought that country from
devastation to prosperity in a few decades, and its impact on the Pacific Basin
and the world.

''Dreams of China,'' the first episode, tonight at 10 on Channels 13 and 49,
recounts how Americans' fascination with that vast land and fondness for its
people turned into fear when the Communists took over after World War II. One of
the cautionary points here is the extent to which domestic politics, in
particular the soft-on-Communism charges of the late 1940's and early 50's,
impeded Washington's ability to deal coolly with the victory of the Communists
in China's civil war. Among the former officials telling the story are John
Paton Davies and John Stewart Service, who were drummed out of the State
Department because they predicted the defeat of Chiang Kai-shek and recommended
an opening to the left. Washington insiders like George Ball and Clark Clifford
recall how close the United States came to using nuclear weapons against China
after Chiang fled to Taiwan. Newsreels bring back not only the events and
emotions of the time but also the jingoistic spirit in which they were reported.
Looked at today, the newsreels come across as flat-out propaganda. Whatever the
failings of television news, it is rarely so unskeptical of the official line.

American suspicions of China, long seen by Washington as a surrogate of the
Soviet Union, were heightened by the Korean and the Vietnam Wars. It was not
until the 1970's, well after the Chinese-Soviet split, that, as the narrator,
Ken Kashiwahara, puts it, America ''rediscovered the Chinese we'd loved and
lost.'' But China's rulers, he notes, have declined to be be consistently
lovable. Last year came the crackdown on student demonstrators in Tienanmen
Square and ''we were jilted again.''

Next week's episode, ''Japan Comes First,'' describes how, partly in reaction to
the disappointment with China, the American occupiers after World War II remade
Japanese society and opened the way to the economic recovery that has become the
wonder of the world. The wars in Korea and especially Vietnam were a boon to
Japanese industry. Along with serving as a good customer of its new ally,
Washington provided a shield behind which Japan could devote its energies to
building up an immense global market for automobiles, computers,
microelectronics, semiconductors and other much-desired items. The final two
episodes chronicle the cold war arms race in the Pacific between Moscow and
Washington during the 1980's while Japan was becoming the world's biggest
creditor. The series leaves viewers with the question of what now, as the
military alliance between the United States and Japan gives way to economic
competition.

Particularly good use is made here of historians, who confirm that even if
far-sightedness were a more common attribute of statesmen and politicians, they
could not foresee all the ramifications of a given policy. One is left with the
troubling certainty that be it in the far East or the Middle East, history will
play its tricks.

Power in the Pacific
American producer, Joseph Angier; series produced by Bruce Belsham for Pacific
Rim Co-Production Association; Harry Bardwell, executive producer for Australian
Broadcasting Corporation; Blaine Baggett, executive producer for KCET/Los
Angeles. Narrated by Ken Kashiwahara. Tonight at 10 P.M. on Channels 13 and 49.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 17, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Workers Leaving Eastern Germany

BYLINE: By JOHN TAGLIABUE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 660 words

DATELINE: SCHWEDT, Germany, Oct. 10


When she thinks back to her days in Dresden in the 1970's as an
electrical-engineering student, Nguyen Lien's eyes glow.

''There was such friendship then,'' said the slight Vietnamese woman, who came
to East Germany offering ''fraternal assistance'' to fellow Communists, and now
finds herself unwanted in a reunified Germany.

''I went to all the solidarity rallies,'' she said nostalgically. ''I was a
delegate for the Vietnamese students.''

Mrs. Lien, who shares a one-room apartment in this poor city of 54,000 near the
Polish border with her husband and 6-year-old son, thinks she can play a useful
role in the new Germany. And she feels that whatever she learns about reviving
the moribund economy of what had been East Germany will prove useful when she
eventually returns to her Asian homeland.

She is hoping to put off that departure for some time. But she is well aware
that in the face of growing hostility to people like herself, about 2,000
workers from places like Vietnam and Mozambique are leaving each week, many of
them after suffering the slurs of racial prejudice and even attacks. In the days
of Communist central planning and subsidized full employment, the Vietnamese,
Cubans and Africans were invited to take hard-to-fill jobs. Now as factories in
the east are shutting down, incapable of competing with Western couterparts,
unemployment is rising in these regions and a unified Germany is using every
available plane to repatriate workers from less developed countries who were
hired by East Germany's former Communist leaders.

Before the full-scale evacuation of the foreign workers was begun, there were
50,000 Vietnamese in Germany.

The departures under pressure comes despite solemn pleas by German leaders at
unification rallies for greater openness and tolerance.

But the calls for solidarity appear to go unheeded by at least some of Schwedt's
population, where Vietnamese workers are often harassed and slogans like
''Foreigners out!'' appear on walls.

In recent weeks, she said, hardly an evening passes without an attack by
skinheads and other youths on the concrete high-rise that 300 or so Vietnamese
call home.

A majority of Schwedt's people condemn the intimidation, which has failed to
discourage a small group of Vietnamese determined to stay on.

''We are curious to see how things develop further here, '' Mrs. Lien said.
''Things will be developing in our country too and we do not know which is the
right path to take and which the wrong one. So we are embarking on a big
adventure.''

Mrs. Lien, a woman in her 30's who left a 13-year-old daughter behind in her
native Hanoi, said more would stay, were it not for the terror.

Many of the Vietnamese especially recall what happened on July 8, when West
Germany won the World Cup soccer match in Rome. On that night, 150 youths,
waving flags and shouting ''Foreigners out,'' smashed windows. A special terror
took hold.

''In the beginning we thought it was just their joy over winning,'' Mrs. Lien
said, ''but then it increased.

Gerhard Ziebarth, a neighbor of the Vietnamese, attributed the trouble to
teen-age gangs who exploited newly won freedoms and the weakening of the police
following after the collapse of Communism to vandalize the foreigners.

Shock over the rise in racist acts is all the more bitter since the Vietnamese
believe that they made a solid contribution to Schwedt's economy.

Before unification, Schwedt was home to more than 4,000 foreign workers -
Yugoslavs, Poles, Cubans, Pakistanis and Vietnamese - who helped build the big
petrochemical plants at the western end of the East German-Soviet oil pipeline
from Siberia. Now only the Vietnamese remnant remains.

Envy was stirred when Vietnamese were awarded some of the few apartments
available. And some accused the Vietnamese of hoarding goods, most notably the
bicycles and mopeds that are standard transportation in Southeast Asia, for
shipment to their families at home.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 17, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Policing the World

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 762 words

DATELINE: PARIS


A peculiar convergence of critics on the left and right has begun to emerge as
Americans digest the enormity of the Persian Gulf crisis. It came as such a
surprise and built up so rapidly that many thought it a passing storm at first,
a nasty adventure like Panama that could be put in its place and then out of
mind.

It never was. But the issues remain muddled in the novelty of a truly
international operation crisscrossing old alliances. The arguments about saving
feudal emirs and cheap oil sound persuasive to many because it is hard to face
the deeper questions.

Does the world still need policing? In what circumstances? If it's a matter of
principle, why isn't it applied everywhere, equally? Should the U.S. do it? If
so, how? To inveterate cold warriors on the right, the answers are no. The U.S.
function was to confront Communism, and if that isn't necessary there is no
reason to get involved in the quarrels of distant tyrants, or exposed for the
sake of allies over-accustomed to U.S. protection. Everything has changed. On
the left, the reflexes instilled by the Vietnam War are stirred. They resonate
with the familiar vocabulary and gestures, as though nothing had changed.

A group in Paris calling itself Americans for Peace has issued ''Bulletin No.
1.'' It calls for a demonstration picketing the U.S. Embassy with such slogans
as ''Blood is more precious than oil,'' ''Let the diplomats do it,'' ''Make
peace not war.''

Nobody could gainsay these slogans, but they don't suggest how to make peace or
how the diplomats should do it. Leaving Iraq's Saddam Hussein triumphant would
be no guarantee, to understate it.

In other parts of the world, existing commitments and emotional allegiances also
take precedence over the challenge. Japan's Socialist Party leader, Takako Doi,
opposes sending any Japanese to the gulf, except perhaps to look after refugees,
and opposes even the use of United Nations force. ''The U.N. is for
peacekeeping,'' she says simplistically. ''That means no force.''

A Japanese businessman asked me recently, ''Will we regret the cold war?''
Indeed, it seemed easier to sort out friend and foe when people imagined that a
single test was all that really mattered. The answer to his question may be yes,
if we don't make new rules.

There is still a test, but it is not so simple. It is the maintenance of a
reasonably orderly world. The history of civilizations is one of enormous
violence, with widespread desolation whenever the foundations of order failed.
We are entering a new period at a time when nations are tied in mutual
dependencies as never before, inescapably vulnerable to each other's actions and
upheavals.

True, some benefit more than others from the kind of order that the liberal
democracies have been trying to establish. But it is a dangerous illusion to
think that third-world countries would be better off left to look after their
own needs and their own conflicts. That is one reason the Soviets have come to
the conclusion that they must join in the attempt to make new, cooperative
rules. All would be hurt in a free-for-all.

Peace and order do not come of themselves. Entropy applies to society on a
national and global scale as well as to thermodynamics. It takes policing to
sustain a rule of law, and even then police can't eradicate crime, only make it
unrewarding.

There is no world police, and precious little international law. But the fact
that the U.S. sometimes did badly when it tried to substitute its own will for
both does not mean the world can do without rule-keeping. And the fact that the
U.S. cannot do it alone does not mean it should reject the responsibility of its
capacity.

This new period is the stumbling beginning of an attempt to organize the world
in the purposes for which the United Nations was established. The difficulties
are obvious, but less daunting than the need. Nor can the ideal goal of
satisfying all grievances, assuring an end to all military violence, be allowed
to frustrate the effort for reasonable order.

The powers did nothing about the bloody civil war in Liberia, and the West
African states that intervened did it poorly. Lebanon has fared no better.
That's a shame, but it doesn't justify never intervening. If Iraq is different,
it is because the strategic importance of oil to everybody and the fragility of
Arab states make the stakes higher and more general.

This isn't about American hegemony, nor the right to guzzle gas as the
''American way of life.'' It's a step toward a community of security and
standards by consent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 18, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
SENATORS DEMAND ROLE IN APPROVING ANY MOVE ON IRAQ

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1346 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 17


Expressing concern that the United States could go to war against Iraq while
Congress is in recess next month, members of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee demanded today that the Bush Administration obtain Congressional
approval before initiating any military action.

The demands were made by leading Republican and Democratic Senators, including
the committee chairman, Claiborne Pell, Democrat of Rhode Island, and Richard G.
Lugar of Indiana, an influential Republican, in sharp exchanges with Secretary
of State James A. Baker 3d.

They and others pressed for the Administration to guarantee that Congress would
have a say on whether and when to become involved in combat with Iraq. But Mr.
Baker, who testified before the committee today, refused to agree to more than
the traditional executive branch pledge to consult with Congressional leaders.

Concerned Over Gulf

The tone of the hearing was set at the opening when Mr. Pell began by saying:
''I scheduled this hearing because of the great concern that many Americans
have, which I share, that we may soon go to war in the Persian Gulf. We should
understand that a war with Iraq could entail thousands of lost American lives
and cost billions of dollars.''

Moments later, Mr. Pell held up a copy of a newspaper bearing the headline:
''Shevardnadze Promises to Consult Parliament on Gulf Involvement,'' referring
to the assurance by the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, to the
Supreme Soviet that he would consult with them before Moscow committed any
forces to the gulf conflict. With a slightly mischievous grin, Mr. Pell then
asked Mr. Baker whether he would ''be prepared to be as forthcoming as Mr.
Shevardnadze is with regard to informing the Congress of any military action
against Iraq prior to the takeoff.''

Mr. Pell, noting that on Friday the Congress is scheduled to adjourn until
mid-January, added, ''Several of us in the Senate have discussed the idea of
establishing a bipartisan Senate-House leadership group to consult with the
President prior to any decision that might be made of offensive military
action.''

Did Not Feel Obliged

Mr. Baker rebuffed the committee request, telling the panel that the
Administration would ''consult'' with the Congressional leadership if military
action were called for, but did not feel obliged to get advance Congressional
approval for the use of force against Iraq.

The lively committee hearing echoed the often bitter disputes between Congress
and the White House over war-making powers in the 1960's and 1970's, when the
executive branch justified its unilateral actions in Vietnam and Cambodia by
citing the President's constitutional role as Commander in Chief, and Congress
justified its demands for more say in any combat commitments under its
constitutional perogative to be the sole power to declare war.

Mr. Baker argued that requiring advance Congressional approval for military
action, or establishing a formal Congressional committee that would make a
decision for war in conjunction with the Administration, would both infringe on
President Bush's functions as Commander in Chief and possibly deprive the
Administration of the ability to respond quickly to any Iraqi provocation or to
take President Saddam Hussein of Iraq by surprise.

Clash With Baker

Both Democratic and Republican committee members clashed with Mr. Baker over the
issue, with a clear bipartisan sense of the committee that military conflict in
the gulf region was likely in the coming two months and that the White House
would try to bypass Congress in going to war.

Equally apparent was the discomfort of the Senators with the prospect of
American soldiers dying to liberate Kuwait. This was evident in their bipartisan
demands to be part of any decision to start a costly war in the gulf. But it was
even more apparent when the Republican Senator from Alaska, Frank H. Murkowski,
a conservative, pressed Mr. Baker as to whether the Bush Administration had
given any thought to arranging a ''commercial'' peace accord between Iraq and
Kuwait, in which Kuwait might sell Iraq islands and oil wells that Baghdad
claims as its own in return for an Iraqi withdrawal from the rest of Kuwait.

What clearly underlay Senator Murkowski's question was a feeling that the United
States should not be going to war to get an unconditional Iraqi withdrawal from
Kuwait, if it can get a conditional Iraqi withdrawal on reasonable terms.

As Senator Murkowski said: ''We have put a line in the sand that says that
there's not going to be any conditions on the withdrawal of Iraqi forces from
Kuwait, they're going to simply withdraw and there's no room for negotiation,
arbitration or otherwise. The rationale is one that I support. I'm wondering,
though, in the search for a peaceful solution, is there some alternative that
could be explored of a commercial solution? If everybody's looking for a way out
because the other alternative that we've discussed here today isn't very pretty
- it's body bags, it's a reality of a war, and you know, we want to avoid that
at all consequences if possible.''

Baker Defends Sanctions

Mr. Baker responded that the Administration believed the best chance for a
peaceful solution ''is for everyone to strictly observe the sanctions and for
the sanctions to begin to work and thereby affect behavior in Iraq.''

''We think it would be a terrible mistake in terms of establishing a new world
order,'' he said, ''if we began by working deals that would permit unprovoked
aggression to pay.''

In making the case that the Administration should bring the Congress in to any
war-making decision, Senator Pell said it was in President Bush's interest
''that Congress share the responsibility for taking the nation to war.''

''More fundamentally,'' he added, ''shared responsibility for war is what the
founding fathers intended.''

Opposes Formal Mechanism

Mr. Baker responded that the President had consulted with Congressional leaders
in the past on his steps regarding military deployment in the Persian Gulf and
he would do so in the future, even during a recess, but then he added: ''I would
have a little bit of reservation about a formal mechanism.''

Mr. Pell's line was then picked up by Mr. Lugar, who suggested a group of as
many as 12 lawmakers who would meet regularly with the President during the
recess to consider any war-making decisions and insure that they have bipartisan
support.

''We learned from the Vietnam experience,'' Mr. Lugar said, ''that the support
of the American people, as expressed through 535 representatives in Congress, is
essential.'' Instead of the Bush Administration making a decision on its own,
Senator Lugar said, ''Congress ought to come back into session and authorize a
declaration of war.''

When Mr. Baker promised that there would be consulations with the leadership,
Senator Paul S. Sarbanes, Democrat of Maryland, shot back: ''There's a
difference between consultation and authorization. It's my very strongly held
view that the commitment of American forces by the President in a major assault
to drive Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait would require an authorization from the
Congress.''

Repeated by Kassebaum

When this line was also hammered by Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican
of Kansas, Mr. Baker finally answered that the Administration had to weigh its
desire to have as much support as possible for any military action against the
need for surprise and rapid decision-making that any war would require.

Only two members of the 19-person committee, Senators Rudy Boschwitz, Republican
of Minnesota, and Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, appeared to
back Mr. Baker's view that consultation with Congressional leaders was
sufficient.

At issue are not only the powers assigned to the different branches by the
Constitution, but also the War Powers Resolution. That act was passed by
Congress over President Richard M. Nixon's veto in 1973 to prevent a recurrence
of military involvements like the Vietnam war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, right, speaking with
Claiborne Pell, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, before
testifying to the committee on the Persian Gulf situation. (Andrea Mohin/The New
York Times) (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 18, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1386 words



International    A3-15



Worry about war in the Persian Gulf breaking out while Congress is in recess
prompted members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to demand that the
Administration obtain Congressional approval before initiating military action.
    Page A1



Are U.S. forces ready to attack Iraq? While there is little sign American troops
are preparing to attack, there is also evidence that they have not yet mastered
the terrain and tactics they would need if war comes.    A13



Disgusted G.I. asks Bush to ''drink hot water with us''    A13



The P.L.O. is locked in turmoil, unable to show any results for its mediation
effort 10 weeks after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, isolated from the West and
former benefactors and angry at new violence in Israeli-occupied areas.    A12



Another worry for Iraq: Kurdish nationalists at back door    A12



Britain is unable to sway the Israelis    A12



Al Ahram assails King Hussein as conspirator against Kuwait    A12



News analysis: Mikhail Gorbachev diminished the prospects of an alliance with
Boris Yeltsin by announcing a less radical transition to a free market in the
Soviet Union. The two leaders are once again on a collision course.    A1



Hard cash talks in the land of the long line    A14



Ukraine bows to student protests on charter    A14



Civic Forum's new leader plans to move the Czech group right    A14



Germans puzzle over defeat of Kohl's foes    A15



Vatican approves two married priests in Brazil    A5



A top Japanese official apologized to the U.S. for comparing foreign prostitutes
in Tokyo to American blacks who move into white neighborhoods and ''ruin the
atmosphere.''    A7



Koreas revert to form: squabbling    A3



Vietnam agrees to expand efforts on U.S. missing    A8



Cambodia troupe's star dancer stays in U.S.    A9



Bhutto facing new misconduct charges    A3



A religious dispute threatens India's Government    A6



House, in a public debate, retains C.I.A. aid for Angolan rebels    A11



Tutu will convene a South African black summit meeting    A10



Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk Journal: Chekhov among the outcasts    A4



The Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to three North American scientists whose
experiments confirmed the existence of quarks, the tiny building blocks of all
matter. An American also won the prize for Chemistry.    A20



National    A16-22, B11, D24-25



Three Senators helped a thrift owner, Charles H. Keating Jr., protect his
failing savings and loan, and had more frequent contact with him over a longer
period than had been established, documents before the Senate Ethics Committee
show.    A1



A budget package before the Senate seemed to have secured passage after passing
its crucial first test: the rejection of a proposal to raise taxes on the
wealthy, largely out of fear of a Presidential veto.    A1



An old tax on the upper income takes centerstage    D25



A new military budget was agreed on by House and Senate negotiators that limits
financing for the B-2 Stealth bomber and cuts nearly $2 billion from President
Bush's request for the 'Star Wars' program. The total budget was $288 billion.
    A1



The House passed a civil rights bill and set the stage for a confrontation with
President Bush, whose veto threat leaves him in a political bind three weeks
before the Congressional elections.    D25

Federal efforts to protect animals on the endangered species list are so
mismanaged that hundreds of threatened species face extinction without any
Government effort to save them, an investigation has found.    A18



Conferees stiffen curbs on chemical pollutants    A19



Man is acquitted in hunting death    A16



Virginia executes the killer of a sheriff's deputy    A22



A wild card in Ohio's governor race is the Federal budget battle. George
Voinovich, a Republican who was running ahead in the polls, may be hurt by the
perception that his party is the protector of the rich.    A16



Berkeley Journal: All clowns? This candidate really is    A16



Navajo leader is guilty on all 42 ethics counts    A16



The head of Dow Jones will retire. Warren H. Phillips will be replaced as chief
executive on January 1 by Peter R. Kann, publisher of The Wall Street Journal,
the company's crown jewel.    D1



Regional    B1-10



The absurdity of the election process in New York City is evident in the plight
of a Bronx man who has lost a series of races, defeated not so much by his
opponents but by a system many analysts say is the worst in the nation.    A1



Felix G. Rohatyn is resigning. The man who helped save the city from fiscal ruin
in the 1970's as chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation said he was
concerned his persona had become too prominent in city negotiations with unions.

    A1



New York City will not be liable for making up the difference in the 5.5 percent
raise for teachers if the State Legislature does not approve changes in pension
earnings assumptions that were also to help finance part of the contract, Mayor
Dinkins said.    B1



''Productivity gain'' in pact with teachers is optional    B10



Dinkins's Latino chief, feeling stymied, quits    B3



The abandonment of East Harlem by the city's banks will be reversed in part by
Banco de Ponce, which is offering millions of dollars in mortgages to the
community. The bank will also add a full-time small-business loan officer.    B1



Opposition by upstate residents to the $2 billion environmental bond issue to
use public money to buy private land has put government and private supporters
on the defensive and passage of the measure in doubt.    B1



Judge declines to raise fines against Nassau    B3



At Indian Point, no second guessing after a nuclear fuel mishap    B6



Promises on crime in Connecticut will probably not be kept by the next governor,
experts say. A prison expansion plan has begun and tougher sentencing for
criminals is in place. But a crushing deficit raises the question: who will pay?

    B1



Bronx girl is found dead a week after disappearing    B3



Game four adjourns as Kasparov attacks wildly but survives    B8



Business Digest    D1



The Home Section

With stepfathers, the shoe seldom fits    C1



For adobe, humble or fashionable, it's mud to mud    C1



Park Avenue show house shows how    C1



Arts/Entertainment



What makes photos art?

    C17



The Whitney's troubled image

    C17



New fight over arts agency

    C17



Word and Image: ''Menninger: The Family and the Clinic''    C24



Bush's polls and the media

    C26



Health Page    B12



Personal Health

Support groups may do more in cancer than relieve the mind

Obituaries    B13



Hortense Hirsch, hospital trustee and volunteer

Thomas F. Brigance, designed sophisticated swimwear

Sports



Baseball: Reds beat A's again    B15



A year later, A's can't forget 5:04 P.M.    B15



Poll: Many fans favor blend of day and night games    B16



Basketball: Knicks routed    B18



Column: Anderson on the d.h.    B15



Football: Fullback grows in Miami    B15



Hockey: Rangers win    B18



Devils beat Capitals    B18



Tennis: Notebook    B17



Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed



Editorials    A24



Israel's friends, and enemy

Mr. Dinkins faces fiscal reality

Brazil comes clean on its bomb

Dr. Death's machine

Letters    A24



Anna Quindlen: Bears with furniture    A25



William Safire: Tax or spend?

    A25



Meir Rosenne: If only the Jews would . . .    A25



William F. Buckley Jr.: National service, national debt    A25


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 18, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Agrees to Expand Efforts on U.S. Missing

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 17


The Vietnamese Foreign Minister agreed today to expand efforts to identify and
return to the United States the remains of American servicemen still unaccounted
for after the Vietnam War, moving the United States and Vietnam a step closer to
normal diplomatic relations.

Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach met here with several senior Administration
officials, including retired Gen. John Vessey Jr., President Bush's emissary to
Hanoi on matters regarding prisoners of war and servicemen who are missing in
action. It was the first time that a Vietnamese official of Cabinet rank had
visited Washington since the Vietnam War.

Mr. Thach was permitted to travel here for one day because the State Department
lifted a travel restriction that normally allows Vietnamese officials to journey
no farther than 25 miles from United Nations headquarters.

Vietnam says it wants diplomatic relations with the United States and an end to
a 15-year-old trade embargo. But the Bush Administration has insisted that
normalization must wait until there is a settlement to the Cambodian civil war
and a resolution of the status of 1,677 American servicemen still listed as
missing in Vietnam.

Greater Vietnamese Cooperation

Mr. Thach agreed to American demands that technical teams, which have been
working to find remains with little success for the past two years, receive
greater Vietnamese cooperation. United States officials said he pledged that the
joint American-Vietnamese teams would be given free access to war records and
archival materials, as well as to people who saw planes downed and other
incidents by which American servicemen disappeared.

''Minister Thach and I have had a successful meeting and agreed to new levels of
cooperation,'' General Vessey said after the meeting, which lasted more than two
hours. ''He has agreed to all the proposals I've made.''

Most significant of all Mr. Thach's pledges, potentially, was his reiteration
and bolstering of a previous agreement to turn over remains of all American
servicemen under Vietnamese control. Since September 1988, Vietnam has turned
over 260 remains, and only 100 of these have been identified as Americans. Most
of the others are believed to be non-American, or were unidentifiable.

The Bush Administration's movement to increase cooperation between the two
Governments began in July, when it decided to open discussions with Hanoi on
ways to make peace in Cambodia. Those discussions, in turn, led Vietnam to
persuade the closely allied Cambodian Government to agree in principle to an
arrangement under which it would share administrative power with three guerrilla
groups and the United Nations until elections are held.

New Momentum for Reconciliation

In recognition of the progress to reach a Cambodian settlement, Secretary of
State James A. Baker 3d met with Mr. Thach late last month in New York City. It
was the first time senior officials of the two countries had met since 1973.

The diplomatic movement toward eventual reconciliation between the two countries
appeared to pick up new momentum today. Mr. Thach also announced that Laos had
agreed to cooperate with Vietnam and the United States to account for missing
American servicemen.

Following the Vessey-Thach session, a senior Administration official said, ''If
Vietnam is forthcoming on P.O.W.-M.I.A. affairs, then this will facilitate the
rapid movement toward normalization - if and when a compromise political
settlement on Cambodia is implemented.''

Government officials, however, said privately that they wondered why Hanoi has
not yet released a number of remains that are believed to have been kept in
warehouses. They said they hoped the Vietnamese would show those remains to the
joint commission.

Ann Mills Griffiths, a leader of the National League of Families of American
Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia, said she was gratified by the
Vietnamese agreements. But Mrs. Griffiths, who attended the meeting, cautioned,
''Obviously, the results remain to be seen.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 18, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Troupe's Star Dancer Stays in U.S.

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 679 words


The star performer in a Cambodian dance troupe decided yesterday to stay in the
United States after discussions with the State Department and the Immigration
and Naturalization Service. But 31 other members of the group left John F.
Kennedy Airport to return to Phnom Penh.

A lawyer for the star dancer, Yim Devi, said she planned to stay as a student
and was not defecting, unlike four other members of the troupe who sought
political asylum during the group's performances in St. Paul and in Lowell,
Mass., in the last two weeks. The lawer, Martin Garbus, denied that the
interviews by the Immigration Service, which had demanded to talk with all
before they left, had influenced Miss Yim Devi's decision.

But Al Santoli, an author who has written a book on the Indochina war and
refugees, said he had evidence that Miss Yim Devi had been trying to arrange to
stay in America since the troupe arrived in the country three weeks ago but had
been intimidated by the group's American sponsor, the U.S.-Indochina
Reconciliation Project.

In addition, Arthur Helton, an attorney with the Lawyers Committee for Human
Rights, who had tried unsuccessfully to reach Miss Yim Devi on behalf of a
relative in the United States, said her decision to stay ''vindicates the
Government's procedures'' in requiring interviews with the Cambodians before
they left. ''The outcome vindicates the Government's intervention,'' Mr. Helton
said.

First Exchange Since 1975

Thirty-six dancers, members of the Cambodian Classical Dance Company, were the
first cultural exchange group from Cambodia to visit the United States since the
end of the Indochina war in 1975. They had been the subject of intense political
pressures, with repeated charges that the U.S.-Indochina Reconciliation Project
had tried to intimidate them into not defecting and countercharges that the
defections were the work of anti-Government Cambodian refugee organizations,
including the Khmer Rouge.

The pressure was particularly intense because dance is one of Cambodia's great
traditional art forms, and there have been fears that the Khmer Rouge, during
their reign of terror in Cambodia from 1975 to 1979, had wiped out virtually all
dancers. The dancers' tour therefore evoked many of the passions of the war.

Almost lost in the infighting were the feelings of some of the troupe's leaders,
master dancers and teachers who survived the Khmer Rouge. Proeung Chhieng, for
example, the director of the Dance School at the University of Phnom Penh, said
the troupe's goal in coming to the United States was to demonstrate to Cambodian
refugees here ''that we have revived dance and our nation is surviving.''

But Mr. Proeung Chhieng, himself a famous dancer before 1975, said ''bad
people'' in the United States had constantly tried to interfere with the troupe,
following the dancers from city to city and encouraging members to defect. Mr.
Proeung Chhieng said he was only an artist, not a politician, and would not name
the ''bad people.''

Afraid of Interviews

But he said the interviews by the Immigration Service, which started at 10 A.M.
Tuesday and continued till 1 A.M. yesterday, had made many of the Cambodians
afraid. After their experience with the Khmer Rouge, he said, the very sight of
Government officials is frightening to Cambodians.

Mr. Garbus, a prominent human rights lawyer, denounced the interviews as
''lawless'' and ''absolutely outrageous.'' He said some of the interviews were
held in the dancers' hotel rooms after they had gone to bed. ''It had echoes of
a different time and a different country,'' Mr. Garbus said.

But Duke Austin, a spokesman for the Immigration Service, said the agency had
acted to prevent a repetition of an incident in 1985 when a Soviet sailor in New
Orleans who had been seeking asylum was left to return to the Soviet Union
without being given an interview.

''Far from frightening and intimidating anybody, the U.S. Government was trying
to make sure that no one was being removed from the United States
involuntarily,'' Mr. Austin said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 18, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
G.I.'s in the Saudi Desert Are Fitter Now, but Still Have Lessons to Learn

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1397 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Oct. 17


In the light of the setting desert sun, one of the United States Army's best
armored units raced across the sand in a whine of engines and billowing
outriders of smoke and dust.

The Second Squadron of the Fourth Cavalry Regiment, a unit of the 24th Infantry
Division, was on the move.

The scene was totally martial. But its message was less menacing: After more
than two months in the Saudi desert, there is little sign that American ground
forces are preparing to attack Iraq anytime soon.

There is also evidence that American ground forces have not yet mastered the
terrain and the tactics that would be demanded of them if war comes
unexpectedly.

'No Offensive Plans'

The sunset display of tanks and armored personnel carriers here was in fact a
shift to a less forward, more defensive position for the Second Squadron, which
had been the United States Army's most forward-deployed force.

''I have absolutely nothing on that,'' said the unit's commander, Lieut. Col.
Glynn E. Pope, when asked if his men were preparing to attack. ''We have
absolutely no offensive plans at this time.''

The colonel and his subordinate officers all said their mission remained to
defend Saudi Arabia, not to attack Iraq or Iraqi-occupied Kuwait. They added
that preparations for a ground attack on Iraqi positions across the border would
take weeks and that so far, they had not been involved in any such plans.

Their statements suggest either that American ground forces are not close to
mounting an attack or that their ultimate mission will be to keep Iraqi forces
from penetrating Saudi Arabia while American aircraft and cruise missiles
decimate Iraq.

'Nothing but a Tripwire'

Evidence seen on a two-day visit with the squadron at its position deep in the
eastern Saudi desert seemed to support the officers' assertions that the unit
was not preparing to attack. Under military ground rules here, the unit's exact
size and location cannot be reported.

The dust-covered soldiers took a grim view of their recent work of holding a
defensive line, facing numerically far superior Iraqi forces just across the
border.

''We knew we were nothing but a tripwire,'' said Christopher Dallas, a
22-year-old gunner from Sacramento, Calif. ''We told ourselves we'd see the
Iraqis coming by our vehicles exploding.''

Two months in the sun and sand have hardened the men of this armored cavalry
unit. They say they need only half the water they did before to tolerate the
heat.

Desert Is More Familiar

The desert remains hostile, but has become more familiar, and temperatures are
falling to more bearable levels, the soldiers said. The men of the Second
Squadron give the impression of an acclimating desert army that will fight
better for having spent months enduring the hardships of the Saudi desert.

But there are signs that the troops still have a way to go to master this harsh
field of possible battle, especially in nighttime operations when one dune looks
like countless others and it is all too easy to get lost.

Some soldiers also complained that they were ''being kept in the dark'' about
their increasingly prolonged mission and that the Army was doing too little to
make desert living conditions more bearable.

If American forces are sent into Iraq, the tanks and other armored vehicles of
the 24th Infantry Division are likely to be among the first wave of forces
unleashed against Iraqi lines in what would most likely be a battle of heavy
armor, rockets and poison gas. As the advance guard of the division of more than
15,000 men, this scout unit would be on the cutting edge of United States
military preparations.

A Platoon Becomes Lost

The Second Squadron's field base here is bare but efficient. A bevy of OH-58
scout helicopers fly over the sands, watching for enemy movements. They are
backed by powerful Cobra helicopter gunships, bearing pods of rockets and
computerized Gatling guns.

Supply trucks and jeeps ferry fuel, ammunition and water from camouflaged dumps
to waiting lines of gray tanks and armored fighting vehicles. The whole base can
be broken down and moved within an hour, officers say.

But a visit suggested the need for more preparation before going to war against
Iraq.

On a nighttime reconnaissance mission, a platoon of the Second Squadron's A
Troop got lost despite using night-vision glasses that illuminated the desert to
daylight brightness.

The platoon of tracked Bradley Fighting Vehicles, mounted with antitank missiles
and 25-millimeter cannons, pulled out at 9:30 P.M. for what should have been a
three-hour scouting trip. But because of missed turns in the trackless sand, the
unit did not find its way home for more than five hours.

''The desert is deceptive, especially at night,'' said Sgt. Errol Thompson, the
commander of a Bradley vehicle, as he steered over the sands trying to find the
way home with the rest of the platoon.

A Hazard of the Job

Asked what would happen if the unit ran into a minefield in the dark, Sergeant
Thompson replied: ''You hit a mine and that's it. You're through.''

''It's one of the hazards of the job,'' he said, grinning as the armored vehicle
spun past a dune at 30 miles an hour.

Some soldiers were so exhausted from two months of front-line duty on three to
four hours of sleep a night that they curled up on the bucking floor of a
Bradley vehicle and slept soundly despite the pounding their bodies took as the
unit careened over gullies and dunes.

The hazy expanse of the Milky Way filled the sky above, and the bright trails of
shooting stars gave the scene a celestial touch. But the grind of treads and
creak of swinging gun turrets left no doubt that the business at hand was to be
prepared to destroy other men waiting under the same stars, in their own killing
machines.

Looking into the darkness through the Bradley's night scope gave an eerie red
and black view of a world that was impenetrable to the naked eye. The high-tech
night sights illuminated even the treads of jeep tracks far out in the sands.

Hard Fighting Conditions

The commanders of these American units say they will use the cover of darkness
if war comes. But the reconnaissance mission here indicated just how difficult
combat could be under such conditions.

It would not be easy to distinguish enemy from friendly vehicles through
night-vision goggles in a world of exploding rockets, burning tanks and
unfamiliar terrain.

To go against dug-in Iraqi units, across a desert inside Iraq and Kuwait that no
American unit has been able to scout on the ground, is a sobering prospect to
these American soldiers.

''If there's a fight, there's going to be heavy casualties on both sides,'' said
a Second Squadron officer who spoke on the condition that he not be identified.
''A ground attack is going to mean a lot of hard fighting.''

After a few hours' sleep back at the base camp, the unit awoke to make a
two-mile run across the desert for morning exercise. After more than a month in
the desert, with almost no amenities, the men then settled down to such luxuries
as a shower in a mobile stall with a barrel of water suspended above it.

Soldiers seemed to relish the chance to decompress, wash their grimy camouflage
uniforms, read letters, eat a hot meal, talk about women they had not seen for
10 weeks, and wonder if they would fight here sometime soon or go home.

A Promise Is Given

The few older men who are veterans of Vietnam and other combat seem to serve as
sort of foster fathers for younger soldiers who have never heard a shot fired in
anger.

''You're young, brash and think that bullet is never going to find you, but
that's not necessarily true,'' said Sgt. Victor D. Mustoe, a 47-year-old Vietnam
veteran and Cobra pilot. ''Some bullets will find you.''

The commander of a nearby combat battalion who asked not to be identified said
he had called his men together to tell them he had brought 500 body bags to
Saudi Arabia. He said the men had answered by making him give them one promise:
that if killed in battle, their bodies would be recovered and sent home for
burial in the United States.

''It matters a lot to them,'' the officer said. ''They wanted to know the score
and I tried to be straight and tell it to them.''

His voice caught, then thickened a little when he added, ''My one goal is to
bring every one of my men home alive.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Members of the Second Squadron of the Fourth Cavalry Regiment,
on maneuvers, and, below left, at camp. Stf. Sgt. Errol Thompson commanded a
Bradley Fighting Vehicle. (Photographs by Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 18, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Soldiers Have Some Beefs for the Boss

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 450 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Oct. 17


The men of the headquarters supply platoon of the Second Squadron of the Army's
Fourth Cavalry Regiment had a few things they wanted to get off their chests.

''Tell George Bush to get off the golf course and out of his fishing boat and
come out here in the desert to take a look at what we're doing and drink some
hot water with us,'' declared Pvt. Brett Thompson, 21 years old. ''We're tired
of being kept in the dark like we don't have the intelligence to be told what's
going on.''

It was only one of many heated comments by the mostly young enlisted men of this
unit, which has been working an average 18 to 20 hours a day for the last two
months.

''I had to come out here to find out what the Army really thinks I'm worth -
nothing,'' said an angry private who asked not to be identified. ''Why is it
that when the U.S. economy gets bad we always go to war?''

In shouted comments, more than a dozen soldiers in the unit complained of very
slow mail, no news, no clear definition of their mission, few cots, no chance to
telephone home, almost no recreational equipment and a feeling that senior
commanders either do not listen or do not want to hear their complaints.

Although some soldiers said mail delivery had improved, it still seems slow and
erratic. Pvt. John Barnes, 20 years old, said he had received no mail in more
than a month.

Commanders said there are plans to install phones at a nearby town and to ferry
troops to a beach resort for a break, but nothing seems definite yet.

''The longer we just sit here like this, the worse morale is going to get,''
said Sgt. Rolland Brooks, a veteran of Vietnam. ''I don't think we came over
here to fight for low oil prices. The atrocities we came to stop are still going
on in Kuwait and we're just sitting here.''

''I think all the big people involved in this should come out to the desert,
here in the sun,'' Sergeant Brooks added. ''I think they'd make a decision real
fast.''

''I want to be able to go to church,'' said Pvt. Woodrow Campbell, 19. ''It
matters to me.''

A sergeant said a tent was being raised to serve as a chapel. Several men said
the fact that their unit has a chaplain is very important to them.

Several soldiers complained that they were taking a pay cut because they were
sent to fight in Saudi Arabia. They said they lost a supplemental $180 per month
for off-base living expenses in the United States, and were given instead an
extra $110 hazardous duty pay -adding up to a loss of $70 a month for risking
their lives in the desert.

''We work for less pay than most American civilians,'' one private said, ''and
we have a job that starts at 4 in the morning and doesn't end most nights until
9 P.M.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 18, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

New Dow Jones Chief Has an Impish Streak

BYLINE: By N. R. KLEINFIELD

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 658 words


Over his lengthy career at Dow Jones & Company, Peter R. Kann has made a lot of
mischief, and he just hasn't been able to help it.

No one would confuse him with Warren H. Phillips, whom he will succeed in
January as chief executive. While Mr. Phillips is reserved and bashful, the
47-year-old Mr. Kann is often described as a charming, gum-chewing, fun-loving
individual. From his days as one of The Wall Street Journal's most distinguished
reporters to his years as a business executive, he has never lost his impish
streak.

John Huey, a senior editor at Fortune magazine and a former Atlanta bureau chief
for The Wall Street Journal, remembers Mr. Kann's knack for enlivening bureau
chief meetings. On several occasions, he led parades of golf carts charging
across golf courses in the middle of the night. Another time, when the bureau
chiefs were partying after a session, Mr. Huey said Mr. Kann chose to spray a
bunch of dancing bureau chiefs with a fire extinguisher.

Entire Career at Paper

The son of Robert Kann, an eminent Austrian historian, Peter Kann has spent his
entire career with Dow Jones. While attending Harvard University, he landed a
summer internship in 1963 in the San Francisco bureau of The Wall Street Journal
and, after graduating from Harvard, he was hired the next year as a reporter in
the paper's Pittsburgh bureau.

A year later, he was sent to Los Angeles, where he beseeched Journal editors to
send him to Vietnam as a foreign correspondent. In 1967, he got his wish. In
Vietnam, Mr. Kann blossomed into a star, and he earned widespread admiration for
his poetic and prolific dispatches. His coverage of the India-Pakistan War won
him a Pulitzer Prize in 1972 for international reporting.

Mr. Kann exhibited a graceful and witty writing style, and a wonderful eye for
life's absurdities. He succeeded in telling about the horrors of the Vietnam war
through montages of telling anecdotes. He once wrote a story about how natives
in the Mekong Delta were less terrified of the Vietcong than of a nine-nostriled
water snake.

Pathetic Spelling

Despite the business and financial bent of The Journal, Mr. Kann rarely wrote
anything about business. He was well known for being thoroughly disorganized (it
was newsworthy if he got to an appointment on time), and any editor who got his
copy learned quickly of his pathetic spelling.

Mr. Kann also harbored managerial aspirations, and in 1976 he was named the
founding publisher and editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. Steadily his
interests swung to the business side of journalism.

His ascent up the managerial ranks was fairly swift. In 1979, he returned to the
United States as assistant to the chairman of Dow Jones, and shortly thereafter
became The Journal's associate publisher. In 1985, he moved up to become
executive vice president of Dow Jones and also took over as president of Dow
Jones' international and magazine groups.

Was Named Publisher

At the beginning of 1989, Mr. Kann was named publisher of The Wall Street
Journal and editorial director of Dow Jones. In July 1989, he was elected
president and chief operating officer.

Colleagues who know him describe him as more of a risk-taker than Mr. Phillips,
but feel he has not yet demonstrated that inclination in his business roles.
''It will be interesting to see if he takes some risks,'' said one former
Journal colleague. ''In other words, has he been held back or has getting to
where he is made him as temperate as everyone else?''

Questions have arisen at Dow Jones about Mr. Kann's marriage to Karen Elliott
House, who had been a Wall Street Journal reporter and editor and is currently
vice president of Dow Jones's international group. A number of Journal employees
said they have wondered about the appropriateness of both of them holding
executive positions.

''I wonder if that issue will become bigger with his latest promotion,'' one
former editor said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 19, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Viewing Chaos in the Capital, Americans Express Outrage

BYLINE: By ROBERTO SURO, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 2372 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Oct. 17


What will happen when Don Campbell, a 67-year-old farmer from Williamsville,
Ill., enters the voting both in November?

''It's sad,'' he said, as he sat atop a roaring tractor waiting to dump a
trailer load of soybeans at the farmers co-op, ''but I feel like going in there
and just voting against every incumbent on the list.''

Though Williamsville is tiny, Mr. Campbell's is not a voice in the wilderness.
In a 1,200-mile journey by automobile from Houston to Chicago, conversations
with nearly 100 people from all walks of life found that the budget battle in
Washington has awakened powerful anxieties and discontent.

The budget stalemate, many people said, is merely indicative of far greater
problems. They expressed a foreboding about the economy, worries and impatience
over the Middle East crisis and, most of all, a bitter disillusionment with
political leadership at all levels. Still, news of the impasse in the nation's
capital, like a magnifying glass that intensifies sunlight into one burning
spot, is focusing people's emotions.

Life Does Go On

''I don't try to keep up with what they're doing in Washington anymore,'' said
Joseph Lewis Tucker, 69, as he tended the roadside stand where he sells produce
near Henning, Tenn. ''There's not a thing I or anyone else can do about it.''

The anger is not so intense that it disrupts the rituals and joys of daily life.
Last weekend there were celebrations for the birth of a calf to Daisy the cow in
the petting zoo at the Piney Woods Fair in Lufkin, Tex. Convention-goers filled
the lobby bar at the Peabody Hotel in Memphis with chatter and laughter. And the
flag was saluted at hundreds of high school football games.

But the mere mention of the budget impasse can ignite uncommon rage. For
instance, Jerry Barber greeted customers at her bookstore in Texarkana, Tex.,
with friendly grace, but when asked whether she was following the news on the
budget, she responded sharply: ''I sure am paying attention, because I know they
can damn well cut that budget. I'll be perfectly willing to listen to talk about
raising taxes, but not until they cut back, and I'm watching them.''

Like many people, Ms. Barber, who is 53 years old, seemed almost entirely
preoccupied with the tax proposals without paying much attention to the spending
cuts under consideration. Except for the proposed gasoline tax, people generally
do not mention any of the specific measures being debated, although there is a
vague sense that the taxing of the rich is at issue. Nor did anyone offer
specific suggestions of their own on how the budget deficit should be reduced.

No one person, event or institution was singled out to bear the blame. President
Bush was criticized not so much for his role in the budget debate as for his
failure to justify the reversal of his ''read my lips'' campaign pledge not to
raise taxes.

''I am a solid Bush supporter,'' said Mark Wilcox, 54, a marketing executive
from Kennebunk, Me., who was in St. Louis on Monday for a business meeting.
''But I think he's really hurt himself because he didn't come out at the
beginning and deal with the people honestly and say: 'I made a mistake. There
will have to be tax increases.' ''

Other people encountered during a five-day journey through a slice of America's
midsection voiced similar feelings.

Houston

In Bush Country, Sense of Betrayal

In Houston's affluent Memorial neighborhood, which George Bush once represented
in Congress, the wives of lawyers, oil-company executives and other
professionals gather each morning in the parking lot of the Pines Presbyterian
Pre-School to chat after they have dropped off their children.

Talking to two friends across the hood of a station wagon, Denise Kleypas, 32,
said: ''I think what's going in Washington is so frustrating. On the one hand,
you have these politicians saying that they are doing what the people want, but
all that means is that each one of them is trying to get their piece of the pie,
their own little programs so they can get re-elected. No one wants to make the
really tough decisions.

''Increased taxes are going to be necessary, that's obvious. But Mr. Bush did
say he was not going to raise taxes. He said that a lot. So now what does it
mean to vote for him or anybody else? It makes you think we need a real shakeup
in the whole system.''

A woman who would identify herself only as Laura P. because ''my husband is an
attorney and he wouldn't like the publicity,'' said: ''We're barely making it
with the taxes we have to pay now, and so it's real aggravating not to know when
the tax increases are going to stop. What gives them the right anyway to raise
taxes when we don't have any say in how it is spent?''

Another woman who declined to give her name, interjected: ''I saw a lady the
other day buying beer and potato chips with food stamps, and then she drove away
from the market in a $25,000 car. It wouldn't bother me so much what they were
spending if I thought they were halfway careful about how they spent it.''

She added, ''I don't blame Bush or Congress more than the other. I think the
blame is on everyone who let it get to this point, including we the people who
have allowed the politicians to run our lives.''

Jefferson, Tex.

Yellow Ribbons, Fading Spirits

Train whistles hooted in the distance, and the sweetly fetid smell of Big
Cypress Bayou blew in on the evening breeze as the Jefferson High School band
gave a stumbling rendition of ''The Star-Spangled Banner.'' The missed notes did
nothing to diminish the cheers that marked the start of a Friday night football
game in Jefferson, Tex.

For many youngsters like those at the game, joining the armed forces has
traditionally been the fastest way out of East Texas poverty, and yellow ribbons
adorn many homes and storefronts in remembrance of Jefferson people who are now
in the Middle East.

Military service took on a new meaning this summer. ''All of a sudden, signing
up doesn't just mean a paycheck and job training,'' said John Wright, a
42-year-old speech teacher who was collecting tickets at the gate of the
football field.

He added: ''Everybody thought going to fight Iraq was going to be another
quick-and-dirty, like Panama or Grenada. That was great. Now it's sinking in
that they might go play in the sand dunes, and no one is really interested in
signing up to fight a war.''

'Wish They'd Hurry Up'

Bo Byrd, an 18-year-old junior who has a cousin and four friends serving in the
operation, has long planned to enlist. ''I think if we just go fight this war we
went over there to fight, we wouldn't be having the problem we have now of those
men sitting in the desert for no reason,'' he said.

Tugging on the brim of his camouflage hat, he said, ''I wish they'd hurry up and
do something, because a couple of more months and there's going to be no sense
to it.''

Kenneth R. Carver, 67, retired to Jefferson after 37 years in the Air Force.
Wearing an old flight jacket and waiting for the game to begin, he too was
worried: ''If it continues on as the status quo, you are going to see the
support break up both here and around the world. It will become a political
problem, and that's bad.''

The budget impasse, he said, ''is just making things worse because it's draining
away people's faith in the Government just when we may need every bit of it for
this crisis overseas.''

Asked if he had a solution for the budget problem, Mr. Carver thought for a
moment and then said gravely, ''What I'd like to see, and I know it can't
happen, is for every single member of Congress to get kicked out so we could
start with a whole new group.''

Arkadelphia, Ark.

Sick of Hearing The Politicians

Arkadelphia, Ark., population 9,150, is a little more prosperous than many of
the farming towns in the Southern Arkansas clay country because it is home to
two universities and a little manufacturing.

Ruben Fendley's two-chair barbershop sits in a shaded neighborhood of old
clapboard houses. It is a busy place on a Saturday afternoon. A small, neatly
groomed man of 58, Mr. Fendley is dismayed.

''No one has bothered to explain what this budget thing is all about,'' he said.
''Basically, all you hear is the Republicans blaming the Democrats and the
Democrats blaming the Republicans.''

Jimmy White, a 57-year-old machine tool operator who was getting his hair cut,
broke in. ''Heck, all they want is more money to spend around so they can get
themselves re-elected, and that's all it is.''

Asked if there were any politicians that any of those present admired, Mr. White
replied, ''The last one I liked was Everett Dirksen,'' the Illinois Republican
Senator who died in 1969. Mr. Fendley said, ''I can't think of any of them I've
liked recently, because I've never admired a man who is not doing 100 percent of
what he's supposed to be doing, and none of them are.''

Laws that would limit terms of office might help, the barber said, because then
''they'd know they were going back into the rat race, and that'd keep them in
touch with real life.''

Memphis

Problems Persist, Gnawing at Hope

In Memphis, the Foote Homes, a public housing project built in the 1950's, is
about a mile from where the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated in
1968. On a balmy Sunday morning, Fred Butler and some of his friends, all of
them black, gathered on a sidewalk to talk about how a bad situation for black
Americans was getting worse despite the opening of some major opportunities
since the days of the civil rights struggle.

Mr. Butler, 50, who prefers to be known as Fast Freddie, complained that
''they're coming around saying the Government needs more money, but then they
send all that money to fight a war over yonder when the main thing is, they
should have solved all the problems around here first. It's just like Vietnam.''
Vernon Yancey, a 33-year-old truck driver, said: ''I don't see how they can be
hurting for money when the rich are doing so good. Everyone else is just hanging
on, especially the black people, and they are the ones who get hit when the
Government says it's got money problems. Look at the gas. They raise the prices.
They raise the taxes. Who gets hit? It's the poor folks. The rich don't even
know what gas costs.''

Sitting in a metal folding chair, Mr. Butler acted as something of a moderator
during a long conversation that others drifted in and out of. At one point he
said, ''Let's admit it, black people are having more things than anytime else.''

''Yeah,'' agreed Ollie Boxley, who is 35 and works with Mr. Yancey, ''kids today
have all kinds of opportunities we didn't have when we were coming up.''

''And they don't want it,'' Mr. Yancey said. ''They don't want to go to school.
They're too happy on the street.''

After a moment, he spoke up again. ''You hear some people blaming the poor folks
for getting too much Government money, and so they say, 'Cut the programs.'
That's not right, because the seniors don't get too much; the women going crazy
trying to raise kids without a man, they don't get too much; a lot of people who
need a place to stay don't get anything. Who's to blame when they get cut?''

Cape Girardeau, Mo.

Insecure Feelings Transcend Taxes

Around Cape Girardeau, Mo., the major worry is a widely publicized prediction
that in early December an earthquake will strike along the New Madrid fault,
which runs through the area. Worries over the economy are far more diffuse, yet
many in the Sunday afternoon crowd at the West Park Mall, a big suburban retail
center, said they were looking more than buying.

''The last several years have been such a good time economically that people
feel they'll have to ride out whatever's coming by tightening up a bit and
making do,'' said Lou Ann Hopkins, 36.

Her husband, Mark, 35, who works in the management of a tobacco company, said,
''I guess we've cut down some purchases recently because you have to wonder how
it will be if we get a recession with all these tax increases on top of it.''

Lil Reynolds, a 51-year-old bank teller, had stopped by her favorite dress shop
to check out a sale. ''I've noticed people are opening savings accounts, putting
away money, paying off consumer loans, those sorts of things, because they are
starting to get scared that the economy's going sour,'' she said.

She added: ''I think everyone is blaming the Government right now because of the
budget. They spend so much money they don't have to spend that I'm upset, too,
and I'm upset about what it's doing to the country.''

Added Diane Huntze, a sales clerk, ''Yeah, but they won't give up their spending
ways.''

Chicago

In the Middle, Feeling Left Out

The intersection of Cicero and Milwaukee Avenues on Chicago's Northwest Side is
at the center of an old but seemingly vibrant working-class neighborhood. But
inside one of the many new commercial establishments, the Seven Cousins sandwich
shop, recently opened by two sisters, Marge Sergo and Karen LaPalermo, there is
gloom.

''We both work other jobs,'' Mrs. LaPalermo said. ''We're doing this because it
takes a family not two incomes anymore, but three or four to make ends meet.''

As the two put Halloween decorations on the walls of their little restaurant,
Mrs. Sergo complained: ''As usual, Washington is not going to be much help. The
Government doesn't do a thing for the middle man. The poor get welfare, and the
rich get loopholes. Meanwhile, the middle man is going to disappear.''

Mrs. LaPalermo added: ''What I can't believe is that they were talking about
cutting the benefits to the old people, They got to live on almost nothing as it
is.''

Mrs. Sergo had a theory: ''I like some of what President Bush has done, but
let's face it: he comes from money, and he lives with money, and the Republicans
are always good at protecting the rich and cutting Social Security and other
stuff that helps hard-working people.''

''To me,'' said Mrs. LaPalermo, ''neither side does anything for you, so it
doesn't matter how you vote. We're worried about where the country's going, but
we can't change anything, not anything. It's scary. It's not supposed to be this
way.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ruben Fendley: Barber, Arkadelphia, Ark. - ''Basically, all you
hear is the Republicans blaming the Democrats and the Democrats blaming the
Republicans.''; Lil Reynolds: Bank teller, Cape Girardeau, Mo. - ''I've noticed
people are opening savings accounts, putting away money, paying off consumer
loans, those sorts of things.''; Fred Butler: Unemployed, Memphis - ''They're
coming around saying the Government needs more money, but then they send all
that money to fight a war.'' (Photographs by Roberto Suro/The New York Times)
(pg. A1); Joseph Lewis Tucker: Produce salesman, Henning, Tenn. - ''I don't try
to keep up with what they're doing in Washington anymore, because they are going
to do whatever they want to anyway.''; Don Campbell: Farmer, Williamsville, Ill.
- ''It's sad, b

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 20, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
U.S. TO SEND TANKS FROM NATO TO GULF

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 508 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 19


The Pentagon said today that it was shipping 400 to 500 of its top battle tanks
to Saudi Arabia from storage depots in Germany.

The M-1A1 tanks going to Saudi Arabia, drawn from stocks originally intended for
NATO forces to use in a war against the Soviet Union, are equipped with
120-millimeter guns and have better armor and protection against chemical
warfare than the Army's other main tank, the M1 model, which has a
105-millimeter gun.

Pentagon officials said it would take about 17 days to ship the tanks to Saudi
Arabia, bringing the total number of American M1 and M-1A1 tanks there to more
than 1,000. Iraq has about 3,500 tanks in Kuwait and southern Iraq.

Moving the advanced tanks to Saudi Arabia vastly improves American armored
strength in the Persian Gulf region and reflects the diminished threat the
Soviet Union poses to NATO forces in Europe.

Sale of Tanks Near Approval

Pentagon officials also said the Administration was in the final stages of
approving a previously announced sale of 220 older M-60 tanks in Europe to Saudi
Arabia, Oman and Bahrain.

The Defense Department also said the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen.
Colin L. Powell, would go next week to Saudi Arabia, where he is expected to
discuss with American commanders plans to rotate United States troops out of the
kingdom.

Defense officials are drafting plans to relieve desert-weary troops with fresh
forces from the United States and Europe. The plans call for troops to be
rotated after six to nine months in the field, officials said.

If troops based in Europe as part of NATO are sent to the Persian Gulf, it will
be the first large-scale deployment of those forces out of Europe since NATO was
formed after World War II. Many of the Army's most modern armored units are
based in Germany.

A Marine Corps spokesman, Lieut. Col. Fred Peck, said the Marine Commandant,
Gen. Alfred M. Gray Jr., tentatively planned to rotate entire units, not
individuals, as was done in the Vietnam War.

Maintaining Units' Cohesiveness

''We essentially want to replicate the force that's there now and maintain
cohesiveness,'' Colonel Peck said. The Marines have about 33,000 troops in Saudi
Arabia and 11,000 more on ships in the Persian Gulf.

Colonel Peck said troops drawn from California, Virginia, South Carolina, North
Carolina and Hawaii would be dispatched by January at the earliest.

The 82d Airborne Division, a rapid deployment force that was among the first
units sent to Saudi Arabia after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2, is
expected to be replaced by a heavier armored unit better suited for combat
against Iraqi tanks in occupied Kuwait.

Army officials said the 82d Airborne, a light assault unit, could return to its
home base at Fort Bragg, N.C., by the end of the year.

The Navy, following its regular deployment schedule, is sending the aircraft
carrier Midway and six other ships from their home port in Japan to replace the
carrier Independence battle group, now stationed in the Gulf of Oman, next
month.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: An American marine, second from left, covering his ears
yesterday as a Saudi soldier fired an anti-tank weapon during a joint live-fire
exercise. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 21, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSION;
Thousands March in 16 Cities to Protest U.S. Intervention in Gulf

BYLINE: By EVELYN NIEVES

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 489 words


Thousands of people rallied in New York and 15 other American cities yesterday
to protest the United States' military buildup in the Persian Gulf. It was the
largest demonstration against the American presence in the gulf since President
Bush first sent troops after Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2.

Similar rallies were held in other nations, including Australia, Canada,
England, Italy and Panama, said rally organizers from the Manhattan-based
Coalition Against the U.S. Intervention in the Middle East.

'Won't Fight for Texaco'

In Manhattan, a parade of marchers six blocks long wound its way through midtown
before rallying at Times Square in the late afternoon. Many chanted, ''Hell no,
we won't go; we won't fight for Texaco'' or ''Money for peace, not for war.''

The police estimated the crowd at about 5,000; marchers said there were more
than 25,000. The march was peaceful, with three arrests on minor charges
reported.

The march included contingents representing students' groups, Vietnam veterans,
senior citizens, Palestine Liberation Organization supporters, labor groups and
homeless people from Manhattan's Lower East Side. There were 10 military
reservists, including two who have been called for active duty and have refused
to go.

Former United States Attorney General Ramsey Clark, who formed the coalition,
was joined at the head of the march by Michael Moore, a documentary film maker.
There were speeches before and after the march, including two by the military
reservists now considered absent without leave.

Stephanie Atkinson, 23 years old, of Murphysboro, Ill,, joined the Army Reserves
six years ago to pay for college, she said, and was called to active duty in
Saudi Arabia last week. ''I believe in the economic sanctions and in honest
negotiations, not war,'' she said. ''If I have to go to jail, I'll go.''

Organizers said they began planning for the march after a speech by Mr. Clark on
Sept. 13 at Cooper Union drew 2,500 to an auditorium that seats 1,000.

Leo Brody, a retired typographer who came from Long Island with about 20 other
retired men and women, said: ''Isn't this proof that the people are not 100
percent behind Bush?''

Mumtaz Hussein, a Pakistani whose mother now lives in Kuwait, said many Kuwaitis
supported Iraq's invasion. ''They are happy that the oppressive regime is
removed,'' he said. ''My mother's family has been there 20 years and they've had
no rights there. We would be happy if the same thing happened to Saudi Arabia.''

Mr. Clark told the marchers that the turnout was ''terrific.'' ''I hope they're
listening in the White House,'' he said.

In Washington, 125 people rallied at the White House to demonstrate against the
deployment. The White House declined to comment on the demonstration.

The Manhattan rally was the largest. Organizers said about 1,000 marchers
gathered in San Fancisco, 200 in Cleveland, 200 in Boston and 100 in Atlanta.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Demonstrators marching along Broadway to protest United States
involvement in the Persian Gulf. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 21, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Dinkins Calls Board 'Peculiar'

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 34, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 344 words


For a year beginning in July 1972, David N. Dinkins served as president of the
New York City Board of Elections. For nearly two years before that he served as
counsel to his predecessor, Maurice J. O'Rourke.

Then, as now, the board was sharply criticized for its handling of local
elections and its political deals. Without public bid, contracts to haul voting
machines from warehouses to polling places went to the companies chosen by
county leaders. Then, as now, each employee was a patronage worker.

Through his press secretary, Albert Scardino, Mr. Dinkins recalled last week
that the agency was ''fairly antiquated and peculiar.''

''The whole system was political; it was established as a political system,''
Mr. Scardino quoted the Mayor as saying.

When he became president, Mr. Dinkins defended the board against the allegation
that an election had been stolen from Allard K. Lowenstein, an anti-Vietnam War
organizer who lost a June 1972 Congressional primary to the Brooklyn machine's
candidate, Representative John J. Rooney, by 890 votes. Mr. Lowenstein's
supporters charged that board workers had permitted wholesale voter fraud. A
state appeals court later ruled that at least 1,920 ''irregular'' votes had been
cast and ordered a new election, which Mr. Lowenstein also lost.

Mr. Dinkins acknowledged then that there had been ''administrative failures,''
but added, ''We're not absolved of all blame, but what I deplore is the
inference that there is deliberate fraud in the board with respect to any
election.''

Later, Mr. Dinkins, a Democrat from Harlem, fought a move that diluted the power
of Manhattan and Brooklyn political organizations over the board.

At the time, the agency was run by four commissioners - a Republican and a
Democrat each from Brooklyn and Manhattan. The State Legislature expanded the
board to include representatives from the two party organizations in the other
three boroughs as well. At the time Mr. Dinkins said such an expansion would
scuttle his reform efforts by adding even more politicians to the mix.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 21, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Control of the Ballot Box: For Parties or the Public?

BYLINE: By MARTIN GOTTLIEB with DEAN BAQUET

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2771 words


Beyond the waste of money and appearance of unfairness, the machine politics and
patronage of New York City's election system limit the ability of people to vote
and the range of choices before them at a time of broad political evolution in
the city.

In no other major American city do citizens face the same combination of
impediments to registering to vote and running for office. In few other
jurisdictions are elections run under so total a system of mailroom-to-boardroom
patronage.

In the eyes of detractors like State Senator Franz S. Leichter, a Manhattan
Democrat, the board that runs the city's elections is little more than ''a soup
kitchen for politicians'' structured ''on the flawed concept that the political
parties, rather than the people, have the greatest stake in the election
process.''

'Incredibly Complex'

The state laws that govern elections, Sherrilynn Iflin of the NAACP Legal
Defense Fund said, ''are the most incredibly complex for getting a candidate on
the ballot - so much so you just can't believe this is taking place in a
democratic society.''

Gov. Mario M. Cuomo's counsel, Evan A. Davis, said, ''A person coming down from
Mars and looking at this law would think we really don't want people to vote.''

The effects of the current system, the critics say, are manifold.

Among the nation's industrial states, New York had one of the lowest percentages
of adults registered to vote, 64 percent, in the last Presidential election,
even though citizens are permitted to register through mail and on the street.
Yet, according to census figures, Illinois had 74 percent, Massachussetts 72
percent and Michigan 88 percent.

Sagging Turnout

In the city, the rate of registration is 10 percentage points lower than in the
entire state, with at least two million of the more than five million eligible
citizens in the five boroughs unregistered. While population shifts and other
factors, including increased immigration, help account for this, flaws in the
election law, like a primary registration deadline that is the most restrictive
in the country, are ''a significant part of the problem,'' Mr. Davis said.

The lag in registration comes as New York falls behind other states and the
nation in voter turnout. In 1948, New York ranked 13th among the states; in
1988, it ranked 41st.

The vast majority of elections in the city, particularly at the neighborhood
level, are not seriously contested, with many candidates tossed off the ballot
for highly technical legal errors or scared away by the prospect of an
aggressive challenge to nominating petitions by a county political machine.
Campaign managers say fighting such challenges can cost as much as $25,000.

In last month's primary elections, which attracted little voter interest, 382
petition challenges were filed, a number unapproached anywhere else.

In any given year, according to the West Publishing Company, which compiles
national records on legal cases, a third to nearly half of the nation's
election-law cases come out of New York, chiefly from the city, a testament to
the litigation-provoking technicalities of the law. The effect, numerous
political analysts say, is to block participation in elections rather than
encourage it.

The situation is particularly critical now. Under the new City Charter, New York
is on the eve of its largest expansion of elective office in memory, with 16 new
City Council seats to be established in time for next year's election.
Meanwhile, by almost all accounts, the population continues to swell with the
same poor people and minority groups that the Board of Elections - which has
only one black member and one Hispanic member -has long been accused of failing
to register and of otherwise disenfranchising.

For example, the Center for Law and Social Justice at Medgar Evers College in
Brooklyn has sued the board, charging that during the 1988 Presidential primary,
there were systematic irregularities and voting machine breakdowns in black
districts that were strongholds of the Rev. Jesse Jackson. Board officials say
there is no intent to disenfranchise any voters.

Running Elections
Rules, More Rules and Accusations

The Bronx Democratic chairman, George Friedman, said of the board: ''It's clear
that it works. I did not have one complaint come to me this past Primary Day.
This is very, very significant, and it indicates the board is making great
strides to curing problems that do exist.''

But critics argue that as useful as some of the reforms have been there is much
more to do. Further, they say, the improvements undertaken board have barely
begun to confront what they view as the heart of the agency's problem - its
unabashed patronage.

It was the bipartisan structure of the board, which was set up at the height of
Tammany Hall decades ago, that was intended to provide checks and balances. But,
in the opinion of many, it has only limited usefulness, particularly in an
overwhelmingly one-party city where far more disputes take place among
Democratics than between Democrats and Republicans.

''I don't understand how you can run a nonpartisan election process where
virtually every employee is beholden not to the director of elections, but to a
partisan politician who virtually controls their salary,'' said William C.
Kimberling, deputy director of the Federal Election Commission's National
Clearinghouse on Election Administration.

El Salvador and Soviet Union

In New York City, he pointed out: ''Some of the highest election officials are
virtually appointed by party chairmen and are more accountable perhaps to the
party chairmen than to the process they are charged with administering. I'm not
aware of any other jurisdiction that does it this way anywhere in this
country.''

Even in Chicago, notorious in political lore for Election Day shenanigans,
county elections workers are civil servants, a practice Mr. Kimberling endorsed
in a monograph that 15 countries, including El Salvador and the Soviet Union,
have used to help restructure their voting systems. The monograph states: ''It
is important that the professional staff be specially protected by an unbiased
civil service in trade for their agreement not to participate publicly in
political matters.''

Nobody denies that patronage drives the city's election process. But there is
sharp debate over whether this helps or hinders the democratic process.

Board officials say it is the very presence of loyal patronage workers that
makes it work. ''This agency gives you more bang for the buck in terms of
efficency than any other agency in New York,'' said Arnold R. Thompson, a former
board member and now the deputy chief clerk in the board's Staten Island office.

''Civil servants have no incentives to do anything,'' Mr. Thompson said. ''These
people out here have incentives. They would never want to embarrass their county
leaders. If something goes wrong out there, a worker is going to get a call from
their district leader. They're going to say, 'Mary, act more polite,' or
whatever, 'or you'll lose your job.' ''

'Jungle in Vietnam'

But insurgents are more than dubious. ''There is no way that there's a single
standard,'' said Vincent Marchiselli, an insurgent Democrat in the Bronx who
once served as chairman of the Assembly election law committee. ''For us to
appear before this board is like going into a jungle in Vietnam.''

Even Mr. Thompson acknowledges the inevitable bias in the system.

''Insurgents always start at a disadvantage,'' he explained in an interview.
''I'm going to answer any questions they legitimately have. If they don't ask
the question, I'm not going to go out of my way to provide information, largely
because I don't know who they are.''

He said he would take a stab at treating insurgents fairly. ''I'm going to try
and probably not succeed,'' said Mr. Thompson, a former teacher at a Lutheran
school. ''There's nothing sinister about that. I'm telling you that as a
churchman. I enjoy the company of my Christian churchmen more than I do of
anyone else. That's me. If one of them were to visit me here, I'll probably have
more conversation.'' In the course of small talk, Mr. Thompson said, ''I'll
probably say there was an insurgent in yesterday, and he was looking for
whatever.''

'Cronyism and Nepotism'

The wariness that many insurgents show about such a political board -
particularly one that holds many of its discussions and takes many of its votes
in private - emerged publicly last year when the former United States Attorney
in Manhattan, Rudolph W. Giuliani, about to enter the Republican primary for
mayor, attacked the appointment of Vincent J. Velella to the board by his son,
State Senator Guy J. Velella. The Senator, who is the Bronx Republican chairman,
was supporting Mr. Giuliani's opponent.

Mr. Giuliani criticized the appointment as the product of ''cronyism and
nepotism'' and accused the senior Mr. Velella of having ''an apparent close
personal relationship'' with the convicted mobsters Anthony (Fat Tony) Salerno
and Vincent DiNapoli, both of whom he has represented as a lawyer for years.

The Senator immediately accused Mr. Giuliani of practicing guilt by association.
His father's relationships were those of a lawyer and his clients, he said.

There is probably no one who defends the local elections process in its entirety
or who can quite explain why it has managed to entrench itself while other
fossilized systems have been reshaped. Yet efforts to change the system usually
get next to nowhere in Albany, where Mr. Cuomo has proposed elaborate
legislative packages, parts of which are passed in the Democratic-controlled
Assembly and almost none of which get through the Republican-controlled Senate.

Power of Patronage
Partisan Panel And Equal Access

The Republicans have proposed some changes of their own but have been cool to
many others, arguing that well-defined restrictions and guidelines are needed to
prevent fraud.

As a result, New York's election law remains the longest in the nation, packed
with arcane details and regulations and such much-criticized provisions as the
requirement that voters must register 60 days before a primary in order to vote.


Cuomo's Executive Order

Other government registration efforts can best be characterized as halting. For
instance, the state-mandated requirement that local boards open polling places
for two days of voter registration prior to the registration deadline costs
about $2 million to carry out in the city. In 1986, city officials figured it
cost about $82 to register each of the 14,600 voters who signed up in the
effort.

A national group called Human Serve, which advocates making voter registration
easier, has proposed an effort to register voters at a variety of government
offices. Despite an executive order from Mr. Cuomo, the program has been frozen
by the bickering at the State Board of Elections.

At the city board, the executive director, Daniel DeFrancesco, said in an
interview he had made a number of administrative overhauls, many involving such
basic management procedures as increased computerization, written job
descriptions and requiring that people show up for work on time. He said he had
accomplished this despite a tight budget, which is about $30 million a year.

''I'm breaking tradition in more ways than one,'' Mr. DeFrancesco said. He also
pointed to efforts to computerize registration files, go outside the party
organizations for employees and election day inspectors when the political
machines cannot supply them, and finally, to move closer to a contract for new
electronic voting machines.

Overlap of Interests
Endurance Of Political Ties

Ties to the county organizations run so deep that at least four board members
are related to past or present political leaders. And along with the
commissioners, the highest ranking staff members of the board are steeped in
partisan politics and, quite legally, make regular contributions to political
organizations.

For example, Alfred S. Pantaleone, the Brooklyn Republican boss, is the deputy
executive director of the Elections Board. Lillian Bachmann, deputy chief clerk
of the Queens office of the board, heads the the Queens Republican Party's
executive committee. Jon R. Del Giorno, the administrative manager of the board,
is on the executive committee of the Staten Island Democratic organization and
traveled to Washington this year to present its potential candidates for
Congress to the Democratic National Committee.

Typically, board officials who serve as party officials as well say they can
perform as impartial professionals.

Particular Problems

Mr. Del Giorno, for instance, said his position with the Staten Island party did
not influence his work in any way because he makes no decisions that affect a
person's candidacy.

''It would be different if I was a commissioner, then I should at least
abstain'' from decisions affecting Staten Island Democrats, he said, a belief
that the commissioners themselves do not appear to share.

But the overlap of interests can present particular problems in an agency that
takes great direction from party leaders.

Mr. DeFrancesco's predecessor as executive director, Betty Dolen, explained that
she made a point of always following political ''protocol.'' If someone was not
performing satisfactorily, rather than speak directly with the person, she would
call the county or district leader who recommended the employee.

But some of her employees were district and county leaders themselves.

James R. McManus, a Democratic district leader from the Clinton area of
Manhattan, is a senior administrator at the board. Mrs. Dolen recalled her
frustration at trying to order Mr. McManus to work.

''I would tell him he has to come in like everybody else,'' she said. ''He just
never bothered to answer.'' Mr. McManus acknowledged that he did not work full
time under Mrs. Dolen, but he said this was because she believed him to be a
political threat and gave him nothing to do. He said he now works 9 to 5 under
Mr. DeFrancesco. ''I'm not saying I don't go out on political meetings,'' he
said, ''but I put in a full day.''

Mr. DeFrancesco said that while Mr. McManus had not always worked a full day in
the past, he had recently started to do so.

Mr. DeFrancesco got his first job with the board in the 1960'sthrough Frank G.
Rossetti, the last of the old Tammany Hall leaders. In the last two years, he
has made contributions totaling $1,250 to the Democratic organizations in
Manhattan and the Bronx and on Staten Island. In the same period, Mrs. Dolen
contributed $1,400 to the Manhattan Democratic organization. Mr. DeFrancesco
said that he had made his contribution to the Staten Island party at a
fund-raising dinner for a politician he was close to.

''The others, since I'm a Bronx Democrat and I was a Manhattan Democrat, I think
it's out of habit,'' he said. ''I don't think it shows partiality. I think I
have a good reputation, that I'm fair and just. I don't think there's anything
wrong with contributing to your party.''

Backdating Document

Insurgents claim that clerks can help particular candidates in any number of
ways.

The most blatant case they cite involved Michael Sternlieb, the Brooklyn
Democrat assigned to keep the official book in which Brooklyn election documents
are filed. Mr. Sternlieb pleaded guilty to charges that he backdated a legal
document that permitted Assemblyman Roger L. Green, Democrat of Brooklyn, to run
as a Liberal Party candidate in 1986. Mr. Green was removed from the Democratic
primary in a petition challenge, and he was forced to run on another ticket.

Prosecutors contend that Mr. Green filed the document too late to qualify and
that without Mr. Sternlieb's efforts he would have been ineligible to run. Mr.
Green was never accused of wrongdoing, and he has contended that the document
was filed on time.

Surveying this terrain - the political hiring, cronyism and appearances of
favoritism - critics like Mr. Leichter argue that any administrative changes
will have marginal effect unless the agency's underpinning of patronage is
challenged. The concept driving the agency, that Democrats and Republicans will
keep each other in check, is the basic problem, he said.

''The theory was they would watch each other,'' he said. ''The fact is they both
gang up and support each other to keep down the insurgents in each party.

''The concept is flawed. It's not the political parties that have the greatest
stake in elections. It's the public.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: A Perennial Maze: New York's Election System
Last of four articles.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Election officials, foreground, at a polling place for the 85th
District in Co-op City in the Bronx last month. From left were Sadie
Herschfield, Lisa Cuker and Edith Jacker. (Eddie Hausner/The New York Times);
Maps: U.S. by states, indicating number of days before an election a resident
must register to vote; percentage of voting-age population registered to vote
(Source: National Clearinghouse on Election Administration) (pg. 34)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 21, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CRAFTS;
Museum's Show Puts the Spotlight on the Comeback of Craftsmanship

BYLINE: By BETTY FREUDENHEIM

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 15, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 997 words

DATELINE: OCEANVILLE


CRAFTSMANSHIP is making a comeback in the craft world. This is the refined
craftmanship that speaks of well-honed skills, a sensitivity to materials and
the designs to show them off.

Of course, the basic techniques and craftsmen never really disappeared, but in
the last decade so much of the contemporary craft work on display in museums and
galleries appeared to be the work of artists who just happened to ''paint'' on
clay, glass or silk rather than canvases.

The ''New Jersey Arts Annual: Crafts'' exhibition at the Noyes Museum here pays
tribute to 31 craft artists of this state who handle their mediums with the
finesse of Renaissance masters while expressing themselves in voices of the
90's. The comparison is apt. Several of these artists employ such historical
techniques as Aubusson tapestry weaving, stained glass and cloisonne enameling.

This museum provides an ideal location for the show. There is no crowding of the
work in the large gallery space, so the viewer can examine the 44 individual
pieces without being distracted by neighboring objects. Peaked ceilings with
clerestory windows provide a soft natural light; the mood is tranquil, inviting
contemplation.

Jurors for the exhibition were Lois Moran, director of the American Craft
Council in New York and editor of American Craft magazine, and Anne R. Fabbri,
director of the Noyes Museum.

James D. Jansma's nearly 2-by-2-foot jar in the museum's central lobby is like a
leitmotif of the show. The massive dimensions of the Layton artist's jar are
awesome to anyone who has tried to manipulate even the smallest ball of clay on
a ceramist's wheel. Yet this form is simple and controlled. A kiln stoked with
wood allowed its glazes and clay to determine their own modulated patterns. The
result is almost atavistic; it is not hard to imagine this pot being dusted off
in an archeological dig.

By contrast, a nearby coffee table by Sergei Gritsay of Piscataway presents the
essence of a machine age and the Constructivist art of 1917 in Russia, when
artists added gears, beams and bolts to their work. The massive metal block
supports, central pipe and metal rods of this table appear sturdy enough to bear
thousands of pounds rather than the rectangular plate glass that tops it.

The elegant lines and meticulous workmanship of John Hein's cabinets, like the
one in this show, are receiving national recognition. This Trenton furniture
maker has just learned that he was awarded a National Endowment for the Arts
Visual Artist Fellowship, the first in 10 years to go to a New Jersey craft
artist.

A shallow, blown-glass bowl, ''Nova 8'' by Leonard DiNardo of Parsippany, is
indeed like a ''temporary star.'' Its brilliant colors glow as they radiate
around a central sphere. How far this artist has moved from the figurative bowl
depicting Vietnam soldiers, which he showed in last year's New Jersey Annual in
the Newark Museum. Here the potential of his medium has been explored and
exalted.

Barbara Fiedler's ''Kayenta'' basket typifies the natural textures so typical of
coiled basketry. Hundreds of raffia stitches hold its pine needles in place. A
pattern of stems and tips emerges as a zigzag pattern down the side. A shaman
might explain the symbolism of this Absecon artist's design as a prayer for
lightning accompanied by rain.

Basketry has won new respect in the last few years. At first glance, Lincoln
Seitzman of West Long Branch seems to have interlaced reeds to conform with
traditiona basket designs. But look closer. He has executed a woodworking tour
de force by cutting and gluing minuscule wooden segments together in a perfect
re-creation of the humbler antecedents.

There are 1,440 pieces in his ''Petrified Market Basket'' and 2,800 tiny pieces
in the ''Petrified Sewing Basket.'' Perfectly matched edges and curved contours
transform this Herculean task into handsome work.

Holly Stults of Beach Haven formed a pendant of gold with a cabochon stone and
black onyx beads in ''Metamorphosis.'' The three wings seem about to revolve
rather than flutter off with the breeze. This work stands far apart from the
safety-pin necklaces of the 80's, which required patience but no metalworking
experience.

A cloisonne cup by Marilyn Druin of Freehold should not be overlooked because of
its small size: less than 3 inches high. She has created a poetry of lines that
flow across the softly mottled surfaces. Her spontaneous effect belies the long
hours of repeated firings required for this technique.

''Balnakiel,'' a tapestry by Beverly Godfrey of Princeton, portrays a pensive
young woman leaning against a wall of lichen-covered rocks, which separate her
from the sea. Hundreds of yarn-wrapped bobbins once hung from the warp threads
as this weaver made slow progress on this demanding work. One square foot would
require days to complete.

And there are joy and humor in the midst of all this earnest work. J. Kenneth
Leap of Runnemede features a queen's face on his stained glass panel, but she
looks out from a playing card motif, not a palace window. A self-portrait of the
artist depicts him in a Renaissance wardrobe, grasping a palette. ''The Joker''
title is spelled out over his head with a broad grin to emphasize it.

An oversized ceramic ''Rabbit'' by Marguerite Brennan of Fair Lawn could serve
as a sentinel for the gallery. One ear is raised as he emerges cautiously from
his hole. But the viewer senses that any loud noises might send the furry gray
creature scurrying back to his dark retreat.

The exhibition is sponsored by the New Jersey State Council on the Arts and the
six major art museums of the state. Two shows take place each year in
alternating sequence: fine arts in spring-summer and crafts in fall-winter.

The show continues through Dec. 16. The Noyes Museum is on Lily Lake Road, just
off Route 9. Hours are 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. Wednesday through Sunday. Admission
(free on Fridays) is $2, or $1 for the elderly and 50 cents for students.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos; ''Nova 8,'' a work in blown glass by Leonard DiNardo;
''Petrified Market Basket,'' a construction of 1,440 pieces of birch, zebrawood
and amapa by Lincoln Seitzman (Noyes Museum)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 21, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Body Count Was Their Most Important Product

BYLINE: By MORLEY SAFER; Morley Safer is a co-editor of ''60 Minutes'' and the
author of ''Flashbacks: On Returning to Vietnam.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 19, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 882 words



THE PHOENIX PROGRAM
By Douglas Valentine.
Illustrated. 479 pp. New York:
William Morrow & Company. $24.95.

The Vietnam War ranks among the most bizarre episodes of this century. And no
part of it was more insanely conceived and executed than the Phoenix program.

''The Phoenix Program,'' by Douglas Valentine, documents the results of an
unseemly liaison between impotent military tactics and money-logged technology.
According to those who formulated it, this monster child with its computer brain
and assassin's instinct would make the Vietcong wither from within. Not by
attacking guerrillas in the field, but by destroying infrastructure - a term, as
Mr. Valentine explains, used to refer to ''those civilians suspected of
supporting North Vietnamese and Vietcong soldiers. . . . Central to Phoenix is
the fact that it targeted civilians, not soldiers.'' ''Infrastructure'' was the
hobgoblin of the Central Intelligence Agency and the State Department. The
military mouthed the word - a shopworn mantra - only to pacify the safari-suited
civilians who actually ran the war. For the military dreamed of head-on
assaults; it was the civilians who blathered on about infrastructure. The
intention of the planners who devised Phoenix was to ''neutralize'' this
infrastructure - which meant, in practice, to kill, capture or coerce into
defection those figures identified as belonging to it.

So out into the countryside went teams of accountants and case officers,
Vietnamese assassins and their American counterparts, with bags and bags of
money, the whole effort tethered to a computer in the United States Embassy in
Saigon. And from the embassy came reports again and again that the program was
working. Body count became our most important product. The bodies turned out to
be just about anyone who got in the way, sometimes even genuine, certifiable
''infrastructures.''

The Phoenix program became a playground for the demented fringes of both
American and Vietnamese society. It was a brothel for both blood lust and
printout lust, featuring a weird crew of characters: grizzled Army officers,
bespectacled accountants and bloodless computer modelers. It had its own air
force, training camps and interrogation centers. Torture chambers, if you like.

It is the stuff of both awful history and glorious black comedy. It needs to be
chronicled by an A. J. P. Taylor or an Evelyn Waugh, or both - not by Douglas
Valentine.

Mr. Valentine - the author as well of ''The Hotel Tacloban,'' about life in a
Japanese prisoner of war camp - has written as turgid and dense and often
incomprehensible a book as I have ever had the misfortune to open. Somewhere in
those almost 500 gray pages there is stuff of great importance: examples of
human folly, courage, stupidity and greed.

Mr. Valentine handles these epic themes as so much fodder from a database - not
unlike the paper end of the Phoenix program itself. He has interviewed scores of
participants in Phoenix, but instead of putting the interviews into some kind of
historical (or even logical) framework - it's called editing - he has simply
transcribed them. And if Phoenix acted like Phoenix talked, then the American
intervention in Vietnam was even more inept than those of us who were witnesses
believed. Here is a typical eye-glazing example: ''Said Dillard: 'Well, I am a
military man, and I have a job to get done.' And from that day on the Field
Police and their Public Safety advisers were the Phoenix program's scapegoats in
the Delta. At their expense Dillard achieved peace between the CIA and MACV in
the Delta. He convinced the CIA that by sharing its information, military
resources could be used against the VCI. In exchange for supporting the CIA's
attack on the VCI, the military benefited from CIA intelligence on the location
of main force enemy units. That translated into higher body counts and brighter
careers.

'' 'I could do what I wanted within the guidelines of the Phoenix program,' Doug
Dillard said with satisfaction, 'which to me was the overall coordination of the
units that existed in the Delta to destroy the infrastructure.' With his
regional reaction force ready and raring to go, Dillard mounted regional Phoenix
operations on the Ward mini-cordon and search technique.

'' 'At the province level we had almost daily involvement with the CIA's
province adviser and SEAL team PRU adviser,' Dillard explained. 'This was either
trying to help them get resources or going over the potential for operations.'
'' The words don't inform; they simply take up space. The most cogent sentences
in the book come from Bruce Palmer, a retired general who commanded the Ninth
Infantry Division in Vietnam in 1968. General Palmer, perhaps wisely, chose to
communicate with Mr. Valentine by letter rather than tape recorder.

'' 'My objection to the [Phoenix] program,' he wrote in a letter to the author,
'was the involuntary assignment of U. S. Army officers to the program. I don't
believe that people in uniform, who are pledged to abide by the Geneva
Conventions, should be put in the position of having to break those laws of
warfare.' ''

General Palmer sounds like a thoughtful man with a belief in the power of the
simple declarative sentence. Perhaps he should have written the book.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 21, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 934 words


LIGHT CAN BE BOTH WAVE AND PARTICLE, by Ellen Gilchrist. (Little, Brown, $8.95.)
In the title piece of this collection of short stories, a Chinese geneticist
vacationing in Seattle falls in love with a teacher from Fayetteville, Ark. Last
year our reviewer, Roy Hoffman, said the story ''bristles with new energy. . . .
It brings together lovers from different cultures more spiritedly than any past
Gilchrist story.''

THE END OF NATURE, by Bill McKibben. (Anchor/Doubleday, $9.95.) Civilization has
been so relentless in dominating the earth, the author argues, that we are
headed for a time when nature can no longer be thought of as independent of
humanity. ''For a man preaching apocalypse, he speaks in a measured and
civilized voice that deserves a hearing,'' Nicholas Wade said here last year.
''Even those who reject his idea that humans should not exceed the limits of
their small partition may pause to wonder if the balance between man's progress
and nature's decline has been struck at the right point.''

ANY OLD IRON, by Anthony Burgess. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $5.95.) The
Joneses, a Welsh family, have a remarkable talent for playing a part in the
great events of the century and for giving Anthony Burgess a vehicle to explain
his philosophy of life. '' 'Any Old Iron' undertakes the enormous task of
setting the dialectical cycles of Karl Marx spinning in the lunatic manner of
the Marx Brothers,'' Susan Fromberg Schaeffer said here last year. ''The reader
cannot help feeling the author's desire to convey all he knows, and this is a
noble attempt, well worth saluting.''

THE JEWS IN AMERICA. Four Centuries of an Uneasy Encounter: A History, by Arthur
Hertzberg. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $12.95.) Tracing American Jewish
history back to colonial times, Arthur Hertzberg concludes that ''the momentum
of Jewish experience in America is essentially spent'' and in need of a
spiritual revival. ''In dealing with more recent history, with which he has an
intimate acquaintance, Mr. Hertzberg . . . does a superb job,'' John A. Garraty
said here last year. His book is ''a useful and scrupulously fair account of
what is a true American epic.''

HIGHER GROUND: A Novel in Three Parts, by Caryl Phillips. (Penguin, $7.95.)
Populating this triptych are an African man who buys his freedom by acting as a
go-between for slave traders, a black activist in a Southern jail in the 1960's
and a Polish immigrant exiled in postwar London. Caryl Phillips ''creates a
complex chronicle of oppression,'' Barbara Smith said here last year. ''The
focus is not on the politics of those who have used racial, religious and sexual
differences as a rationale for hatred and injustice, but instead upon the
internal impact of oppression.''

OUR LONG NATIONAL DAYDREAM: A Political Pageant of the Reagan Era, by Sidney
Blumenthal. (Harper Perennial, $10.95.) In a collection of essays, Sidney
Blumenthal describes how a President and his Administration sleepwalked through
a decade, hoping that their dreams would come true. ''His observations are
always insightful, and usually irreverent,'' Cory Dean said here in 1988.

PRETTY WOMEN, by Kate Coscarelli. (Onyx, $4.95.) Two women -one the dean of a
university, the other the head of a Hollywood studio - share a secret about a
political scandal that occurred when they were both wives of Air Force officers
stationed in Libya. Last year our reviewer, Wendy Smith, said, ''It's a pleasure
to read a popular novel in which the main concerns are ethical rather than
sexual or sartorial.''

IN SICKNESS AND IN WEALTH: American Hospitals in the Twentieth Century, by
Rosemary Stevens. (Basic, $12.95.) A social scientist argues that even America's
nonprofit hospitals have acted more like businesses than charitable trusts.
''Anyone interested in how a country that prides itself on its generosity and
egalitarian tradition could have developed so ungenerous and inegalitarian a
health system will find enlightenment in Ms. Stevens' book,'' Uwe E. Reinhardt
said here last year. ''It is superbly researched, and rendered in an engaging
style that combines the policy analyst's breadth with the historian's fine sense
of detail.''

THE YEAR OF THE ZINC PENNY, by Rick DeMarinis. (Harper Perennial, $8.95.) In
1943, the year pennies were made of zinc, a boy named Trygve Napoli learns to
escape from life's unpleasantries by imagining that he is a fighter pilot. Last
year our reviewer, Mary-Ann Tirone Smith, said that the protagonist of this
coming-of-age novel is ''right up there with Huck Finn and Holden Caulfield.''

STRANGE GROUND: An Oral History of Americans in Vietnam, 1945-1975, by Harry
Maurer. (Avon, $12.95.) A writer who describes himself as a former draft dodger
retells the story of the Vietnam War through voices of Americans on both sides
of the conflict. ''These now familiar tales take on fresh poignancy when told by
the men and women who lived them,'' John Glenn said here last year.

UNDER CONTRACT, by Liza Cody. (Bantam, $3.95.) A private investigator named Anna
Lee is hired to protect a traveling rock star. ''Ms. Cody brings the reader into
the world of rock and, without glossing anything over, takes a curiously
sympathetic look at its inhabitants,'' Newgate Callendar said here in 1987.

SHADOW WARRIOR, by Felix I. Rodriguez and John Weisman. (Pocket Books, $5.95.) A
former C.I.A. agent and Bay of Pigs veteran who became a cohort of Oliver North
tells his side of the Iran-contra story. Last year our reviewer, John Maxwell
Hamilton, said the book ''is narrated in the engaging style of a spy thriller.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bill McKebben (Sue Halpern/Random House)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 21, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Las Vegas: Day for Night

BYLINE: By William Murray; William Murray's most recent novel is ''The Getaway
Blues'' (Bantam).

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 24, Column 3; Sophisticated Traveler Magazine

LENGTH: 3628 words


EVER PLAYED CHICKEN-IN-THE-POT? NO? Tell you how it's done. You pay the man a
dollar and he hands you a mallet with which you hit a spring that catapults a
plucked rubber chicken toward a turntable of slowly revolving empty kettles. You
get three tries and win a prize of a stuffed doll if you can get the chicken
into the pot. Sound like fun? Some people think it is. These two middle-aged
couples I ran across a few weeks ago at Circus Circus, a huge pink-and-white box
of a casino on the Strip in Las Vegas, Nev., that features circus performers and
carnival attractions, were thoroughly enjoying themselves. ''We was here last
night and he hit three in a row,'' one of the women informed me, as her husband
brought the mallet crashing down and propelled another bird into the air. She
held up the latest prize her group had won, a small stuffed bear, and laughed.
''We're havin' a hell of a time.''

I told this story to a friend of mine named Howard Schwartz, who runs the
Gamblers Book Club, a well-established local enterprise specializing in
publications in and out of print on gambling and sports, and he said, ''Circus
Circus is what the U.S. would have been like if Naples had won the war.'' I
assumed he meant chaotic. ''Sure,'' he added, ''and fun.''

This seems to be the point about Las Vegas that most of its detractors miss. I
have a number of serious-minded friends, mostly in the East, who can't
understand why I like the place. They point to what they consider its hideous
architecture, its commitment to an orgiastic misuse of neon, as evidence of an
unredeemable vulgarity, and its reliance on gambling for its major source of
revenue as proof of its basic immorality, especially because of the industry's
well-documented past criminal connections. To them, Las Vegas, with its attitude
of hedonistic self-indulgence, stands as a symbol of much that is wrong with the
country, as if persuading suckers to shove quarters into a slot machine were as
detrimental to the public weal as promoting the sale of junk bonds. Las Vegas
may be difficult to defend on esthetic and narrowly moralistic grounds, but for
me it's mostly a question of taste. Evil here is only sin deep.

Las Vegas is an open city in a country in which many of the pleasures offered to
visitors, such as gambling and nude dancing, are considered crimes. That's one
reason so many people flock to it with relief. The place has never pretended to
be anything but what it is - a playground where the American middle class can
indulge its fantasies, without having to risk breaking the law. And when a hood
named Benjamin (Bugsy) Siegel opened the Flamingo in 1946, the third big casino
hotel to appear on the main highway to Los Angeles that soon became better known
as the Strip, his presence on the scene provided a largely spurious sense of
wickedness to the raucous goings-on. The respectable citizens at the gaming
tables and in the showrooms and lounges had the added thrill of feeling that
they had become players in a piquantly naughty drama starring the sort of
gangsters glamorized in Hollywood movies. Siegel became a founding father; his
arrival on the scene, during the boom years of the late 1940's, really put the
city on the national map and began to shift the center of the action away from
the downtown area's aptly nicknamed Glitter Gulch, the few blocks along Fremont
Street lined by such older casinos as the Golden Nugget and Binion's Horseshoe,
to the Strip, where most of the big hotels and newer resorts are now located.

The first time I spent the night in Las Vegas was in the late spring of 1966,
when I was driving across the country with my two daughters, then aged 10 and 6,
while moving from New York to California. We checked into the Flamingo, after a
hard day of driving, and I still remember the thrill of feeling that I was
actually staying in an underworld palazzo. From my window I could look out on
the famous Champagne Tower, ablaze in neon bubbles and crowned by its famous
pink-and-black sign. After I had put the girls to bed, I explained to them that
Daddy was about to make a descent into the lobby for an hour or two to play a
few harmless games of chance. As I opened the door to leave, Julia, my
left-handed 6-year-old, sleepily suggested that I use only that particular hand.
I went downstairs, wedged myself into a crowd around an active craps table and
followed her instructions. I began by making five passes and couldn't lose for
winning. Four and a half hours later, I tottered back to my room $1,400 richer,
my cross-country trip paid for. It's the sort of small miracle Las Vegas can
provide and tends to make converts out of those of us who believe in luck as a
crucial element in human affairs.

Las Vegas can become addictive, and over the years I've developed a strategy for
coping with it. I try always to have a specific, preferably working reason for
being here, and I limit my stays to no more than two or three days. This
technique has worked out well, enabling me to indulge in the sybaritic pleasures
the town provides while feeling that I haven't compromised myself as a
supposedly responsible chronicler of events. The truth is, of course, that I'd
probably keep coming anyway, because I so thoroughly enjoy myself every time.

No one without a sense of humor and a capacity for childlike wonder can
appreciate Las Vegas. From a distance, especially at night, it looks like an
explosion in a fireworks factory, with great masses of multicolored rockets and
showers of neon stars bursting and flashing into the sky. The Strip itself
resembles an enormous carnival midway, with thousands of revelers swooping in
and out of dozens of funhouse attractions through fields of electromagnetic
radiation guaranteed to pop any gauss meter. Inside the casinos themselves, the
action seems muted, except around a hot craps table or among the massed banks of
slot machines, where the turning wheels and twinkling lights are accompanied by
the metallic clang of falling coins.

For gamblers Las Vegas has always been a paradise, all the more so today because
of the creation of the luxurious new sports books, where fans can sit from
morning to night at long counters under soft reading lights, like clerks in a
conservative investment house, or in comfortable padded seats facing banks of TV
screens and wager on football, basketball, baseball and hockey, as well as
contests at hippodromes across the country. ''This isn't a race track,'' a
horseplaying friend of mine confided to me during a recent visit to the betting
area at Caesars Palace, ''it's a feast.'' He had an 18-horse round robin going
at four different tracks, in addition to exactas, doubles, triples and trifectas
at various other Thoroughbred emporiums. He bombed out of his round robin early,
but seemed undismayed. Hours later, I saw him, flushed with excitement, still
hovering in front of his screens like a hummingbird before a massed array of
succulent blossoms. The next morning, gaunt and red-eyed from his exquisite
ordeal, he informed me that he had only lost $200, a pittance for the amount of
action he had enjoyed.

It's quite possible to have a perfectly wonderful time in Las Vegas without
going near the tables or risking so much as a nickel in a slot machine. People
who enjoy night life, for instance, get all of it they can absorb, because in
this town nothing succeeds like excess. The shows, in both the main theaters and
lounges, are loud, garishly costumed and heavy on flash and feathers. My latest
count of show-business doings listed 73 entertainments, ranging from spots
featuring musical performers and dancing, strippers, variety acts and comedians
to the extravaganzas populated by hordes of spectacular-looking young women and
starring the sort of people who have become show-biz legends. In this latter
category, talent is not an essential. Some of Las Vegas's favorite headliners
are Frank Sinatra, Cher, Dean Martin, Steve Lawrence and Eydie Gorme, Paul Anka,
Toni Tennille and Lou Rawls, performers whose longevity has outstripped their
skills or who never had much to offer in the first place. Since the death of
Liberace, the reigning king of the marquees here is Wayne Newton, an artist of
such modest natural ability that it's inconceivable he could flourish in any
other milieu.

What the Strip's favorite entertainers offer to their adoring public is
nostalgia, a trip back to a fantasy world solidly rooted in the 1950's, the last
decade of American innocence. Audiences in the showrooms, both along the Strip
and downtown, are composed in good part of primly dressed citizens in their
middle years, who can recall a gentler time before the upheavals of the 1960's,
stagflation and the Vietnam War. They identify completely with their ancient
idols and can be as fanatical in their devotion as teen-agers. When I went to
see Elvis Presley, then a bloated parody of himself, a couple of years before
his death, a platoon of middle-aged housewives quite literally stormed the stage
during his act, and one woman ran right down the middle of the long ringside
table I was sitting at to get close to him.

Liberace, who billed himself as Mr. Showmanship, was undoubtedly the
quintessential Las Vegas personality. Attired in his fantastic costumes and
jewelry, making entrances and exits in custom-built, rhinestone-encrusted
automobiles, beamingly chatting away about his brother George and his Mom while
tickling a little Chopin or a pop ballad out of one of his outrageously
decorated grand pianos, he represented the ultimate triumph of style over
content. He was also a genuinely nice man, whose act was designed to delight the
older crowd and who, while lightly poking fun at himself, threatened no one. He
left behind him a museum to enshrine his legacy. Set in a shopping mall, the
buildings contain not only his costumes, jewelry, cars, furniture and other
artifacts, but some magnificent musical instruments, including George Gershwin's
baby grand. As many as 17,000 people a month have trooped through these rooms,
while the late master himself can be seen and heard on a strategically placed
video screen. It may not be the Uffizi or the Louvre, but the level of
reverential admiration is just as high.

For me, however, the best entertainment value in Las Vegas is the magic on
display. The city has become the capital of magic, because it provides so much
work for its practitioners. I first discovered this when I was asked to write an
article some years ago about the resurgence of interest in the form and
inevitably found myself whisked to Las Vegas. A complete innocent about magic's
mysteries and mores, I immediately became captivated by the incredible big
illusions perpetrated by such masters of the genre as Doug Henning, who could
make elephants disappear and cheerfully saw people in half, and Siegfried and
Roy, a couple of sinewy Germans who work mainly with big cats and who perform
miracles of levitation, transformation and transposition with lions, leopards
and huge white tigers.

It was in Las Vegas, too, that I became enchanted with what I consider to be the
highest form of magic, the prestidigitation performed by close-up artists, the
magicians who work with their naked hands right under your nose. Whereas the big
illusions are largely a matter of construction and mirrors, a great close-up
magician relies entirely on his skills, acquired after thousands of hours of
practice. The finest one I've ever seen is Michael Skinner, who has been working
weeknights for 15 years at the Golden Nugget downtown. Now in his late 40's,
Skinner has mastered about 2,000 moves and is always devising new ones. His
favorites are with cards, which he defines as ''the poetry of magic,'' and he
manipulates them with the dexterity of Perahia tackling Mozart. An hour in his
company, or in that of any fine sleight-of-hand artist, provides more
enchantment than the Brothers Grimm.

The best entertainment bargain in town is the informal get-together of the
Darwinian Society, which meets around 10 o'clock every Wednesday night in a
local Chinese restaurant off the Strip and is open to all. On some occasions, 50
or 60 magicians show up to talk, perform and enjoy each other's skills. ''Magic
is the only human activity, besides sex, that two people can share intimately,''
Mike Skinner says. In Las Vegas, intimacy is a valuable commodity.

The look of the town is neither cozy nor particularly attractive, laid out in
long rectangles that sprawl erratically across the bleak desert landscape like
patches on a quilt. Still, it must be doing something right. About 4,000 people
a month are moving into the area now, not to visit but to live. Along the
straight, flat roads crisscrossing the Strip and the other main avenues leading
to downtown's less expensive, tawdrier pleasure palaces, new condominiums and
apartment complexes rise overnight, like mushrooms, from the desert sands.

The new arrivals, of all ages, have come to stay, attracted by the jobs the
casinos provide, as well as by the warm, clear air, cheaper living (Nevada's
gaming industry pays the tax bills) and the proximity of resort areas such as
Lake Mead, with its 550 miles of shoreline and water sports. Many of the
residents never go near the Strip, which on weekends becomes a sludge of
vehicles and jostling pedestrians.

Nor is Las Vegas the cultural wasteland outsiders imagine it to be. The campus
of the University of Nevada at Las Vegas shelters scholars as well as basketball
players and sponsors a weekly radio program, ''Spotlight on the Arts,'' to
inform listeners about what's going on in the way of lectures, concerts and
theater. The arts calendar would not compare favorably with doings, say, in
Florence or Athens, but at least there are some activities available to people
indifferent to the clamor of the slot machines.

One of the reasons Las Vegas continues to be such a lure to outsiders is that it
has learned to adapt to the changing needs and desires of the general public.
''The Vegas mystique used to rely on the mysterious and the mischievous,'' a
spokesman for one of the big hotels informed me. ''Sin city was the concept.''

That began to change in the early 1980's, when a recession slowed the influx of
visitors and several casinos faltered and went under and some of the brighter
prime movers in town realized that the economy of the city could not continue to
rely solely on the presence of high rollers at its gaming tables. The sudden
proliferation of race tracks and state lotteries and the rebirth of Atlantic
City meant too much competition for the gambling dollar.

With the opportunism for which it is justly famous, Las Vegas set out to attract
the younger, affluent family crowd. The Mirage, which cost about $615 million to
create and opened last November, is an outstanding example of the new approach.
Vaguely Polynesian in concept, it bills itself as a resort rather than a hotel.
Each day thousands of people wander through the atrium, with its lush tropical
foliage, lagoons and waterfalls, and gather outside by the so-called live
volcano that periodically spews steam and fire into the air opposite the main
entrance. ''But this is extraordinary,'' I overheard a middle-aged Frenchman say
to his wife, as he and his family observed the volcano doing its stuff, ''a
veritable triumph of vulgarity.''

No matter what may bring me to Las Vegas in the future, however, I still intend
to limit my stays to no more than three days. This is because, like most
visitors, I always find it impossible to sleep there. Too much going on, too
much to see and marvel at, too many laughs, too much sound and fury, too much
hard action. ''My God,'' my wife exclaimed, as the airplane bearing us home
after a recent trip soared up off the runway, ''it's like that old movie 'Lost
Horizon.' I've just aged a thousand years.''

CREATURE COMFORTS

GROUND RULES

Accommodations in Las Vegas, Nev., are plentiful (more than 275 hotels and
motels at last count), ranging from such theme resorts as Caesars Palace to such
popular chains as Holiday Inn. The Las Vegas Chamber of Commerce (2301 East
Sahara Avenue, Las Vegas 89104; telephone: 702-457-4664) can provide information
on accommodations, upcoming events and attractions in the area. Most hotels have
parking areas, so you may want to bring or rent a car to visit such nearby
sights as Hoover Dam, Red Rock Canyon and Lake Mead.

SELECTED PLEASURE DOMES

Caesars Palace (3570 Las Vegas Boulevard South, Las Vegas 89109; 800-634-6661),
with 1,500 rooms, has doubles from $105 to $145. One- to eight-bedroom suites
are available, starting at $220. Nine restaurants and one deli-style snack bar
offer meals at a variey of prices. At the Bacchanal, where tables are set around
a Roman pool and fountain, a seven-course prix fixe meal, which may feature
duck, lobster or veal, costs $120 for two, including wine or champagne served in
chalices and a shoulder massage between courses.

Circus Circus (2880 Las Vegas Boulevard South, Las Vegas 89109; 800-634-3450),
so named for the daily circus acts performed on its premises, has 2,793 rooms.
Rooms (single or double) are $30 on Sunday through Thursday, and $41 on Friday
and Saturday; lower rates are sometimes available, depending on the season. A
one-bedroom suite costs $95 to $120, depending on the floor. There are five
restaurants, including the Steakhouse, where a three-course dinner of lobster
cocktail, filet mignon and cheesecake costs about $75 for two, including wine.

At the 4,032-room Excalibur (3850 Las Vegas Boulevard South, Las Vegas 89119;
800-937-7777), rooms (single or double) are $45 Sunday through Thursday, $55
Friday and Saturday; lower rates are sometimes available. A room with Jacuzzi
costs $110. Seven themed restaurants offer a range of cuisines, including
Italian and German. The King Arthur's Tournament dinner show, where you can
watch jousting matches while feasting on Cornish game hen, costs $24.95 a
person.

The Flamingo Hilton Las Vegas (3555 Las Vegas Boulevard South, Las Vegas 89109;
800-732-2111) has 3,530 rooms; a double or single costs from $65 to $115. One-
and two-bedroom suites (one of them named for Bugsy Siegel) range from $240 to
$480. There are nine restaurants, including the Flamingo Room, where a New
York-cut sirloin, with selections from a seafood salad bar and lemon mousse pie,
costs about $65 for two, with wine.

The 3,049-room Mirage (3400 Las Vegas Boulevard South, Las Vegas 89109:
800-627-6667) has rooms (double or single) ranging from $89 to $159. Six
bungalows with gardens and pools are from $750 to $1,250. There are five
restaurants, including Kokomo's, where a meal for two, which might include
avocado soup with crabmeat, sauteed garlic prawns and pineapple-macadamia nut
cheesecake, costs about $80, with wine.

MORE THAN SLOT MACHINES

CULTURAL INSTITUTIONS

There are nearly a dozen art, natural history and history museums in and around
Las Vegas, Nev. What follows is a selection.

Liberace Museum, 1775 East Tropicana Avenue (telephone: 702-798-5595), is open
from 10 to 5, Monday through Saturday, and from 1 to 5 on Sunday. The main
museum contains the piano gallery, with 15 opulent instruments (one covered with
mirrors), the car gallery (including a Rolls-Royce covered with mirrors) and the
celebrity gallery (autographed photographs of eminent persons). The annex
contains the costume and jewelry galleries, with sequins and feathers and
rhinestones galore, as well as re-creations of the office and bedroom of
Liberace's house in Palm Springs, Calif. The library houses Liberace's
collection of miniature pianos, as well as such family memorabilia as the violin
that belonged to the pianist's brother, George. The minimum tax-deductible
donation - all proceeds go to the Liberace Foundation for the Performing and
Creative Arts - is $6.50.

Imperial Palace Auto Collection, on the fifth floor of the parking garage of the
Imperial Palace Hotel, 3535 Las Vegas Boulevard South (702-731-3311), is open
daily from 9:30 A.M. to 11:30 P.M. There are about 200 antique cars, including a
1907 Franklin Type D and a 1910 Thomas Flyer, as well as vehicles that once
belonged to Liberace and Elvis Presley. Admission: $6.95.

Guinness World of Records Museum, 2780 Las Vegas Boulevard South (702-792-3766),
is open daily from 9 A.M. to midnight. Exhibits include life-size replicas of
the world's tallest man, the world's smallest woman and a human lightning rod;
there are also films of the world's greatest shallow dive (28 feet, into a
12-inch wading pool), a record-breaking domino fall (more than 260,000) and
record-breaking feats of eating spaghetti, grapes and oysters (288 in 1 minute,
33 seconds). A ''World of Las Vegas'' display is devoted to the history of the
city, its casinos and such entertainers as Wayne Newton. Admission: $4.95.
Nevada State Museum and Historical Society, 700 Twin Lakes Drive (702-486-5202),
is open daily from 8:30 to 4:30. Changing exhibits emphasize Southwest subjects
and artists; permanent displays show the history of Las Vegas and Clark County
and the flora and fauna of the surrounding desert. Admission: $1.

Las Vegas Art Museum, 3333 West Washington Street (702-647-4300), is open from
10 to 3, Tuesday through Saturday, and from noon to 3 on Sunday. Shows change
monthly, and include traveling shows of regional, national and international
interest. Other exhibits emphasize Western artists and children's art; most of
the works are for sale, as are works displayed in the Collector's Gallery, which
features pieces sent on consignment by local collectors. Admission is free,
although donations are accepted.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Slot machines at Caesars Palace; a room at the Excalibur, and
the artificial volcano at the Mirage in full eruption. Below, showgirls prepare
to go onstage at the Riviera, and the dazzling view from the north end of the
Strip. (PHOTOGRAPHS OF EXCALIBUR AND MIRAGE HOTELS BY MARK JENKINSON FOR THE NEW
YORK TIMES/ALL OTHER PHOTOGRAPHS BY KAREN KUEHN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 21, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Can 50 Million Frenchmen Be Wrong?

BYLINE: By Alessandra Stanley; Alessandra Stanley is a reporter for The New York
Times

SECTION: Section 6; Page 41, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3913 words


In France, he is famous. his name is pronounced reverently, much the same way
that Peter Sellers's Inspector Clouseau said ''room,'' which is to say with
trilled consonants, rich vowel sounds and extended gurgling. ''Rrrheurque.''
''Rghoorque.'' Rourke.

There is Le Look Rourke, a state of fashionable abandon - faded jeans, dirty
hair, two-day stubble - that in Left Bank cafes, fashion magazines and subway
ads, stands for everything that is cool.

There is Mickey Rourke, Actor, most often cited in connection with rebel icons,
as in ''The New James Dean'' or ''The Thin Marlon Brando.'' And there is what
one biographer called Le Phenomene Rourkien, the fact that the star of ''9 1/2
Weeks,'' ''Barfly,'' ''Year of the Dragon'' and a few other movies most
Americans either hated or never saw, is a hugely popular star in France, mobbed
at film festivals and movie openings, lionized by cafe society, ardently
defended by intellectuals and critics. Last year, two French writers were
inspired to write books about the actor. Both biographies were entitled, simply,
''Mickey Rourke.'' There was no need to say more.

Throughout Europe, but most particularly in France, Mickey Rourke may be the
most beloved American performer since . . . well, not quite. No one can, or ever
will, take the place of Jerry Lewis. But perhaps not since Jerry Lewis has an
American's reputation in France produced so much bewildered incredulity at home.
''No, I didn't know.'' There is a long pause as Douglas Z. Wick, a young
Hollywood producer whose credits include the hit movie ''Working Girl,''
considers the notion. ''Mickey Rourke, the actor?'' he asks delicately. ''But
you know, in a way it makes sense. Mickey Rourke is the kind of guy who could go
into someone's living room, drop a cigarette on the rug, grind it in, and
everyone here would think 'What a pig!' The French would think he was cool.''

There are warier souls who suspect that the French are merely feigning
admiration for Mickey Rourke in an elaborate canard to make gullible Americans
look foolish. They are wrong. The erotic movie ''9 1/2 Weeks,'' about a
sadomasochistic love affair between a New York stockbroker (Rourke) and a
downtown art gallery manager (Kim Basinger), which in the States was dismissed
as ''yuppie soft-porn'' and relegated to Spectravision pay-channels in hotels,
played for two years on the Champs-Elysees. The movie, which opened in Paris in
1986, has been showing continuously at different theaters ever since.

''Angel Heart,'' a murky, erotic thriller best described as occult film noir,
co-starring Robert De Niro and Cosby kid Lisa Bonet as a voodoo priestess given
to ritualistic dances with a chicken, was a huge hit when it was released in
France in 1987. It has been showing once a week at the same art house in the
15th arrondissement for the past three years.

In any given week in Paris, in fact, there are almost always two and sometimes
three Mickey Rourke classics showing simultaneously somewhere in the city - four
if you count his bit part in the 3-hour-47-minute Michael Cimino epic,
''Heaven's Gate,'' a movie whose title in Hollywood has become a synonym for
box-office fiasco in the way that the word ''Watergate'' suggests political
malfeasance. The French hailed ''Heaven's Gate'' as a masterpiece, and replay it
often on television and in movie theaters. In one pared-down less-than-3-hour
American version, Rourke's part was cut out. According to the French, that
omission alone ruined the film in America.

The French consider film making an art, but film criticism is a national blood
sport. France is a nation of movie buffs who prefer the designation
''cinephile.'' The aim of any self-respecting French cinephile is revisionism:
uncovering and trumpeting the lurking genius of actors and directors long
unappreciated and misunderstood in America. In America, there is always one
unconventional kid in a crowd, the smart-aleck eighth grader who sets himself
apart from his friends by insisting that of all the Beatles, he prefers Ringo.
The French are a nation of eighth graders who say they prefer Ringo. Or Jerry
Lewis. Or Mickey Rourke. ''One thing you must understand is that we like to like
movies that the Americans despised,'' says Lionel Chouchan. A director of the
annual American Film Festival in Deauville, Chouchan has spent his 16-year
career with one finger firmly on the contrarian pulse of his countrymen. ''We
like to show we are more cultivated and clever than Americans, that we liked the
movie 'Heaven's Gate.' '' Chouchan is not in the least bit surprised that Mickey
Rourke is a big star in France, but says that it is regrettably ''too soon'' for
an hommage to Mickey at the Deauville Film Festival, France's traditional forum
for honoring such great Hollywood artists as Jane Russell. ''But I can assure
you that in 15 years - if he is still alive - there will be an hommage to Mickey
Rourke in Deauville, and he will go on stage and the French will be delirious
with joy.'' He adds, with a mystified shrug, ''I hear that in the States people
barely remember how to spell his name.''

Les Cahiers du Cinema - the famous magazine of film criticism that launched La
Nouvelle Vague, Godard and Jerry Lewis, and is so highbrow it refused to
interview the French director Claude Lelouch (''A Man and a Woman'') for 24
years - discovered Mickey Rourke in 1985 in ''Year of the Dragon,'' a movie
disdained by mainstream American critics, picketed by Asian-American groups and
studiously avoided by moviegoers. It was touted in France as the latest
masterpiece by the director of ''Heaven's Gate.'' Les Cahiers du Cinema
proclaimed that Rourke alone stood out from the pack of ''steroid-fattened and
lobotomized'' Hollywood leading men. It hailed his performance and noted
approvingly that in the movie, he metamorphosed from ''existentialist to violent
nihilist.''

Fanny Ardant, the elegant French actress who has made films with Truffaut and
Alain Resnais, describes Rourke's appeal: ''He has an aura, a strong physical
presence with an underlying fragility in his look, in his smile, that I love. I
like his insolence, he throws himself in all directions, he reminds me of Brando
when he was young.''

In 1988, the Italian director Liliana Cavani (''The Night Porter'') chose Rourke
to play St. Francis of Assisi in a movie about the saint's life, entitled
''Francesco.'' According to Philippe Durant's biography of Rourke, Cavani
visited the set of one of Rourke's movies, took one look at his jeans and
wounded expression, and knew instantly she had found her Francesco, much the
same way David O. Selznick had sighted Vivian Leigh and said, ''Scarlett.''
''Francesco'' was shown at the Cannes Film Festival last year, but has yet to be
released in the United States.

Mickey Rourke is among the Americans startled by his status in France. ''I was
kind of shocked, because 'Rumble Fish' was such a bomb in the States,'' Rourke
said in a phone interview. ''I was also surprised at how they appreciated
Coppola and how much they appreciated Michael [Cimino]. Over there, he wasn't
stigmatized over the failure of 'Heaven's Gate.' ''

The 36-year-old Rourke, who has visited France many times since 1985, savors his
reception there, perhaps for the some of the same reasons Richard Nixon enjoys
visiting China.

In France he finds ''a greater amount of people educated in the effort of film
making and what it takes to make a movie.'' His voice grows raw as he dwells on
the boorish insensitivity of American studio executives who ''think if you try
to make a movie that transcends the formulas and doesn't make $200 million, it's
like you did something wrong.'' Rourke describes France as a more enlightened
nation. ''It's real simple: they are not as easily brainwashed.''

It may be hard to imagine Mickey Rourke, the hard-living biker who grew up on
the meaner streets of Miami, fitting in easily in Paris, a city where police
stations are as clean and solemn as banks, and rudeness as an art form is
verbal, not martial. France, he explained, ''is a place for me to go and at
least feel good about being an actor.''

Rourke is made to feel especially good about himself at the trendy restaurant
Natacha, a Parisian version of Elaine's, frequented by the likes of Madonna,
Warren Beatty and Gerard Depardieu, and where the owner, Natacha, is just as
fiercely protective of her celebrity patrons - and the good tables - as her New
York counterpart. This is not Sardi's. The walls are tastefully decorated with
works of art, with one exception: a large color portrait of Mickey Rourke framed
and hanging by the bar. ''When he came in the first time,'' Natacha recalls, ''I
saw this young guy, surrounded by people, and I thought, that is a star. He had
an aura. For me it was like seeing James Dean all over again.''

There are, of course, perfectly reasonable explanations for Mickeymania. The
French, who have never gotten over the death of James Dean or Marlon Brando's
staying alive, are forever searching for a reincarnation of the young Hollywood
rebel.

''He is a very good actor, but there is also magic about him. He has the real
star quality. When he is on screen, something happens. Something like James
Dean.'' These are the words of Jean-Pierre Lavoignat, deputy editor of Studio, a
glossy, sophisticated movie magazine that runs an average of two to three long,
beautifully illustrated articles on Rourke a year. ''Rourke is a myth here, a
legend,'' he adds. ''He is a rebel, insubordinate, anti-establishment. The
French clearly admire Rourke's bad-boy persona, but they love his movies. French
audiences and critics love him best in exactly all the films Americans loved
least. For American audiences, Rourke made his mark as a debt-ridden hairdresser
in ''Diner.'' Yet ''Diner'' was not a huge hit in France; ''Rumble Fish'' was.
Francis Ford Coppola's small-budget, mostly black-and-white film, starring Matt
Dillon and featuring Rourke as his brother, an enigmatic biker known only as
Motorcycle Boy, was a flop in the United States, but an instant cult classic in
France.

''We didn't notice Matt Dillon, he was too clean-cut and handsome,'' recalls
Michel Boujut, a French movie critic and novelist. ''We only had eyes for
Rourke. He had a look, an attitude, that we love. And besides, he worked with
the two directors we love, Cimino and Coppola.''

The French, many of whom consider ''Emmanuelle'' an artistic breakthrough along
the lines of Picasso's ''Guernica,'' seem to find Rourke deep, particularly as
the smoldering lover in ''9 1/2 Weeks.'' They were also pleased to learn that in
preparation for ''Rumble Fish,'' Coppola had asked Rourke to read ''The
Stranger'' by Albert Camus. Not surprisingly, the movie ''Barfly,'' based on the
life and short stories of the poet Charles Bukowski, a writer known for
debauchery and therefore much beloved by the French, was also reverently
received.

''Cinema Cinemas,'' a high-minded, sober documentary-style television program
about movies, has devoted three shows to Mickey Rourke, but not one to Steven
Spielberg. ''Spielberg doesn't interest us,'' Claude Ventura, one of the show's
director-producers and a respected critic, loftily explains.

There are no formulas to decipher which movies the French, among the most
zealous moviegoers in Europe, are likely to champion. They seem to like
westerns, cartoons, action-adventure movies, thrillers, science-fiction,
musicals, big-budget extravaganzas, soft-core porn and Vietnam movies
(''Especially the defeatist ones,'' according to Philippe Carcassonne, a
producer.) France's favorite film of the last 30 years is Sergio Leone's epic
spaghetti western, ''Once Upon a Time in the West,'' though serious cinephiles
prefer ''Johnny Guitar.'' Among the many independent, low-budget movies that
disappeared in America only to become runaway hits in Paris, one of the most
popular was ''The Pom-Pom Girls,'' a 1976 comedy whose plot is summed up by its
title.

''Batman'' is the movie always cited in Paris as an avatar of steely national
will: ''The French were disgusted by the heavy-handed advertising campaign, the
merchandizing,'' says Serge Toubiana, editor of Les Cahiers du Cinema. ''People
made a voluntary, political decision not to see 'Batman.' ''

In fact, ''Batman'' drew three million people to theaters - twice the number
required to qualify as a blockbuster. Yet it has become an article of faith
among the French that they just said no to ''Batman.''

Intellectuals, of course, go to movies not for the actors but for the directors,
the ''auteurs.'' Bertrand Tavernier, the erudite and fiercely literary French
director (''Round Midnight'' and ''Sunday in the Country'') is working on a
critical anthology, ''Fifty Years of American Cinema.'' One of his favorites is
Val Lewton's ''I Walked With a Zombie.''

The French managed to export the auteur theory to Hollywood, but the concept got
a little mangled by the time it reached studio promotion departments. A recent
Sunset Boulevard billboard portentiously announced: ''National Lampoon's
Christmas Vacation. A Film by Jeremiah S. Chechik.''

The producer Philippe Carcassonne (''Monsieur Hire'') has a theory about French
tastes that links Jerry Lewis, James Dean and Mickey Rourke in a seamless
continuum. ''We appreciate the classic American winners, the John Waynes and
Sylvester Stallones,'' he says. ''But we love the losers. The Americans view our
love of Jerry Lewis with utter contempt, but he too is the epitome of the
American loser, the comic loser. Rourke and Dean are the other extreme, the
mavericks, the tragic losers.''

Throughout France, words like ''Heaven's Gate,'' ''Jerry Lewis'' and,
increasingly, ''Mickey Rourke'' are fighting ones: toss them at any Frenchman,
and he will explode indignantly in their defense, usually with a treatise on how
Americans understand nothing about film.

''I adore Jerry Lewis.'' The words are uttered coolly, with a faint edge of
challenge, by Marc Nicolas, a senior aide to the French Minister of Culture,
Jack Lang. Nicolas, 33 years old, is a highly cultivated civil servant - a
notion no more oxymoronic in France than Jerry Lewis, auteur. He makes the
intellectual case for Jerry Lewis - the genius of his camera angles and cutaways
- but on top of that finds him extremely funny. Recounting a gag from ''The
Bellboy,'' which Lewis directed, wrote and starred in, Nicolas could not keep
himself from cracking up.

''Ah yes, the eternal case of Jerry Lewis,'' Tavernier says wearily. It is a
question that is raised, usually with a smirk, every time he attends a
colloquium on film in America, which is quite often. Tavernier, no surprise,
reveres Jerry Lewis. ''I reply that it took you Americans 40 years to write a
serious book on Laurel and Hardy,'' he says testily, ''In 20 years, I am sure
that Americans will be writing seriously about 'The Bellboy' and 'The Nutty
Professor.' '' But Tavernier is not yet prepared to put Mickey Rourke in the
same league. ''He was very good in a few movies, 'Barfly' and 'Year of the
Dragon,' '' he says, ''but I don't look at an actor's public popularity as a
measure of a film's success.'' For the record, Robert Benayoun, the French
critic who first unveiled the hidden genius of Jerry Lewis's mise en scene,
still stands his ground, albeit a bit defensively. ''The Americans have always
attacked me for that, but I am not the only one,'' he notes sternly. ''Peter
Bogdanovich also likes Jerry Lewis. I know it, he told me so.''

Benayoun has not lost his revisionist touch. ''I think Woody Allen has only
gotten better and better since he moved away from light comedies,'' he says. He,
too, is not quite ready to place Mickey Rourke in the pantheon with Jerry Lewis.
''He is a very good actor, of course, but I think he really appeals to women -
they like that rumpled, slightly dirty, sordid quality of his.'' Encouraged by
his European admirers, Mickey Rourke once made his own stab at auteurship. He
wrote a screenplay, which took seven years to complete, called ''Homeboy.'' The
1988 American-made movie, about a down-and-out cowboy turned boxer that was a
kind of cross between ''Raging Bull'' and ''Shane,'' was never released in
United States theaters. Not many French people saw it either, but several
critics in France praised his effort. One of the most recent entries in l'oeuvre
Rourke was ''Wild Orchid,'' an erotic movie set in Rio de Janeiro. Directed by
Zalman King, who also co-wrote ''9 1/2 Weeks,'' ''Wild Orchid'' was, quite
naturally, marketed as a Brazilian ''9 1/2 Weeks.'' Rourke, his face slathered
with bronzer, plays a businessman-voyeur opposite Jacqueline Bisset and Carre
Otis; the movie, known for one cinema verite sex scene, is so staggeringly silly
that it too was quickly banished to Spectravision limbo. Even the French critics
trashed it. Nevertheless, ''Wild Orchid'' performed more than respectably at the
box office in France.

On ''Wild Orchid'' movie posters in France, a telephone number was listed under
the inviting message ''Mickey Rourke is waiting for you at 36654041.'' Those who
called in were greeted by a recorded message of Mickey Rourke urging them, in
French, to see the movie. Actually, the voice belonged to a French actor
mimicking an American accent and Rourke's velvety whisper. Rourke, who sued the
producers over their release of nude stills from the film, refused to promote
it. He also does not speak French.

Three of Mickey Rourke's recent films - ''Homeboy,'' ''Johnny Handsome'' and
''Wild Orchid'' - were far from triumphs, even in France. Yet his popularity, at
its peak three years ago, hasn't waned significantly. The French, it seems, do
not hold failure, or bad movies, against their stars.

''Once the French become enamored of a persona,'' explains Jean Luc Defait, an
independent producer and film distributor who holds the French rights to
''Barfly,'' ''9 1/2 Weeks'' and ''Wild Orchid,'' ''he stays popular regardless
of whether his films are good or bad.'' He adds solemnly, ''A Mickey Rourke
smile has no price in France.'' The Deauville festival's Chouchan put it
slightly differently: ''We are more loyal to our stars. In France, it is enough
to do something big once. You can live off of it for the rest of your life.
France has got to be the only country where Poulidor, the man who never won the
Tour de France, is more famous than any of the winners.'' Raymond Poulidor came
in second in the Tour de France 3 times in 13 attempts at the championship
before retiring in 1977. The man who beat him in 1964, Jacques Anquetil, is not
nearly so beloved. The French, it seems, are a nation of Red Sox fans. ''I adore
Rourke.'' Jean-Pierre Wagneur says uncategorically. The 43-year-old Wagneur is
the owner of Le Grand Pavois, a multiscreen movie theater that has shown ''Angel
Heart'' for four years, and periodically revives ''9 1/2 Weeks,'' ''Heaven's
Gate'' and ''Year of the Dragon.'' He has liked all of Mickey Rourke's most
recent movies, except ''Wild Orchid'' (''not worthy of him''). Yet Wagneur
confesses that he is worried about the actor's career. ''He needs a big
commercial success in America.''

Wagneur shakes his head forlornly, unable to fathom why certain movies beloved
by the French failed to appeal to American audiences, and vice versa. ''Die
Hard,'' the action-adventure film starring Bruce Willis, bombed in France.
Wagneur blames Bruce Willis. ''Now if they had put Rourke in 'Die Hard,' that
would have triumphed here,'' he says. Wagneur bristles indignantly at the
suggestion that a ''Die Hard'' starring Mickey Rourke might not have gone over
as well in the United States. ''If that movie could succeed with Bruce Willis,''
he says, pronouncing the name as if it were poison ivy, ''I can't imagine it
wouldn't have done even better with someone really good like Rourke.''

Even in France, no man is a hero to his valet, or, in this case, his sound
dubber. ''I don't think his movies are all that great,'' Patrick Poivey says,
''but I am not supposed to say it.'' Poivey is an actor with a deep, sulfurous
voice who has dubbed Rourke's lines into French in three films. He found it
quite challenging to duplicate Rourke's distinctively soft, murmuring
intonation. ''He is totally without timbre, and he mumbles,'' Poivey says
exasperatedly. ''Mumbling just doesn't work in French. I did what I could, but
mostly it was a job for the sound engineers.''

Mickey Rourke's latest film, a Michael Cimino remake of an old Humphrey Bogart
movie, ''Desperate Hours,'' failed to please American reviewers. Caryn James, a
critic for The New York Times, noted that in his role as a dangerous escaped
convict, Rourke ''seems more polite and less psychopathic than when he is
playing more normal men.'' She pronounced the film ''misguided.''

However, the French distributor, Claude-Eric Poiroux, who owns a small
distribution company called Forum, fought the giants Gaumont and UGC for the
rights. ''It's Cimino and Rourke,'' he explains, ''a safe bet in France.'' Given
that Rourke plays an escaped convict who had completed a Johns Hopkins course in
creative writing while in prison and who, after taking a family hostage, dons
his trademark ''9 1/2 Weeks'' costume - formal black suit with undershirt -
Poiroux could be right.

Mark Horowitz, a Los Angeles-based screenwriter, has another view. ''Cimino and
Rourke? Of course, the French will love it. It's like telling them 'Together
Again: Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis.' '' Actually, the French prefer their Lewis
post-Martin, when he began to direct.

There are American skeptics who think the whole Mickey Rourke fad is a hoax.
Horowitz for one dismisses Rourke as the latest sally in a huge bilateral
practical joke.

''There is a constant war between the U.S. and France,'' he explains. ''We sent
them Jerry Lewis, so they retaliated by sending us deconstruction and Jacques
Derrida.'' He is referring to a trend in French critical theory that swept Yale
and other campuses during the late 70's, and turned a generation of American
English majors into Gitane-smoking readers of the Parisian literary journals Tel
Quel and Poetique.

Horowitz, who once gave considerable thought to starting his own conceptual
biweekly newspaper entitled, ''Silly New Ideas From France,'' continues: ''So
the Americans said, 'Those goddamn frogs, we'll show them.' We started rooting
around the stockroom for some detritus of our own we could lob back. Somebody
hit on Mickey Rourke.''

Mickey Rourke himself does not seem overly concerned about his American
detractors. In France, he says, ''There will always be that select group of the
intelligentsia that recognizes the effort.''

His is a sentiment shared by the man known in France simply as Le King. ''It's
the most exciting thing in the world for a film maker to spend time there,''
Jerry Lewis says of the country he faithfully visits at least once a year. ''I'm
like a creative idiot. I need a fix from time to time. If I don't get it here, I
fly to France.''

Lewis, who has finally heeded the pleas of his French fans and is now writing
the sequel to ''The Nutty Professor,'' says he is unaware that Mickey Rourke has
also become an idol in France. ''No, I hadn't noticed,'' he says quietly.

But Jerry Lewis is not altogether surprised. ''French tastes are very unique,''
he explains. ''Once they fall in love with you, it's forever.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mickey Rourke at the opening of ''Homeboy'' in Paris. He wrote
the screenplay, which took seven years to complete. The film never made it to
theaters in the United States. (Francois Darmigny/Gamma-Liaison); Jerry Lewis in
''The Nutty Professor.'' Says one Frenchman: ''The Americans view our love of
Jerry Lewis with utter contempt.'' (The Kobal Collection) Le Phenomene Rourkien:
Mickey Rourke in ''Barfly'' (Cannon/Shooting Star), ''9 1/2 Weeks (Photofest)
and ''Year of the Dragon'' (Shooting Star); Jerry Lewis is anointed Commander of
Arts and Lettters by the French Minister of Culture, Jack Lang. (William
Karel/Sygma)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 21, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The President: Read His Slips

BYLINE: By James Reston; James Reston is former Washington correspondent and
former executive editor of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 810 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Most Presidents run into unavoidable trouble by the time they reach midterm, but
George Bush is different. Many of his troubles were not only avoidable but
predictable, and this has hurt him because they raise questions about his
judgment.

In a way, the criticism of his budget difficulties has been extreme if not
unfair. Fights between Republicans and Democrats over how to raise and spend
money are unavoidable. Put a few hundred billion on the table and they usually
pounce on it like pit bulls. But the main thing is not that they disagreed about
how to cut it up, but that they agreed to reduce the deficit by half a trillion
dollars in the next five years. This may be the single most important economic
decision of the last two years.

George Bush is better at the big things than the little things. His objective on
the budget was admirable but his handling of it was comical, and when he's
mocked as weak or indecisive, he's unpredictable. We saw this in the campaign
when he overcame his better qualities and followed John Sununu, Lee Atwater and
James Baker down the low road.

After he won, he promised to nominate the best advisers available and told us we
were living in an age of terror when life was fragile, and then picked Dan
Quayle of Indiana for Vice President. This was clearly an avoidable blunder, and
an injustice to both Mr. Quayle and the country, which fortunately can be
corrected next time if his party thinks about it.

The odd thing about George Bush is that he plans his fumbles. He didn't have to
promise not to raise taxes in a future he could not possibly foresee, or remind
the country about his infamous wisecrack, by telling the reporters during the
budget mess ''read my hips.'' They read his flips instead.

He has done some very good things. No President since the last great war has
made a greater effort than George Bush to reach out to the opposition leaders
for compromise and understanding. He has been on television almost as much as
Dan Rather, and has held more press conferences in more strange places than any
President since the inception of that jumping-jack institution. He has many
other good qualities, but foresight isn't one of them.

When he ordered 200,000 men into the Arabian desert, he went on vacation and
delivered his war communiques from the back of a golf cart, and was genuinely
surprised that most people didn't think this showed ''grace under pressure.'' In
the middle of the budget crisis when he was trying to get the support of the
leaders of the Democratic Party, he took time off to campaign in North Carolina
for the re-election of Senator Jesse Helms, of all people. He was determined at
the start to ''hit the ground running,'' forgetting that this is what John
Kennedy did when he ran into the Bay of Pigs, and Lyndon Johnson did when he ran
into Vietnam.

These are the ''little things'' that trouble even many of his most loyal
supporters, and some of them are not so little. One of his major foreign policy
objectives was to persuade Mikhail Gorbachev not to use military force to
achieve political objectives in the Baltic states and Eastern Europe, but he
invaded Panama against his treaty commitments to the United Nations in order to
capture a two-bit dictator, and didn't know what to do with him when he caught
him. Having defied the U.N. in Panama, he then relied on it in Iraq.

It wasn't enough for him to blockade Iraq and punish Saddam Hussein as ''another
Hitler,'' but he insisted on sending the biggest U.S. Army since the last war
into the desert, not wanting to use it, not knowing how to get it out and facing
once more the taunts of the armchair warriors, who say he must not only restore
the independence of Kuwait but also get rid of Saddam Hussein and the threat of
Iraq's Army as well. This is a dangerous situation for a President dropping in
the popularity polls and facing both a deficit crisis and a mid-term election.

In such a pickle, a little half-time skull practice wouldn't hurt, but sometimes
he's all bones and no skull, and can't sit still and think. He's all over the
lot - fighting for the rich, campaigning not only in North Carolina but in
California, driving in from Camp David to conserve gas and letting his
helicopter return empty, jogging in the morning and flying to the world series
in Cincinnati at night, always on the move, always pleasant and even cheerful.

He is the first President in memory who has not been able to get the votes of a
majority of the members of his own party for a major bill in the Congress, but
he has even tolerated Newt Gingrich, the Republican whip in the House, who has
not only defied the President on the budget but hasn't even had the decency to
resign.

He may come smiling through and even be re-elected, but it will take him a while
to recover from the planned fumbles of the first half.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Beginning, 20 Years Late

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 275 words

DATELINE: BERKELEY, Calif., Oct. 21


The Class of 1970 at the University of California at Berkeley finally held its
graduation ceremony on Saturday, 20 years after the commencement was canceled
because of unrest related to the Vietnam War.

About 260 of the 3,300 members of the class attended the belated commencement.
The turnout was larger than expected, and graduates had to share caps and gowns.

"This is the kind of class that would share," said Carol Orsborn, who owns a San
Francisco public relations agency and suggested last year that the ceremony be
held.

At Saturday's commencement, the speaker, Leon Litwack, a history professor at
Berkeley, told the graduates that they should be proud that the campus was a
major site of anti-war protests and free speech movements.

"Berkeley has become synonymous around the world with therights of free
expression," Professor Litwack said.

In May 1970, tensions were high at Berkeley, and after President Richard M.
Nixon sent American troops into Cambodia, student protests against the war
increased. Earlier that month, four students were killed at Kent State
University in Ohio by members of the Ohio National Guard, which had been called
to break up demonstrations.

Ronald Reagan, then Governor of California, ordered the Berkeley campus closed
for two days because of the shootings at Kent State, and students and teachers
at Berkeley began to talk about demonstrating at the commencement.

As a result, a university official canceled the mass ceremony several weeks
before it was to take place. Instead, the school's departments were authorized
to hold their own commencements, a practice that continues today.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 22, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Salvador Arms Aid: Will Congress's Tactic Work?

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1060 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Oct. 21


The vote by the United States Congress to cut in half military aid to this
country appears likely to cause political instability here. In the short run
this may fortify hard-liners on both left and right, but in the long term it
could also provide a lever to persuade the army to compromise with the rebels.

Many labor unions and grass-roots organizations strongly support the decision to
cut military aid as the only way to force the Government and army to accept
sweeping political and military changes required to break a deadlock at the
peace talks, which are to resume in Mexico by Nov. 4.

But many political leaders and military commanders here interpret the vote by
the Senate on Friday, which followed a similar one by the House on June 27, less
as a reaction to human rights abuses, like the slaying of six Jesuits last year,
than a sign that Washington has given up on El Salvador and is seeking to end
its involvement no matter the consequences.

"El Salvador is a headache that Washington feels it just has to get rid of,"
said one of the country's most senior military commanders. "Washington is
preoccupied with Nicaragua, Panama and the Mideast."

The commander, who spoke on condition that he not be identified, noted that the
Bush Administration had begun to talk privately about "Lebanizing" the conflict
here, by which it means treating El Salvador like Lebanon: pulling out and
waiting to see what happens.

In Washington, White House officials say the Administration is unhappy with the
Senate move to cut the aid pending specific steps toward peace in El Salvador.
They say that they will try to persuade lawmakers to change the legislation at a
conference between the Senate and the House and that no decision on whether to
veto it has been made.

Hard-Liners Gain Ground

In El Salvador, military commanders and some Western diplomats say the
Congressional vote could fortify hard-liners at both ends of the political
spectrum. If the Congressional decision becomes law, they say, it might make the
rebels more intransigent and unite military reformists and anti-American
extremists, who feel that American aid is not worth the accompanying
constraints, including those intended to reduce human rights violations.

The hard-liners on both left and right have appeared in the ascendancy in recent
months. Negotiators for the insurgents, under intense pressure from troops in
the field, have backed away from the first formal accord reached between the two
sides, a human rights agreement signed three months ago. Since then, the
insurgents' proposals have been less conciliatory, apparently intended primarily
to aggravate divisions within the armed forces.

The new tactics of the rebels stem in large part from divisions within their
movement. Once committed Marxists, the most senior commanders now describe
themselves as social democrats fighting for pluralism, a mixed economy and a
negotiated end to the civil war, which has killed more than 70,000 people. But
field commanders and rank-and-file troops have been more hesitant to make the
ideological switch. They are now generally more radical and more committed to
military victory than the leaders, who spend most of their time outside the
country.

'What's the Difference?'

Troops in the field are also more likely to dismiss a Washington decision to
slash aid as a meaningless publicity gesture. The rank and file and their
commanders say it does not matter if the United States halves the weaponry it
supplies if the army continues to use the ammunition to attack the civilian
population from helicopter gunships. "One bullet or two -- what's the
difference?" a field commander in the northern province of Chalatenango asked
recently.

The immediate military effect of the $42.5 million aid cut would likely be
small. Forewarned by the debate, the army has forearmed itself by stockpiling
weapons, ammunition and spare parts. President Alfredo Cristiani, who already is
facing an explosive economic crisis, will have extreme difficulty in fulfilling
a pledge to make up the military's financial shortfall by cutting social
programs. Military commanders say the army is likely to face material shortages
within a year. That, diplomats say, may press it into accepting previously
unacceptable guerrilla demands.

But the cut in American military aid, which currently pays for the entire
Salvadoran defense budget except salaries, is likely to have an immediate
psychological effect. At a recent six-hour staff meeting between the high
command and second-level officers from around the country, there was no mention
of the killing of the six Jesuit priests, the incident that led to the
Congressional campaign to reduce military aid. Instead, members of the high
command said, they were questioned about their plans to make up for the
impending shortfall.

U.S. Accused of Appeasement

The result already has been new influence for right-wing militants, who argue
that the United States is pursuing a policy of appeasement toward the rebels.
They are pushing the army to step up the war by cracking down on rebel
sympathizers. In a sign of the radicals' increasing influence, a small but
growing number of military officers are for the first time in years privately
discussing plans to round up and kill leftist civilians. Some officers say they
are only waiting for an expected guerrilla offensive to start the operation.

"The brake is coming off," a Western diplomat said. "As the U.S. role decreases,
there is less and less reason for the radicals to take a back seat."

In recent months, military hard-liners and their civilian allies have picked up
some support from so-called army reformers, who believe the high command is
corrupt and inefficient. Convinced that Washington has run out of patience and
wants to end the longest American-supported counterinsurgency campaign since the
Vietnam War, they are scrambling to prepare for what is coming to be called the
"post-gringo era."

The emerging coalition is a clear threat to a tightknit group of so-called
pragmatic senior officers viewed by Washington as the key to a negotiated
settlement. But so far at least President Cristiani's uncompromising support for
the high command has undercut the right-wing extremists' repeated efforts to
seize control of the armed forces.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 23, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Foes Sharpen Tools Of Electronic War In Persian Gulf

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 6; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2736 words


AS the United States braces for a possible war with Iraq, both sides are engaged
in a secretive race to hone the tools of electronic warfare -- technologies that
could be decisive in a battle for the Arabian peninsula.

If the United States and its allies should eventually decide to uses force to
drive Iraq from Kuwait, Iraq's radar-directed defense systems could cost the
attackers many aircraft and lives, military electronics experts say. To meet the
threat, the Defense Department and electronics industries are striving to
improve the countermeasures that could greatly reduce the toll.

In anticipation of battle, both sides are probing each other's electronic
defenses by various means. Iraq has complained of intrusions into Kuwaiti
airspace by Saudi Arabian fighters, for example. An apparent object of these
flights is to activate Iraqi radar systems, thereby revealing their positions
and abilities to Saudi and American intelligence analysts.

American experts assume that Iraqi electronic intelligence analysts are studying
the emissions of American aircraft flying near the border. According to American
military officials, Iraq intentionally deactivates some of its
target-acquisition radar systems during these flights, to prevent American
analysts from studying the signals Iraq would use if war should begin.

Iraq's armed forces are said to have acquired some of the best electronic
antiaircraft systems in the world from France, Britain and the Soviet Union.
Iraq's arsenal of French-German Roland missiles, guided to their targets by both
radar and infrared radiation, destroyed at least 12 American-built fighters of
the Iranian Air Force during the Iran-Iraq war, and would be a potent threat to
American aircraft in the Persian Gulf. Iraq also has a half-dozen different
types of Soviet-built antiaircraft missiles, some of which would be very
difficult to evade, several former Pentagon officials say.

Summing up Soviet attitudes toward the role of electronic warfare systems, Adm.
Sergei G. Gorshkov, the late commander of the Soviet Navy, once said, "The next
war will be won by the side that best exploits the electromagnetic spectrum."

Electronic warfare has played a key role in clashes between Israel and Syria
during the past decade, and Israel has frequently used pilotless drone airplanes
both as decoys and for intelligence-gathering to defeat Syrian antiaircraft
systems. On a single morning, June 11, 1982, Israeli strike aircraft destroyed
17 Syrian surface-to-air missiles with the help of electronic intelligence
gathered by drones. Over the years, Israel frequently used drone decoys to touch
off Syrian radar defenses and to lure Syrian aircraft into traps.

According to the London-based International Institute for Strategic Studies, a
military fair held in Baghdad in May 1989 disclosed that Iraq has been very
successful in integrating weapons systems supplied by several nations to produce
effective hybrid systems. These hybrids are a source of concern to American
planners, because relatively little intelligence exists as to their strengths
and vulnerabilities.

Iraq also possesses some of the best American-made antiaircraft systems. Among
them are 144 deadly Hawk missiles equipped with advanced guidance systems, which
Iraq captured when it invaded Kuwait in August. The Hawk is America's primary
defensive weapon against aircraft, and some missiles, flying at low to medium
altitudes.

The magazine Aviation Week & Space Technology, whose informants include key
military officials, quoted a former Pentagon expert last week as saying, "There
are several Iraqi weapons systems that our existing systems cannot handle."



The Global View
Hundreds of Types Of Radar Systems

Intelligence analysts know of hundreds of different radar systems manufactured
by many countries, each with its special characteristics; each radar has a
distinctive signature defined by its frequency, the duration and pattern of its
pulses and other features.

The computers carried by some of America's combat aircraft and missiles include
electronic libraries capable of analyzing emissions from as many as 20 different
radars and directing countermeasures for each one. But there is no guarantee
that such a library will include every threat an American warplane might
encounter over Iraq.

Each enemy missile an American plane might have to evade is likely to be guided
by several different radar systems. The Soviet SA-2, for example, which took a
terrible toll of American planes in the early years of the Vietnam War, is
guided by four radar systems. (The Defense Department assigns picturesque code
names suggestive of comic-book characters to such systems; the SA-2 radars are
called "Flat Face," "Squat Eye," "Low Blow" and "Spoon Rest.")

Different types of radar have different purposes. In general, the ones with
longer wavelengths are more useful for long-range detection, while those with
shorter wavelengths, and narrower beams, can discern relatively small objects
and are used by missiles to track their targets at short distances. Other types
of radar are best suited to carrying information, including data sent from a
ground station to a speeding missile. Some radar is broadcast as a continuous
signal, while other types are propagated in series of pulses.

A relatively new type, called monopulse radar, locates and tracks its target by
sending out single, widely separated pulses, each lasting only a few millionths
of a second. Experts say it is extremely difficult to monitor such radar long
enough for a computer to decide on an appropriate strategy to defeat it. Since
antiaircraft missiles flying at more than twice the speed of sound reach their
targets within seconds, a missile guided by monopulse radar has a strong chance
of reaching its target unhindered by enemy interference.

The Pentagon and the industries that supply it closely guard the secrets of
American and foreign electronic-warfare systems. Disclosure of details,
officials say, could not only compromise the effectiveness of American systems
but could reveal secret intelligence-gathering technologies used to spy on
potential adversaries. Nevertheless, some industry experts say Iraq is using
some of the best electronic warfare systems available, possibly including
monopulse radar.



Electronic Tactics
Aerial Warfare Depends on Radar

In modern air warfare, radar is used to spot an approaching enemy, to track its
movements, to direct the aircraft, guns or missiles used against it, to track
missiles, bullets or shells fired at the enemy and correct their aim, to
detonate warheads when they approach an enemy close enough to destroy it, and to
convey data and instructions between ground stations and missiles.

Perhaps the simplest way to deal with an enemy's ground-based radar is to
destroy it, using its own beam as a guide for a missile. Such a missile is the
AGM-88 High-speed Anti-radiation Missile (HARM), a mainstay of American
electronic-warfare technology in the Persian Gulf.

The HARM missile, which costs more than $250,000, is launched at an enemy
radar-guidance antenna, the destruction of which will protect strike aircraft
from defending missiles. The HARM's main attribute is that it can identify and
home on a wide range of radar frequencies, following a beam down to the antenna
that transmits it. It then showers the antenna and radar station with specially
designed shrapnel.

One of HARM's disadvantages is that each missile can destroy only one enemy
antenna, and a typical Iraqi missile defense would probably deploy hundreds of
radar antennas, usually mounted on trucks, over many miles. Unless most of these
antennas were quickly destroyed, the system would remain effective.

Another problem arises from a countermeasure pioneered by Soviet missile crews
in Vietnam, in which antiaircraft radar transmitters are turned off whenever
defenders know or suspect that an anti-radiation missile has been launched at
them. This deprives the incoming missile of its guidance beam, unless the
missile can delay its attack until the antiaircraft radar is turned on again.

With a normal range of about 17 miles and a speed of 1,400 miles an hour, a HARM
has a flying time of less than a minute. Missile engineers are working to extend
this range, partly to give the HARM more time to wait out enemy transmitters
that have been temporarily switched off.

Technical journals recently reported that a new variant of the HARM has a range
up to 63 miles. Also, the Northrop Corporation has built a new anti-radiation
cruise missile capable of loitering while waiting for a target antenna to
broadcast. Code-named Tacit Rainbow, it reputedly has a range of more than 350
miles, but the Air Force has disclosed that the missile failed some key tests.
Soviet arms negotiators have strongly objected to the missile's production.

With prospects that the Tacit Rainbow project will probably be canceled, Air
Force Secretary Donald B. Rice told Congress this month that it was essential to
develop some substitute, a missile that could loiter for an extended period
before finding and attacking an enemy radar antenna.

Failing the physical destruction of enemy radar installations, attacking
aircraft must rely on an arsenal of electronic tricks for deceiving the enemy,
and this has spawned one of the most complex families of technology in military
history.



The Evolution
A Combat Role For 50 Years

Radar signals are radio emissions that have wavelengths ranging from about one
millimeter to one meter. Most military radar systems operate at frequencies from
about one gigahertz (one billion cycles per second) to 20 gigahertz, and for
convenience, this spectrum is divided into bands designated A through M.

Radar differs from other radio frequencies in that it propagates along a
relatively narrow beam, and it is reflected by such electrically conductive
substances as metals. The ability of a radar antenna to send out a signal and
locate a target from its reflected echo has changed the character of warfare
since the Battle of Britain a half century ago, in which radar made its combat
debut. British fighters were able to meet the German bomber onslaught
effectively, largely because of the "Chain Home" radar warning system erected
along England's channel coast.

During World War II, opposing sides constantly developed countermeasures to each
others' radar. When Germany discovered that Britain's night bombers carried
warning radars in their tails to detect approaching German fighters, the Germans
developed receivers to exploit the British radar as a homing beacon. When
Britain discovered that Germany was using ground-based radar to guide its
fighters to attacking bombers, the Royal Air Force began dropping bundled strips
of aluminum cut to a length one-half that of the wavelength of the German radar.
The effect was to so clutter German radar screens and as to obscure the
airplanes.

Aluminum strips, known today as chaff, are used by all modern air forces; to
evade antiaircraft missiles, Soviet aircraft dropped chaff in Afghanistan,
Americans used it in Vietnam and Libya, and Israeli planes dropped it over
Lebanon. Inthe first few weeks after American forces arrived in Saudi Arabia,
there were some shortages of chaff for use by Air Force fighters, but the
problem has reportedly been corrected.

Chaff is not an infallible defense against radar-directed weapons, however. When
a fighter is being chased by a radar-guided missile, chaff can sometimes divert
the missile and save the fighter, provided that the chaff has been cut to a
length appropriate to the wavelength of the attacking radar. But an airplane in
combat quickly runs out of chaff and must try to foil enemy radar in other ways.
One is to release a flying decoy designed to produce a more convincing radar
echo than the airplane itself. Various American companies are working on decoys,
but none is believed to be operational in the Persian Gulf.

This leaves electronic jamming as the principal means of defeating enemy
antiaircraft systems.

Jamming can take two forms: it can attempt to overpower radar echoes with the
blinding strength of the jamming signal, or it can create spurious radar echo
patterns that deceive and confuse enemy radars.

The only "brute force" jamming system known to be capable of instantly
blanketing a very large area is a nuclear explosion. A high-altitude nuclear
explosion produces an electromagnetic pulse that disables many forms of
communication and can wreck the microelectronic circuits on which radar systems
depend. While some analysts have speculated that such an explosion might be
useful if the United States were to attacked Iraq, most believe that political
considerations rule out even those nuclear explosions that would be relatively
harmless to humans.

A radar-jamming technique that has been successfully used in several wars is
"gate stealing." In this, the jammer copies the characteristics of the enemy
radar beam as it "paints" a friendly aircraft, and sends out a signal resembling
the natural echo. At first, this spurious echo is broadcast to coincide with the
natural echo, but at each repetition, the spurious (and stronger) echo is
altered increasingly from the real echo.

The enemy radar receiver tracks the changes in the false echo, and is gradually
led away from the electronic "gate" in which the real echo can be detected. The
jammer can then be switched off, leaving the enemy with no echo to track and
forced to repeat the search for his target.

Another technique exploits a deficiency inherent in most radar systems: the fact
that in addition to their main beams, they propagate clusters of much weaker
beams, or "side lobes," at angles away from the main beam. If a target is close
to a radar antenna, it may be intercepted by one of the side lobes. This
confuses the radar system by producing false images comparable to the "ghosts"
that distort ordinary television reception when the video signal rebounds from
buildings or passing aircraft.

By deliberately intensifying radar ghosts in an enemy's receiver caused by
side-lobe echoes, a jammer can confuse tracking systems into misreading the
direction of a target. By subtly changing the timing of spurious echoes, a
jammer can also fool an enemy radar's calculation of a target's range.

Various American companies are developing systems to minimize side-lobe
vulnerability to electronic interference. Such systems use very high-frequency
radar propagations called millimeter waves, which greatly reduce the size and
energy of side lobes.

Whatever form it takes, jamming itself can be hazardous for the user; a jamming
signal can be exploited by missiles designed to home on the jammer, thereby
destroying the aircraft that carries it.



The Future
'Stealth' vs. 'Counterstealth'

The best future technological strategy, most American and Soviet experts agree,
will be to avoid the use of any kind of radio or radar propagation whenever
possible, always seeking to exploit the enemy's propagations as beacons. This
trend in thinking has spurred the development of "stealthy" aircraft that do not
use radar, radio communications or even jammers. Such aircraft rely on their
ability to absorb or deflect enemy radar signals.

The United States has only about two dozen Stealth aircraft in the Persian Gulf
area. Except for these F-117A fighter-bombers, America's combat aircraft are all
conspicuous radar targets and, in the view of some experts, sitting ducks for
some advanced air defense systems used by Iraq.

Gen. Donn A. Starry of the Army, retired, a former commander of the Army's Rapid
Deployment Force and a leading expert in military technology, believes the
United States is too often hamstrung in fielding new technologies, including
those essential to electronic warfare.

"America is the most inventive nation on earth," he said in a recent interview,
"but instead of putting our military inventions in the field, we go on fiddling
with modifications and improvements instead of settling on something and
producing it. We end up with endless delays, cost overruns and other problems.
The Russians are much more practical about putting their defense technologies to
work. I hope that this Soviet talent has not been conferred on their former
Iraqi clients."

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 23, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Air Strike on Iraq, the Favored Strategy, Means Big Risks for Both Sides

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 19


An American-led air strike against Iraq the Pentagon's favored strategy if war
starts -- would be a complex operation risking thousands of civilian casualties
and causing billions of dollars in property damage, Defense Department officials
and military analysts say.

Military commanders are pondering an array of strategic options -- from pinpoint
laser-guided missile strikes to widespread carpet-bombing -- aimed at destroying
scores of Iraqi military and industrial targets, and ultimately forcing Iraqi
troops to withdraw from Kuwait.

Anthony Cordesman, a specialist in military forces in the Middle East, said Iraq
could suffer property losses exceeding $200 billion, depending on the scope of
the American aerial battle plan. Civilian casualities could exceed several
thousand depending on the type of attack.

But military analysts said that a punishing air strike, coordinated with ground
and naval attacks, would be fraught with potential political pitfalls, including
the collapse of the fragile international coalition aligned against Iraq.

Casualties and Political Fallout

Balancing the search for diplomatic solutions against the steep costs of war --
which some analysts say could mean 10,000 to 20,000 American casualties
including 15 percent killed -- has been a constant exercise for Bush
Administration officials in mapping out a Persian Gulf strategy.

The risk of political fallout hinges partly on the speed and success of the
United States in winning its immediate goal of driving Iraqi troops out of
Kuwait, and partly on the more nebulous and difficult challenge of forging
longer-term security goals for the region.

In the short term, a quick, successful air assault coupled with a ground attack
that pushed Iraqi forces from Kuwait would likely win praise from most quarters.

"If the perception is we're winning, the fallout is minimal," said Jay
Kosminsky, deputy director of defense policy studies at the Heritage Foundation,
a conservative research institute here.

But if heavy bombing raids on military and industrial targets in Iraq and Kuwait
failed to budge Baghdad's forces or did so only with high casualities, "the
political consequences would be horrible," said Barry M. Blechman, a military
expert at the Henry L. Stimson Center, a research organization in Washington.

Coalition Could Split

At worst, Mr. Blechman said, a prolonged, costly war could split the fragile
international coalition, and "forever radicalize the Arab world, pressuring
those Arab governments who went in with us."

Military officials agree. "If Arab nations are involved in an attack, that would
mitigate any backlash against the United States," a former senior-ranking Air
Force general said. "If it's perceived as a pure American attack, there's
greater potential for backlash against the United States in the Arab world."

While military commanders would probably avoid bombing densely populated areas,
analysts said that in a heavy strike there is no guarantee against civilian
casualties.

A military analyst who follows the air power issue closely said, "If you're
using mass raids, you can't assume everything will be delivered on precise
target."

Gradual Escalation Unlikely

Pentagon officials and military analysts say that while air power alone is not
enough to force Iraq to withdraw its troops from Kuwait, superiority in the
skies is essential to the military operation's overall success.

With American and allied troops outnumbered on the ground -- and unlikely ever
to achieve the 3-to-1 advantage military analysts say is needed to win a pure
ground war -- a strategic aerial bombardment carried out in a carefully
synchronized series of destructive raids remains the most effective military
option.

Military leaders say the lessons of Vietnam -- and the failed policy of
gradually escalating forces -- all but promises a heavy United States strike
from the start if war breaks out.

With major technological advances in the last two decades, air warfare is more
reliant on sophisticated military hardware and software than ever before. Much
of that technology remains untested under battle conditions.

Armed with surveillance planes that can detect enemy aircraft hundreds of miles
away, high-precision air-to-ground missiles and bombs and more versatile fighter
planes, military analysts say the American air attack is far more potent than
the aerial weaponry Washington used over the jungles of Southeast Asia.

Pursue Air Superiority

It is difficult to predict exactly how a war in the Persian Gulf might start.
But once it did, Pentagon officials and military analysts said that American and
allied air forces would immediately seek to gain air superiority by knocking out
Iraqi air defense systems, including antiaircraft missiles, and destroying many
of Iraq's 550 warplanes at their bases before they could retaliate.

With air defenses crippled, waves of American and allied attack planes,
including F-111 fighter-bombers with Maverick television-guided and laser-guided
missiles and F-117A Stealth fighters with gravity and guided bombs, could attack
targets like runways, control towers and fuel and ammunition depots, using
cratering bombs to tear up airfields.

Other planes would strike factories producing nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, oil refineries, electrical power plants and other sites in an attempt
to break the Iraqis' will to fight and to cripple their future war-making
abilities.

For deep strikes at industrial centers and weapons plants, field commanders
would probably use F-15 Eagles, F-16's, F-111's and B-52's equipped with
2,000-pound bombs and Israeli-made Have Nap cruise missiles with a 50-mile
range.

Scenario Has Assumptions

In addition to more than 700 Air Force planes based in Saudi Arabia and other
gulf countries, air power would be bolstered by Navy and Marine aircraft, as
well as hundreds of French, British and Saudi fighter jets.

Against Iraqi ground forces, tank-killing A-10 Warthogs and Marine FA-18 Hornets
could be used to attack enemy forces directly, or to repel reinforcements and
blow up bridges, roads and other logistical links toward the rear.

This scenario, analysts note, assumes all goes well for the anti-Iraq forces.
Many problems could crop up, from missed targets to mechanical failures to human
mistakes.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: With American and allied troops outnumbered on the ground, a
strategic aerial bombardment carried out in a carefully synchronized series of
destructive raids remains the most effective military option in the gulf region.
F-15 Eagles, like these at a Saudi base, would be among the aircraft used for
deep strikes at industrial centers and weapons plants. (Paul Hosefros/The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 23, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Bitter McCain Bids Ethics Panel To End Delay on Deciding Case

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 22


Declaring that it "could jeopardize my political career," Senator John McCain
rose to the Senate floor today to accuse the Senate Ethics Committee of unfairly
delaying its decision in the case against him.

"I do not deserve, and I only speak for myself, to be strung out week after
week, month after month," the Arizona Republican said, his voice tight with
anger. "The evidence is there. The American people deserve to know it. The
evidence is there, and the judgment must be made. Otherwise, it will reflect
very badly, not only on me, but on this institution."

Mr. McCain said his comments "may upset the very powerful Ethics Committee,"
and, indeed, they threw the normally secretive deliberations of the panel into
open partisan battle. Mr. McCain is one of five Senators accused of improperly
intervening with Federal regulators to assist a former savings and loan
executive, Charles H. Keating Jr., who contributed more than $1 million to the
Senators or groups they supported.

The committee's special counsel, Robert S. Bennett, recommended more than a
month ago that the charges against Mr. McCain and Senator John Glenn, Democrat
of Ohio, be dropped. The other Senators under investigation are Dennis
DeConcini, of Arizona, Alan Cranston of California, Donald W. Riegle Jr. of
Michigan. All the Senators are Democrats except for Mr. McCain. None of them is
up for re-election this year.

Effort Seems Orchestrated

In an apparently orchestrated effort today, other Republicans immediately took
to the floor after Mr. McCain to accuse Democrats of holding up the inquiry for
political reasons. Democrats responded quickly, contending that Republicans were
leaking confidential documents to discredit them.

George J. Mitchell, the Senate Democratic leader, asserted that the committee's
deliberations "ought to be treated with the same respect" as a grand jury
proceeding. He said he was distressed by recent news accounts that were based on
confidential documents subpoenaed by the committee.

"It is unfortunate, indeed it is outrageous," Mr. Mitchell asserted, "that the
confidential work of the committee has been consistently and prejudically leaked
to the press before any final decisions have been made by the committee." He
said it was "particularly disturbing that the leaks have been limited to
accusations against members of the Democratic Party, although the preliminary
investigation now under way involved members of both parties."

At issue was why the committee has not acted on a monthold recommendation by its
special counsel, Mr. Bennett, to clear Mr. McCain and Mr. Glenn, from the
committee's investigation.

Issue of Party Politics

Because Mr. McCain is the only Republican among the five Senators in the
inquiry, Republicans suggested that the Democrats were sitting on the case
because if Mr. McCain was cleared, Republicans would have ammunition just before
Election Day to paint the case as one involving only Democrats.

The committee has been deadlocked over Mr. Bennett's report and is scheduled to
meet again on Tuesday. Officials close to the panel said tonight that some
Democrats were proposing that instead of voting on Mr. Bennett's report, the
committee hold open hearings on all five Senators after the election. But some
Republicans on the panel argued that would only delay action until next year,
and they were pushing for the committee to act before the Senate recesses,
probably later this week.

Lawmakers are usually reluctant to discuss politically charged ethics cases
involving themselves or their colleagues. But the accusations of partisanship
and coverup flew back and forth today, with principals on both sides breaking
their virtual silence for the last year and venting their frustration.

But the three Senators who Mr. Bennett recommended be subject to further inquiry
were noticeably silent today.

Mr. Glenn did not speak on the floor, but said in a statement, "I, of course,
share Senator McCain's concern." He asked the the committee "not to allow the
Senate to adjourn, and thus delay indefinitely a resolution of this matter
without deciding what, if any, action to take concerning those allegations."

Although backers of Mr. McCain have been upset for months over the pace of the
inquiry. Mr. McCain said the last straw was when the Ethics Committee postponed
a meeting planned for today. He urged the committee to make Mr. Bennett's report
public and to act on the recommendation before the Senate adjourns, which is
expected later this week.

"I cannot accept a deliberate effort to withhold the truth," Mr. McCain
asserted, "and the continued suspicion of a coverup." The Senator said that
while "I patiently cooperated and held my tongue for nine months," he was
concerned "about my honor, my integrity and my reputation."

Then Bob Dole, the Senate Republican leader and two other Republicans, John C.
Danforth of Missouri and Slade Gorton of Washington, rose to defend their
colleague.

Referring to Mr. McCain's being a prisoner of war in North Vietnam for five and
a half years, Mr. Dole said: "He has been held hostage before under very
difficult circumstances. So let us not keep him hostage here in the Senate."

The case, he said, has hung like a cloud over this institution for more than a
year, and Mr. McCain and Mr. Glenn have been "hung out to dry."

The tenor of the floor speeches was all the more unusual because members of the
Ethics Committee, composed of three Democrats and three Republicans, have long
prided themselves on not letting politics interfere with their disciplining
their own.

That was not the case today. Senator Howell Heflin, an Alabama Democrat who is
chairman of the committee, said there was "an organized campaign of leaks" for
partisan advantage. Directing his criticism at his own committee, he said he had
a "strong suspicion that some of the leaks have come from either members of the
committee or their staffs."

"I do not believe that the Ethics Committee should be placed in the position of
responding to pressure for the benefit of a friend or friends," Mr. Heflin said,
"or the disadvantage of enemies or for a party position."

But one Republican member of the ethics panel, Senator Trent Lott of
Mississippi, has also accused the panel of unduly dragging out the
investigation.

"I feel like I've been an accomplice to a crime," he told reporters on Friday.
"If I were any one of the five I would be going ballistic. It's just not fair."

And Mr. Danforth, on the Senate floor today, implored the committee to end the
nightmare of the Senator from Arizona of the committee not acting this year and
the case dragging on "month after month."

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator John McCain as he appealed for the release of an ethics
committee report on him. (C-Span)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 23, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

'Anti-Incumbent Fever' Threatens Oregon Senator

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1621 words

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore., Oct. 22


Nowhere in the country is the nation's sour political mood being tested more
directly this year than in Oregon.

Voters here are struggling to decide whether they are so angry at Washington
that they want to throw out of office a Senator they have known and elected for
a very long time.

Mark O. Hatfield, who after 24 years in the Senate is the body's second-ranking
Republican, is in danger of losing his seat to a businessman named Harry
Lonsdale, a newcomer to politics who in this year of political discontent is
running the quintessential example of an outsider campaign.

With the mild manners of Mr. Smith before he went to Washington and the
us-versus-them language of Huey Long, Mr. Lonsdale has used a sophisticated
advertising campaign against Mr. Hatfield, describing the Senator as a tool of
the timber industry and a defender of dumpers of toxic waste and other special
interests who fill his coffers with campaign contributions.

"The rich and powerful are robbing us blind, and the politicians in Washington
are not doing a thing to stop them," Mr. Lonsdale says in a television
advertisement. "They've taken too many special interest dollars for too long.
I'm running for the Senate because it's time for new blood and fresh thinking.
It's time someone said no to special interests and fought for the rest of us."

'Sound Bites to Survive'

Mr. Lonsdale's success with this appeal has forced Mr. Hatfield, a 68-year-old
bookish iconoclast who had clung to the belief that town meetings were more
effective than poll takers and negative advertisements, to do something he never
thought he would do: run an aggressive television campaign with commercials
attacking Mr. Lonsdale.

"Now, apparently, we have to talk in 30-second sound bites to survive," he told
his advertising man, Ron Schmidt, after a screening of Mr. Lonsdale's
advertisements a few days ago.

"This is the first major election in anybody's memory in which the virus of
negative campaigning that we've seen in other areas has invaded Oregon," Mr.
Hatfield said. "It's a new experience for me."

Not the First Troubles

Mr. Hatfield has had troubles before, but has always risen above them. In the
midst of his 1984 campaign newspapers disclosed his wife had received a real
estate fee from a client with interests before the Senate. But the charge, which
might have brought down many other politicians, turned into nothing more than a
minor embarrassment after Mr. Hatfield and his wife came to Oregon and
apologized.

A number of prominent Oregon Democrats, including Representative Ron Wyden,
looked closely a year ago at possibility of challenging Mr. Hatfield and decided
they could not beat him. That opened the way for Mr. Lonsdale to take the
party's nomination.

An accumulation of criticisms, including one that Mr. Hatfield has not been in
the state enough and another that his chief of staff took junkets on tax money,
would surely have weakened him this year. But Tim Hibbitts, an Oregon poll
taker, said Mr. Hatfield was not really in any danger of losing until he got
caught up in the rising anger against Washington in just the last few weeks.

"The fundamental problem is we have got an anti-incumbent fever sweeping the
state," he said.

Lonsdale Leading in Poll

Mr. Hatfield said polls by his campaign showed his support had been shored up
after he began responding to Mr. Lonsdale's advertisements. But a poll taken by
Mr. Hibbitts and broadcast tonight by KATU-TV of Portland found Mr. Lonsdale
ahead for the first time, 50 percent to 44 percent.

In that poll, 608 likely voters were surveyed by telephone over the weekend. The
margin of sampling error was plus or minus four percentage points. More than
half of those surveyed said they thought Mr. Hatfield should be replaced, but
not because they really favored Mr. Lonsdale. Forty-two percent said they still
had no clear opinion of Mr. Lonsdale.

By all accounts, Mr. Hatfield, who is widely remembered as an early opponent of
the Vietnam War and is still the closest thing mainstream American politics has
to a pacifist, was slow to realize how much trouble he was in, or, at least,
slow to respond.

"The wake-up call," as a spokesman for Mr. Hatfield called it, came when The
Oregonian, the state's largest newspaper, published a poll that was taken after
a wave of Lonsdale commercials and showed that Mr. Lonsdale had closed to within
a few points of Mr. Hatfield.

'From 1965 to 1990'

Suddenly, one of the institutions of the Senate, the former chairman of the
appropriations committee and now its ranking Republican, was faced with the
toughest fight of his career.

Mr. Hatfield, who has never spent more than a few thousand dollars on television
before, authorized a full-scale counterattack, taking his campaign "from 1965 to
1990 in the space of three weeks," as one member of his political staf described
it.

The most compelling illustration of this shift involved some former employees of
Mr. Lonsdale's company, Bend Research, a small scientific products company. They
had tried to give Mr. Hatfield's office derogatory information about Mr.
Lonsdale's company months ago but were turned away. Two weeks ago they were
called back by the altered Hatfield campaign and their allegation that the
company dumped waste water with toxic chemicals has now been used in a
commercial.

While he had been active in an environmental group that sought to preserve the
forests, a group Mr. Hatfield's campaign describes as "radical," Mr. Lonsdale
was unknown to most state residents six months ago, before his television
campaign.

Support From Establishment

The state's political establishment has rallied around Mr. Hatfield. The former
chief of staff to Democratic Gov. Neil Goldschmidt moved into the Hatfield
headquarters to run the campaign. Bob Packwood, the state's other Republican
Senator, sent his chief of staff to help out, too.

This blurring of partisan lines is less remarkable here than it might be in an
eastern state where party divisions run deeper. But it is also a testament to
the sense that this state's business and political communities have of Mr.
Hatfield and his seniority in Washington as an important state resource. Still,
this closing of ranks could play into Mr. Lonsdale's hands and Mr. Hatfield
acknowledged that his opponent has touched a nerve with that appeal.

In many places around America, this anger at Washington is more an abstraction,
something voters can use to vent their anger without really doing anything. But
here in Oregon they are being forced to measure their disenchantment against a
real person.

Denis Long, a Republican and president of the Kiwanis in North Bend, a timber
port on the Oregon coast, said he had known Mark Hatfield since the 1960's, but
was sympathetic now to Mr. Lonsdale's criticism of him.

"I've got a big problem with the fact that these guys are back there and it's
like a good-old-boys society," said Mr. Long. "You vote yourself a pay raise.
You don't really solve problems; you just kind of shuffle it onto some of the
junior people that are in your committee. 'Let's have a study and after we're
done studying that, let's study the study.' "

Abortion and Timber

But two other issues are also complicating Mr. Hatfield's campaign. One is
abortion, which he opposes, although he tries to place his opposition in a
broader context of support for family planning, contraception and counseling.
Mr. Lonsdale supports access to abortion, clearly the more popular position in
the state.

The other issue is timber. Asked why he got into the race, Mr. Lonsdale replies,
"The trees." He says he never expected to win, but hoped he could force Mr.
Hatfield to embrace much tougher restrictions on logging in the old, mature
forests.

Mr. Hatfield has long sought a middle ground that would keep the timber industry
in business while calming environmentalists.

But while timber remains a crucial industry here, the number of people directly
employed in it has shrunk as high technology industry in the Portland suburbs
has boomed.

"The growth has been among people who look at a clear cut and don't see jobs,"
explained David Sarasohn, associate editor of The Oregonian. That means growing
numbers of voters are attracted to Mr. Lonsdale's policy of curbing logging.

Anger Not Seen Before

While timber and abortion are important, this race is turning on the voters'
anger. "I've been in the political arena here for 20 years and I've not seen
anything like it at all," said Mr. Schmidt, Mr. Hatfield's advertising
consultant.

Workers with Mr. Hatfield's campaign said they believed they were in trouble if
the choice was, as Mr. Lonsdale presented it, between someone from Washington
and someone who is not from Washington. But they said they could win if they
could focus the voters on a choice between Mr. Hatfield and Mr. Lonsdale.

So the Hatfield campaign is trying to sow as many doubts about Mr. Lonsdale as
quickly as it can. One television commercial cites a series of apparent
uncertainties by Mr. Lonsdale about issues and asks, "Could Harry be over his
head?" Another quotes the charges from former employees that Mr. Lonsdale's
company dumped toxic wastes. In the meantime, Mr. Hatfield says he is
philosophical about his struggle to regain the faith of a state he has
represented for so long.

"I have to recognize this is a unique period of time with the fear about
possible recession, the potential of war hanging over our heads, the
demonstration of such paralysis in the Congress," he said. "I'm not going to
overreact, to feel the people of Oregon have abandoned me or been seduced by the
media."

NAME: Mark O. Hatfield

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon, left, faces a serious challenge
after his 24 years in the Senate. He campaigned earlier this month in Salem.
(Bruce Thorsen for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Charles Timmes, 83; General Specialized In Insurgency Battle

BYLINE: By ALFONSO A. NARVAEZ

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 324 words


Charles J. Timmes, a retired Army major general who served in World War II,
South Korea and South Vietnam and was an expert on counterinsurgency tactics,
died Saturday at Fairfax Hospital in Falls Church, Va. He was 83 years old and
lived in Falls Church.

His son, Col. Thomas Timmes of Alexandria, Va., said he died of a heart attack.

General Timmes (pronounced Tim-EASE) was chief of the United States Military
Assistance Advisory Group in South Vietnam in the early phases of American
involvement there and later served in that country with the Central Intelligence
Agency.

General Timmes was a highly decorated veteran of World War II. He was a
battalion commander with the 82d Airborne Division and led his men in a combat
jump behind Utah Beach in Normandy on D-Day, June 6, 1944. After the battalion
was transferred to the 17th Airborne Division, he led a combat jump across the
Rhine. He also participated in the Battle of the Bulge.

Fordham Law School Graduate

After World War II, General Timmes was a military adviser in South Korea and in
Washington and served as assistant commander of the 101st Airborne Division. He
served in South Vietnam from 1961 to 1964 and then held staff positions before
retiring from active duty in 1967. He was with the C.I.A. in South Vietnam from
1967 to 1975 and later worked as a lawyer in Washington.

A 1932 graduate of Fordham Law School, General Timmes practiced law in New York
City before being called to active duty in 1941. He was awarded the
Distinguished Service Cross, two Distinguished Service Medals, the Silver Star,
two Bronze Stars and two Purple Hearts.

General Timmes is survived by his wife, the former Marie Kuntz; another son, Dr.
John Timmes of Phoenix; a daughter, Mary Shanabruch of Indianapolis; two
brothers, Joseph of Short Hills, N.J., and Edward of Tampa, Fla.; two sisters,
Ann Hanlon and Mae Timmes, both of Manasquan, N.J., and 15 grandchildren.

NAME: Charles J. Timmes

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 25, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Michael Goldsmith, 68, Foreign Correspondent

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 23; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 242 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Oct. 24


Michael Goldsmith, an Associated Press foreign correspondent for 45 years, died
today at a hospital in southern France. He was 68 years old.

His doctor at the Grasse hospital said the cause of death was a stomach
hemorrhage. Mr. Goldsmith suffered a stroke Oct. 1 and was hospitalized again on
Sunday after a relapse.

He joined The Associated Press in 1945 and was based in Geneva and Paris for
most of his career, but traveled widely on assignment, reporting on
post-independence turmoil in the Congo, Algeria and Yemen; the building of the
Berlin wall; the Vietnam War and the Paris peace talks that ended the United
States involvement there; the 1973 Middle East war, and the Afghan civil war.

Mr. Goldsmith was on assignment in the Central African Republic in 1977,
covering the ceremony in which Jean-Bedel Bokassa proclaimed himself emperor,
when the authorities arrested him and accused him of being a spy. He was beaten
unconscious by Mr. Bokassa, two of his sons and a group of aides, and imprisoned
for a month. Despite this incident, Goldsmith kept in touch with the deposed
emperor while he lived in exile in France.

Mr. Goldsmith was born in Vienna in 1921 to British parents. He was educated at
London University and served as an intelligence officer in the British Army in
World War II.

He is survived by his wife, Roxanne; their son, Andrew, 15; and two sons and a
daughter from previous marriages: Martin, Michael and Mary.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 25, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Boat People Lacking in Teachers of English

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 286 words


To the Editor:

A few days ago I visited the Pillar Point camp in Hong Kong, which houses 5,000
Vietnamese boat people who have qualified for resettlement in the West.

It seems probable that the great majority of the Vietnamese living at Pillar
Point will almost certainly be resettled in English-speaking countries. Between
Jan. 1 and Sept. 1, 4,100 of the 5,100 refugees who left Hong Kong for
settlement in the West went to English-speaking countries -- Australia, Canada,
Britain, New Zealand and the United States.

The accommodation at Pillar Point is adequate, and many of the refugees have
obtained temporary jobs in Hong Kong for wages that are opulent by Vietnamese
standards. Unfortunately, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is
facing a severe financial crisis in Hong Kong, and all adult education at the
Pillar Point camp has stopped.

Many future readjustment problems could be eased if the Vietnamese refugees at
Pillar Point could be given training in English. Many of them are eager to
learn, but they have no teachers.

In the past, a number of American organizations concerned with the plight of the
Vietnamese boat people have been critical of the way in which the camps in Hong
Kong have been run. If these organizations were now to help finance the
provision of a few competent teachers of English at Pillar Point, they would be
making a constructive gesture that would help smooth the path of many men, women
and children who are going to live in America.

The Government of Hong Kong is otherwise heavily committed to providing basic
education in its other camps for the Vietnamese boat people.

(Sir) PHILIP GOODHART
Member of Parliament
London, Oct. 18, 1990

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 25, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

DESIGN NOTEBOOK;
Landmarks of the Common Folk

BYLINE: By JANE HOLTZ KAY

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1109 words


"ANONYMOUS was a woman," feminists complain.

"Anonymous was an immigrant," descendants say.

Lately, however, the status of "anonymous" has risen. It is the unknown, the
everyday and the ignored that attract advocates, as what might be called folk
landmarking gains prominence.

Recent struggles to preserve the past have centered on places like the Boston
school where Fannie Farmer taught cooking; the Los Angeles site where Biddy
Mason, a freed slave, became a public figure; the Chess Records Studio, where
blues were first recorded in Chicago and the model tenements of the City and
Suburban Homes Company in New York City.

In each case, high-style design or architecture is secondary and patriarchal
history even less important. Instead, America's polyglot heritage and pluralist
past, its non-heroes and everyday life are lauded.

Some architects and historians have reservations about folk landmarking. They
criticize it as being scattered and part of the New Tribalism, which many say
fragments the study of history into too many parts. Gwendolyn Wright, professor
of architecture and history at Columbia University, recalled an assembly that
"went so far as to call the purpose of history 'instilling pride in each ethnic
group.' "

Professor Wright likened the folk vs. high-style discussion in design to the
cultural literacy debate: Should universities go beyond emphasizing the works of
white male scribes (even Homer and Plato)? Should preservationists go beyond
high architecture or traditional heroes and events to make broader cultural
reminders permanent on the landscape?

In some cases, supporters go so far as to build the landmark. In Los Angeles,
the Power of Place, a preservation group, commemorated Biddy Mason by installing
an 8-by-80-foot wall at 331 South Spring Street, the site of the home of Mason,
the midwife, landowner and philanthropist. Titled "Biddy Mason, Time and Place,"
the black poured-concrete panels with text were created by Sheila Levrant de
Bretteville, a graphic designer.

Power of Place, founded by the feminist historian Dolores Hayden and dedicated
to celebrating Los Angeles's ethnic history, raised $200,000 to build the wall.
It is now raising money for an art marker at the 1914 Embassy Auditorium.

Although the building is already a landmark because of its architecture and its
history as a home for music making, Power of Place wants to bring attention to
the fact that Hispanic labor organizing occurred there from the 1920's, said
Donna Graves, executive director of the organization.

"I think there is a roots kick," said Charles Hosmer, a professor of history at
Principia College in Elsah, Ill., who cited recent landmarking in St. Louis. The
Landmarks Association there gave a party to raise money to save Coral Court, an
Art Deco motel associated with a locally notorious kidnapping, said Carolyn
Toft, executive director of the association. The motel sits on another folk
landmark, Route 66, which is now a Missouri Historic Highway.

Professor Hosmer traces the trend of folk landmarking to the turmoil of the
mid-60's. At the time of the Historic Preservation Act of 1966, the
Washington-slept-here style of landmarking was at odds with the social
consciousness of the Vietnam War era. In 1977, President Jimmy Carter helped
designate as a National HIstoric Landmark a section of Auburn Avenue in Atlanta
where the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. grew up. There are no grand buildings
there, but a few blocks of simple wooden houses.

In the 80's, the specter of the bulldozer accelerated the movement. The effort
to save the Boston Cooking School, the birthplace of Fannie Farmer's cookbook,
which introduced science to the kitchen in 1896, started two years ago when the
Italianate brownstone at 174-175 Tremont Street was threatened by the proposed
construction of Commonwealth Center, a large retail complex.

Suzanne Spencer-Wood, a historical archeologist and a consultant to the Boston
Landmarks Commission, said in her report on the building that it was the city's
most vivid reminder of the movement "to improve women's status by
professionalizing their work." The project is now on hold, and the cooking
school, though dilapidated, still stands.

The drive to save the City and Suburban York Avenue Estate, workers' housing
built on East 79th Street in Manhattan from 1901 to 1913, stemmed from a
proposal by the developer Peter Kalikow to construct luxury towers on the site.

Although the city's Landmarks Preservation Commission had designated the whole
block of 14 buildings as a landmark, in August the Board of Estimate excluded
four of the buildings that are closest to the East River. The Coalition to Save
City and Suburban Housing, comprised of 200 community, civic and preservation
groups, is preparing a court challenge to that ruling.

"We're beginning to recognize the diversity of the country's history," said Tim
Samuelson, a researcher for the Commission on Chicago Landmarks who helped save
the Chess Records Studio. "It's not what people think of when they think of
Mount Vernon and Lincoln's home."

The recording studio at 2120 South Michigan Avenue was the first to record the
blues in Chicago in the 1950's and enlisted such rock 'n' roll artists as Chuck
Berry and Bo Diddley. Today, visitors can survey the outside of the two-story
building, with its 1911 terra-cotta ornament above and its 50's granite and
aluminum storefront below. Supporters hope that one day visitors will be able to
view a restored studio space inside.

With this "unlikely candidate for international veneration" now protected, Mr.
Samuelson is moving on. Next on his agenda are Walt Disney's birthplace at 2156
North Tripp Avenue on the northwest side of Chicago, and a 1917 parking garage,
one of the first built for automobiles, at 219 West Washington Street in the
Loop.

"Many people think just in architectural terms of a historic event that happened
a century ago," Mr. Samuelson said.

With developers approaching the landscape like "masked avengers," in Gwendolyn
Wright's words, many more people now sympathize with this new school of
pluralist preservation. Others worry that designating this or that a folk
landmark ignores the larger landscape.

"It's essential that we recall a range of events," Professor Wright said. "But
what's important is the larger city, too."

Despite these concerns, folk landmarking is altering old notions of
the-best-and-the-brightest to enfranchise a larger populace. At the least, this
broader stewardship and constituency may perceive the built world as a quilt of
communities and not just a velvet tapestry of the few.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Chess Records Studio, where blues were first recorded in
Chicago. (Steve Kagan for The New York Times);
Suzanne Spencer-Wood, a historical archeologist, is trying to save Fannie
Farmer's cooking school in Boston. (Jim Bourg for The New York Times) (pg. C6)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 26, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
U.S. DECIDES TO ADD AS MANY AS 100,000 TO ITS GULF FORCES

BYLINE: By MICHAEL GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1522 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 25


The Bush Administration has decided to expand the number of American forces in
the Persian Gulf and may send as many as 100,000 more troops to the region,
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said today.

The United States has sent more than 210,000 troops to the gulf, as part of a
planned deployment of 240,000 troops. In announcing that more forces would be
sent, Mr. Cheney said the exact number had not been worked out, and he gave no
date for completing the American military buildup in the region, the largest
since the Vietnam War.

Mr. Cheney said some of the additional forces might be drawn from among the
50,000 American troops that are being withdrawn from Western Europe.

Seeking to Increase Pressure

Officially, the Administration maintained that the move did not signal a policy
change. But by announcing that it was sending more combat forces and that the
complement might be substantial, the Pentagon seemed to be trying to increase
pressure on President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait and accept
a peaceful settlement on United Nations and American terms.

The additional deployment of large numbers of troops would transform the
American ground force in Saudi Arabia from a largely defensive military
formation to one better suited for offensive action. Some military planners,
including Army officials, have been saying for weeks that the United States
should deploy two additional heavy divisions if it wanted to open an attack to
evict Iraqi troops from Kuwait, which Iraq invaded on Aug. 2.

Little Boycott Effect Seen

The decision to send more troops came as William H. Webster, the Director of
Central Intelligence, said the economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations
have had little effect on the Iraqi military. Answering questions after a speech
in Washington this morning, Mr. Webster said he had "no real confidence" that
stability could be achieved in the Middle East if Mr. Hussein remained in power
-- unless Iraq disarms or is constrained by a regional military alliance.

Taking note of the large number of Iraqi troops in Kuwait, Mr. Webster said that
President Hussein's strategy "is to sit tight if he can unless he is threatened
with imminent peril."

Mr. Cheney, who met with President Bush on Wednesday, disclosed the decision to
send more combat troops in a series of morning interviews with four television
networks, and his spokesman reaffirmed the decision at the regular Pentagon
briefing for reporters.

Mr. Cheney said the United States had never set an "upper ceiling" on the number
of troops that would be sent, and he added that the Pentagon had not formally
decided precisely which additional units to send.

Asked on the CBS News program "This Morning" whether the Administration might
send 100,000 more troops to the Persian Gulf, Mr. Cheney said, "It's conceivable
that we'll end up with that big an increase."

Pete Williams, the chief Pentagon spokesman, reaffirmed that statement at the
Pentagon's regular news briefing for reporters today, saying a deployment of
that magnitude was possible.

The units to be sent will be selected after Mr. Cheney confers with Gen. Colin
L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who met with military
commanders in Saudi Arabia this week. Officials said additional units would
augment the troop total in the region, and would not end up simply substituting
for American forces recalled home as part of a troop rotation.

Original Ceiling of 240,000

The Pentagon's original plan, decided on in August, called for sending about
240,000 troops, a force that include four and a half Army divisions and 45,000
marines, some 11,000 of whom are on ships for a possible amphibious landing.

That deployment is nearing completion, and the Pentagon has said that more than
210,000 American troops are already in the region, including Navy and Air Force
personnel.

The last Army combat unit that was previously scheduled for deployment, the last
elements of the First Cavalry Division, arrived in Saudi Arabia this week, and
only support troops and logistical items remained to be sent until today's
announcement.

The original Pentagon plan to send about 240,000 troops was based on earlier
contingency planning by Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the commander of all
American forces in the region, for defending Saudi Arabia against a possible
Iraqi invasion.

Attack Plan Was Missing

General Schwarzkopf's contingency plans were not complete when Iraq invaded
Kuwait, said a military official who asked not to be identified. He said one
missing element was a plan for an American counterattack against Iraqi forces.

Iraq has had about 430,000 troops in Kuwait and southern Iraq for more than a
month. Administration officials have said the Iraqis have been strengthening
their position by laying mines, building sand barrers and digging in their
tanks, a development that Mr. Cheney suggested has encouraged the Pentagon to
send more troops.

Explaining why the Administration was continuing the buildup, Mr. Cheney said
the United States needed to have enough forces in the gulf "to deal with any
contingency."

Reiterating Administration policy, the Defense Secretary said that American
forces were sent to Saudi Arabia to deter Iraq from invading Saudi Arabia, to
prepare to defend the Saudi kingdom in the event of an attack and to enforce the
United Nations sanctions against Iraq.

Seeking 'Range of Options'

But he added that the deployment of American forces was also intended "to give
the President a range of other options should another option be necessary," an
apparent reference to possible offensive American action to drive the Iraqi
forces out of Kuwait.

"The fact is that Saddam Hussein has continued his buildup in Kuwait," Mr.
Cheney said on the CBS program.

"He's dug in in a very permanent-looking sort of way, gives no indication of
being willing to withdraw from Kuwait," he added. "And we think that it's
necessary to make certain that we've got the forces over there to deal with any
contingency."

There are a number of ways to build up the American force in the region. Mr.
Cheney suggested that the Pentagon would replace the lightly equipped 82d
Airborne, which was deployed early in the operation, with a heavier mechanized
division, a move long advocated by military planners.

Both Mr. Cheney and his spokesman said the United States might send some of the
50,000 troops to be withdrawn from Europe this year to Saudi Arabia. This
announcement surprised some Army officials, according to Pentagon officials.

Europe Units Called Unready

The officials said the Army units being withdrawn had already stopped some
combat training, were not at full strength, and might not be the best suited to
build up American military power in Saudi Arabia.

Mr. Cheney's disclosures also surprised some members of Congress. The Defense
Secretary had only hinted at the moves at a closed-door meeting with House
members on Wednesday, saying the Administration had set no upper limits on
American forces.

Administration officials said that Washington was still committed to using
economic sanctions to try to compel Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait, and that the
decision to send additional forces did not mean that the Administration had
decided on military action.

Mr. Webster said economic sanctions against Iraq were having little visible
effect on President Hussein's military and probably would not for some time.

Iraqi Stockpiling Described

"The sanctions are beginning to have an effect in a number of areas, but very
few of them are in the military," Mr. Webster said, "He knows the value of
stockpiling, and has done so."

The steps taken by the Iraqi military, like retreading truck tires, may be
efforts to avoid shortages and not a reaction to them, he said.

Intelligence data suggest that some of Mr. Hussein's military advisers may be
starting to chafe under his leadership, he said, but Mr. Webster held out little
hope for either a revolution or a high-level coup in Baghdad.

"We had all that in place in Panama," he said, "but it took something else." He
referred to the American invasion to remove Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega from
power in December.

Deployment Compared

Pentagon officials have repeatedly described the dispatch of more than 210,000
American soldiers, marines, airmen and sailors in the gulf as the speediest
military deployment in history. In the Vietnam conflict, the United States had
dispatched 23,000 advisers by 1964; by the end of 1965, it had 184,300 troops in
Vietnam, excluding sailors in the South China Sea. By the end of 1966, the total
had risen to 385,000.

In addition to the American forces, close to 200,000 troops from Saudi Arabia,
Britain, France, Egypt and other nations allied with the United States are also
in the Persian Gulf. Arrangements have been made in recent days to transport a
Syrian armored division to Saudi Arabia.

Iraq has steadily expanded its forces in Kuwait and southern Iraq, reaching a
level of about 430,000 troops more than a month ago.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 26, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Stage, and Off

BYLINE: By Alex Witchel

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1209 words



Troubles in 'Abundance'

Life is imitating art at the Manhattan Theater Club, where "Abundance," the new
play by the Pulitzer Prize winner Beth Henley about women trying to survive
against insurmountable odds, has an offstage resonance all its own. Now
scheduled to open on Tuesday, a week late, the play, directed by Ron
Lagomarsino, had been cast with Lesley Ann Warren and Amanda Plummer in the
leading roles.

Ms. Warren, who was finishing work on the new Mel Brooks film, "Life Stinks,"
missed the first week of rehearsals, which began on Sept. 4. The actress arrived
on Sept. 12 "exhausted," her spokesman said. She lasted four days. A company
member says she insisted on taking a long weekend to fly to Los Angeles for the
Emmy Awards -- she had been nominated for the CBS mini-series "Family of Spies"
-- and never came back.

Is it a trend? Apparently Ms. Warren got cold feet last season after she agreed
to appear in Brian Friel's "Aristocrats" at the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles.
A spokesman for the theater says she backed out before signing a contract.

Ms. Warren's spokesman says: "She did not sign a contract at the Taper and did
not hang up rehearsals. She couldn't do 'Abundance' for medical reasons. Her
doctors consulted with the producers to try to work something out, but they were
locked because of their schedule."

She was replaced within 24 hours by Tess Harper, who appeared in the film
version of Ms. Henley's "Crimes of the Heart." By then, two weeks of rehearsal
time had been lost, and Ms. Harper had only 10 days to prepare before
performances were scheduled to begin. The first two previews were canceled. Then
she got the flu.

Compounding the cast's problems have been the very complicated technical aspects
of the show, which uses two turntables and numerous quick changes of Old West
period costumes. Which is where Amanda Plummer comes in. Last year she was let
go after one week of rehearsals from Adrian Noble's "Art of Success" at the
Manhattan Theater Club. Her co-workers on "Abundance" say that because the show
was in such tenuous shape, the management could not afford to shake things up
further. Accordingly, one company member said, Ms. Plummer behaved like someone
who could call her own shots. One night last week, for instance, she took a
decided disliking to her wig, and the 8 P.M. curtain rose at 8:45.

"Everyone is under an awful lot of pressure," says the Manhattan Theater Club's
artistic director, Lynne Meadow, reached by phone in St. Bart's. "Amanda's
problem was a technical problem. It's a period play, and the costumes and wigs
weren't done right. Her discomfort about the wig was just a reaction to a
compressed rehearsal period. These have been very extreme circumstances."

True, says a production staff member. "But her actions have not helped the
show's morale. And 'Abundance' is a really good play, Beth's best work. It
should have gone without a hitch." A spokesman for Ms. Plummer says she has no
comment.

Royalties From 'Machinal'

The only people who might be happier than its staff over the success of
"Machinal," which has been extended at the Public Theater through Nov. 25, are
the American Indians of Arizona. It seems that when the New York-based writer
Sophie Treadwell, who wrote the play in 1928, retired, she settled in Tucson.
When she died in 1970, she left the rights to the play to the Roman Catholic
Diocese of Tucson with the stipulation that "proceeds be used for the protection
and comfort of Indian children in Arizona." Matt Ellis, cash and investments
manager for the diocese, said: "We allowed 'Machinal' to be published by
Applause Books in a collection called 'Plays by American Women' in 1982, and
since then about 12 colleges and universities have made inquiries for
productions. At the New York Shakespeare Festival our royalty fee is 6 percent
of the weekly gross, and that money will be sent to three reservations out here,
and the pastor at each mission church will decide how the money should be best
used."

How much are we talking about? After the first few weeks of the subscription
run, the royalty should rise to more than $1,000 a week for the four weeks
beginning Tuesday.

A Second Chance

"The Speed of Darkness," by Steve Tesich, will be the first show produced under
the new Broadway Alliance. This is an arrangement that limits a play's budget to
$400,000 and requires that it be performed in an "endangered theater" where the
ticket price cannot exceed $24. The play, scheduled to open on Feb. 14, is being
produced by Robert Whitehead, Roger L. Stevens, Howard Platt, Sheila Henaghan
and Robert Sachter. Robert Falls, the artistic director of the Goodman Theater
in Chicago, will direct, as he did when it played there in 1989. Stephen Lang,
who won the Joseph Jefferson Award for his work in the play, will star again,
and the other leading role is still uncast.

You may remember that only last season "The Speed of Darkness," about the
reunion of two Vietnam veterans, was scheduled at the Manhattan Theater Club.
But after a reading, the theater's artistic director, Ms. Meadow, suggested that
more work needed to be done and that the theater's Stage Two would be more
appropriate than the main stage. Mr. Tesich and his agent, Sam Cohn, disagreed
and pulled the play. "There was no disagreement over how much work the play
needed," Mr. Tesich says. "The disagreement was on whether the work could be
done in time for their season. I felt quite at ease that it could be done.
Somebody there doubted my ability to do what the play needed."

Ms. Meadow said: "We never doubted Steve Tesich's abilities. Manhattan Theater
Club prides itself on being a haven to writers, and I felt honor-bound to
provide optimal circumstances for him to work. He's a first-rate writer."

Mr. Tesich said he completed his last draft in April, a "substantially different
version" from what was submitted to Manhattan Theater Club. "On paper I can't
think of anything else I want to do," he said. "But I'm perfectly ready to
discover in rehearsal that I'm dead wrong. Or quite right."

Finn's Mother Knows Best

When William Finn's "Falsettoland" moved to the Lucille Lortel Theater from
Playwrights Horizons, his friend Wendy Wasserstein wrote some radio commercials
for it, starring -- who else? -- his mother. During a break in the taping,
Barbara Finn, who was chatting with someone and unaware that the microphone was
on, said: "He could have been a doctor. He could have been a lawyer. But no, he
writes musicals." When everyone stopped laughing, the ad agency put her
kvetching to good use and wrote another spot around it. Along with the two Ms.
Wasserstein had already written, it has been running for the last few weeks, and
-- of course -- business has never been better.

'Marilyn, the Method and Me'

Susan Strasberg, actress, writer and daughter of the Actors Studio founder, Lee
Strasberg, is writing a new book for Warner Books, due in 1992, tentatively
titled "Marilyn, the Method and Me." She said she would cover "the eight years
that Marilyn was the third child in our family, and also my relationship with my
father, which I hadn't dealt with in 'Bittersweet' when he was still alive."

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 26, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

10 Writers Receive $30,000 Awards

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 32; Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 447 words


Ten American writers were named winners of the 1990 Whiting Writers' Awards last
night, for which each will receive $30,000. The annual awards are in recognition
of writing achievement and writing promise.

The winners were honored by the trustees of the Whiting Foundation in a ceremony
at the Pierpont Morgan Library.

These are the winners:

 Emily Hiestand, author of a volume of poetry, "Green the Witch-Hazel Wood" (
Graywolf Press , 1989).

Tony Kushner, a playwright, whose "Millenium Approaches," an apocalyptic vision
of America in the 1980's, was produced last spring at the Mark Taper Forum.

Yannick Murphy, fiction writer, playwright and adjunct professor at the American
Language Institute of New York University, for her "Stories in Another Language"
(Alfred A. Knopf, 1987).

Lawrence Naumoff, the author of two novels, "The Night of the Weeping Women"
(Morgan Entrekin/ Atlantic Monthly Press , 1988) and "Rootie Kazootie" ( Farrar,
Straus & Giroux , 1990).

D. Nurkse, the author of three books of poems, including "Staggered Lights" (
Owl Creek Press , 1990).

Mark Richard, whose collection of short stories, "The Ice at the Bottom of the
World," was published last year by Alfred A. Knopf.

Harriet Ritvo, nonfiction writer and associate professor in the Department of
Humanities at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who is the author of
"The Animal Estate: The English and Other Creatures in the Victorian Age" (
Harvard University Press , 1987) and co-editor of "The Macropolitics of
19th-Century Literature: Nationalism, Imperialism, Exoticism," to be published
next year by the University of Pennsylvania Press.

Christopher Tilghman, whose collection of short stories, "In A Father's Place,"
was published this year by Farrar, Straus & Giroux.

Amy Wilentz, a nonfiction writer, whose book, "The Rainy Season" (Simon &
Schuster, 1989), is about Haiti since the fall of the Duvalier Government.

Stephen Wright, whose first novel, "Meditations in Green" (Charles Scribner's
Sons, 1983), is about the Vietnam War.  His most recent novel is "M31: A Family
Romance" ( Harmony Books , 1988).


Candidates are proposed by nominators around the country who are appointed by
the foundation and who serve anonymously. A five-member selection committee,
also anonymous, reads and evaluates the work of candidates.

The Whiting Foundation was established in 1963 by Mrs. Giles Whiting, who left
an unrestricted bequest of more than $10 million to the foundation. In 1984, Dr.
Gerald Freund was appointed director of the new Writers' Program, which has
since awarded more than $1.5 million to 60 poets, novelists, playwrights and
essayists.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 26, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

For Bruce Morrison in Connecticut

SECTION: Section A; Page 34; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 550 words


Republican Lowell Weicker, running as an independent, has complicated the
contest for Governor of Connecticut. In 1988, he was defeated in his campaign
for a fourth term in the Senate. Now, capitalizing on his popularity as a
maverick, Mr. Weicker leads in the polls, but without clearly defining how he
would govern.

The Democratic candidate, Representative Bruce Morrison, offers a far sharper
vision, a record of accomplishment -- and the best prospect of constructive
leadership.

The third man in this three-way race is Republican John Rowland, the state's
most conservative Representative in Congress. First elected in 1984, he gained
national attention by bashing a Japanese radio outside the Capitol for
photographers and by pressing for the return of G.I.'s missing in action in
Vietnam -- but not much else.

He rashly proposes reduced compensation for state employees, and pledges to veto
any legislation to establish a state income tax. He changed from pro-life to
pro-choice on the abortion issue just before announcing for the governorship,
opening himself to the charge of transparent opportunism.

Lowell Weicker is a hearty, combative man whom The Times has repeatedly endorsed
for the Senate. We greatly admire his lonely courage in defending constitutional
principle, disadvantaged minorities and the handicapped. But his qualifications
to lead the state for the next four years are not obvious, and his campaign has
been disappointing.

He is sensibly noncommittal about an income tax but vague about a program. As an
independent, he would be in a good position to clean house after 15 years of
Democratic control. But it sounds like bluster to hear him claim he'd be so bold
that voters would retire him after one term. No one, no matter how bold, can
conquer Connecticut's difficulties in four years.

By contrast, Mr. Morrison offers appealing thoughtfulness and clarity about
those difficulties. Neither he nor his opponents can say today just what they
would do about the biggest problem, the large and growing budget deficit. But
Mr. Morrison outlines a plausible agenda. It includes a hiring freeze, a
slowdown in spending on highways and other public works, adoption of cutbacks
proposed by a special commission and short-term borrowing if necessary. He is
cautious but not dogmatic about an income tax, or any new taxes. Indeed, like
both of his opponents, he would cut some taxes to improve the business climate.

Bruce Morrison isn't as flashy as Mr. Rowland or as well known as Mr. Weicker.
In some voters' minds he may be identified with the establishment Democrats who
have long dominated in Hartford, but that's a grossly mistaken identity. He
bravely challenged Gov. William O'Neill for the party's nomination, helping
impel Mr. O'Neill to retire from politics.

Mr. Morrison is a serious man. He wants to develop regional compacts to save
desperate cities. He has thought carefully about state-managed universal health
care. In nine years as a Legal Services lawyer for the poor in New Haven, fresh
out of Yale Law School, and eight conscientious years in Congress, he has
demonstrated compassion, intellect and vigor. Mr. Weicker shares those virtues
but, in our judgment, Bruce Morrison would be more effective. We endorse Mr.
Morrison for Governor.


LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 27, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Escalation, 1990 Style

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 465 words


Does it make military or political sense to add 100,000 or more American troops
to the 210,000 already deployed in Saudi Arabia? Though the buildup announced by
Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney is unexpected, that does not mean it is
imprudent. But if Americans are to support this new commitment, the
Administration needs to explain its purposes and to allay fears that the
collective forces in the Persian Gulf are becoming excessively Americanized.

The buildup may be essential to persuade Saddam Hussein that he has no choice
but to withdraw from Kuwait unconditionally. But since Vietnam, Americans have
been wary of escalation, and slippery official justifications for it. Pentagon
analysts say that even 100,000 additional troops may not be enough, that more
backup is required. As the risks and sacrifices swell, so will the pressure to
initiate use of force soon, when the desert is cooler and dark nights favor
surprise.

Administration officials insist there is no change in the declared strategy of
multilateral collaboration to evict Iraq from Kuwait. Tough U.N. resolutions
have imposed sanctions against Iraq that already seem to be producing results.
This collective effort has prevented Saddam Hussein from defining the conflict
as a U.S. vendetta inspired by a thirst for cheap oil. Increasing the U.S.
component in the multilateral effort risks Americanizing the siege to his
advantage.

Creditably, the Bush Administration seems alert to the danger and is finally
taking up a Soviet proposal to upgrade the long-moribund U.N. Military Staff
Committee. For the first time in memory, senior military officers representing
the five permanent members of the Security Council will meet to discuss joint
action.

Success, however, will require more than multinational unity. To nurture
American understanding and support, the President needs to explain why more
American troops must be deployed when there is no commensurate increase by
European and Arab allies.

Saudi Arabia has 60,000 troops in the force. France has reportedly agreed to put
its 13,000 under U.S. command. Britain has done the same with its 15,000 troops.
Syria has pledged 19,000, Egypt 20,000. Other countries are sending detachments
or ships. But so far, there's been not even a token military contribution from
Germany or Japan.

No one can say for sure that war will be avoided, or that economic sanctions and
the multinational force will induce Saddam Hussein to disgorge Kuwait. But the
terrible cost in lives, and the risk of enduring Arab hatred of America, are
powerful arguments for restraint. Impatience alone is no argument for initiating
war. The burden is on President Bush to show that a significant increase in
American forces will make less likely their use in battle.


LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Social Events

BYLINE: By Thomas W. Ennis

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 56; Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 1130 words



For the Rusk Institute

Oct. 29 -- The Rusk Auxiliary is giving a dinner party at the Scarlatti
restaurant, 34 East 52d Street, for the Howard A. Rusk Institute of
Rehabilitation Medicine at the New York University Medical Center. Cocktails at
7 P.M.; dinner at 8. In addition to a raffle, there will be gift bags for all
guests. Informal. Tickets, $250, from (212) 340-6196.

 At the Winter Garden

Oct. 29 -- The American Friends of the Israel Museum in Jerusalem is giving a
25th birthday fund-raising party at the Winter Garden of the World Financial
Center. Cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing at 8. Black tie.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 683-5190.

Briefly Noted

Oct. 29 -- The Ms. Foundation, which provides financial aid to women's groups,
is hoping to increase its treasury with a fund-raiser at Caroline's Comedy Club,
Pier 17 at the South Street Seaport. Angela Scott, Joy Behar, Brett Butler and
other comedians will entertain, beginning at 5:30 P.M. Tickets, $125, from (212)
353-8580.

Oct. 29 -- A fund-raiser for the American Horse Shows Association's younger
riders programs will be held at Cartier, Fifth Avenue and 52d Street, where
champagne will be offered from 6:30 to 8:30 P.M. Black tie optional. Tickets,
$125, at the door or from (212) 972-2472, ext. 73.

Oct. 29 -- An Evening With Dracula, a costumed and staged reading of the Bram
Stoker novel, will benefit Survivor Productions, a nonprofit theater company
specializing in melodramas. The 7 P.M. performance at the Sara Delano Roosevelt
House, 47 East 65th Street, will be preceded by a performance of theatrical
tricks at 6:30. Tickets, $10, from (212) 877-2988.

Oct. 30 -- The Fresh Air Fund will benefit from a Halloween dance, buffet dinner
and auction to be held at Roseland, 239 West 52d Street, where the party will
begin at 7 P.M. Masks designed for the event by Peter Max and Mark Kostabi will
be auctioned. Tickets, $100 for guests 35 years old and younger; $150 and $300,
from (212) 221-0900.

Oct. 30 -- The French-American Foundation is raising money for its
early-childhood education projects with a champagne reception and auction of
luxury goods, mostly French, at Christie's, followed by dinner and dancing at
the French Consulate, 934 Fifth Avenue (75th Street). Festive attire. Tickets,
$75 for the reception and auction only or $250 for all events, from (212)
737-3850.

Oct. 30 -- The entire New York Knicks basketball team and its coaches are
expected to attend a dinner dance for the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation at the
Waldorf-Astoria. Reception at 6 P.M.; dinner and entertainment at 7. Black tie
optional. Tickets, $150, from (212) 889-7575.

Oct. 30 -- The Aspen Institute, the sponsor of social-affairs forums, will
observe its 40th birthday with an awards dinner at the Plaza. The evening, which
will raise money for the institute, will honor William C. Butcher and Marian
Wright Edelman. Black tie. Tickets, $500, from (212) 735-0721.

Oct. 30 -- The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center is offering a champagne
reception, concert and dinner at its annual benefit at Alice Tully Hall.
Reception at 6:30 P.M., concert at 7:30 with Handel, Purcell and Mendelssohn on
the program, and dinner at 9:30. Black tie optional. Tickets, $325 for the
concert and dinner; $20 for the concert only, from (212) 362-1900, ext. 357.

Oct. 31 -- The Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company will benefit from a
dinner dance at the Intrepid museum, Pier 86 at West 46th Street. Mayor David N.
Dinkins and Ron Kovic, the author of "Born on the Fourth of July," will be among
the people honored as benefactors of Vietnam veterans. The party starts at 6:30
P.M. Black tie. Tickets, $250, from (212) 512-5640.

Oct. 31 -- The Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service's 124th anniversary dinner
at the Waldorf-Astoria will benefit the bureau's programs for children. Black
tie. Reception at 6 P.M.; dinner at 7. Tickets, $500, from (718) 875-0710.

Oct. 31 -- Graham-Windham, one of the nation's oldest child-welfare agencies,
will be the beneficiary of an evening of jazz by Wynton Marsalis and Ellis, his
father, and Branford and Jason, his brothers, at Alice Tully Hall at 8:30 P.M. A
champagne reception will follow. Tickets $250, from (212) 529-6445, ext. 319.

Oct. 31 -- The Hospitality Committee for United Nations Delegations is giving an
ambassadors' ball at the Plaza to raise money for its programs. A cocktail
reception at 7:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing at 8:30. Black tie
or national dress. Tickets, $300, from (212) 963-7182.

Nov. 1 -- Highlights from Rita Hayworth movies will be shown at an Arabian
Nights party to benefit the Alzheimer's Association. The actress's daughter,
Princess Yasmin Aga Khan, is in charge of the benefit, to be held under a tent
at Tavern on the Green. Black tie. Tickets, $1,000 and $2,500, from (212)
735-0712.

Nov. 1 -- The Alcoholism Council of Greater New York is giving its annual
Amethyst Ball at the Pierre. A reception at 7:30 will be followed by dinner at
8:30. Black tie. Tickets, $350 or $150 for guests age 35 and younger, from (212)
979-6277.

Nov. 1 -- Independent Curators Inc. is observing its 15th anniversary with a
cocktail party, fund-raising exhibition and silent auction of works by artists
who have participated in the group's shows over the last five years. These
events at the Bess Cutler Gallery, 593 Broadway (Houston Street), will be
followed by dinner at the Columns, across the street at 584 Broadway. Tickets,
$300 or $50 for guests age 35 and younger who wish to attend only the cocktail
party, from (212) 254-8200.

Nov. 1 -- Ruby Dee, Ossie Davis, Carmen de Lavallade and Geoffrey Holder are
expected to attend a dinner dance for the Sickle Cell Anemia Foundation of
Greater New York at the New York Hilton. Joyce B. Dinkins is the honorary
chairwoman. A 6:30 reception will be followed by dinner at 7:30. Tickets, $100
(reception is $35 additional); $65 for students and the elderly, from (212)
865-1500.

 Send In the Clowns

Nov. 2 -- The Big Apple Circus's annual fund-raiser for its community programs
will begin with a French picnic at 6 P.M. under the big top at Damrosch Park at
Lincoln Center. Following a performance by ballerinas, horses and clowns, guests
will be invited to join the performers for dessert and dancing. Tickets for
adults, $75, $150, $250 and $350; for children, $50 and $100, from (212)
268-2500.

 Helping the Elderly

Nov. 4 -- The 74th annual dinner to benefit the Hebrew Home for the Aged in
Riverdale, the Bronx, will honor Sanford Weill, a longtime benefactor. A 6:30
P.M. reception at the Waldorf-Astoria will be followed by dinner at 7:30. Black
tie. Tickets, $500 and $1,000, from (212) 549-8700, ext. 250.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Peru's Leader Proposes A Market to Fight Coca

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, Oct. 27


Peru's new President has proposed a novel approach to fighting coca-leaf
production: the creation of a free-market environment where peasants would find
alternative crops to be economically attractive.

In a speech in Lima on Friday, the leader, President Alberto Fujimori, rejected
military and police repression, which until recently was the dominant anti-coca
strategy in Peru, the world's largest source of the raw material for cocaine.

Instead, Mr. Fujimori, an agronomist by training, proposed granting land titles
to coca growers and radically slashing state controls and private monopolies
that currently make cultivation of legal export crops unprofitable for small
farmers.

"There is now no possibility of moving to other crops because of the restrictive
regulatory environment," Hernando de Soto, a free-market theorist and
contributor to the plan, said today in a telephone interview. Mr. de Soto, a key
adviser to the new Government, is to travel to the United States on Monday to
promote Peru's new approach.

Fear of Civil War

Last month, Mr. Fujimori angered United States officials by rejecting a $35.9
million military aid package. The aid included training and equipping six
Peruvian Army batallions for operations in Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley, an area
responsible for most of Peru's annual $1 billion coca-leaf harvest.

During the presidency of Alan Garcia, who stepped down July 28, the United
States financed an aggressive program in the Upper Huallaga of blowing up jungle
laboratories and of eradicating fields of coca.

But fear of setting off a full-fledged civil war with the one million Peruvians
involved in coca-leaf cultivation was a recurring theme in Mr. Fujimori's speech
on Friday.

"Efficient repression, which leaves peasants without alternatives, could easily
unchain a civil war of unsuspected dimensions," the President warned of the
Upper Huallaga. The region is already heavily influenced by guerrillas of the
radical Shining Path movement.

Plan to Revive U.S. Talks

"Let us not repeat the errors of President Ngo Dinh Diem of Vietnam," the
President continued in the speech, which was delivered to foreign diplomats,
including Ambassador Anthony Quainton of the United States. "Here in Peru, we
are not going to run the risk of being defeated because we put the peasants,
their innumerable relatives, friends and countrymen on the side of the drug
traffickers and terrorists."

Also on Friday, Mr. Fujimori sent President Bush a letter proposing renewed
talks on military and economic aid. The military aid money rejected by Mr.
Fujimori last month will now be reassigned to Bolivia and Colombia, two
countries regarded by Washington as more cooperative in the war on cocaine.

In a sharp break with conventional discourse in the Andes over coca production,
the Fujimori policy speech did not discuss specifics of military aid, economic
aid or even potential alternative crops.

After the speech, Mr. Quainton told reporters that United States official would
closely study the new anti-drug strategy before commenting.

Issuing of Land Titles

In August, American officials were angered when Mr. Fujimori moved into
retirement Juan Zarate, the police general most closely identified with American
anti-drug efforts.

In early August, at the time of a visit to Lima by Vice President Dan Quayle,
the United States Office of National Drug Control Policy called Peru's drug
fighting effort "the most problematic" of the three Andean producers.

A report by the agency said the Bush Administration was evaluating the efforts
of Peru's new Government to see if they "justify the provision" of more aid next
year. The Administration has proposed sending $700 million in military and
economic aid to Peru over the next five years.

Mr. de Soto estimated this week that land titles could be issued within a year
to coca growers in the Upper Huallaga, the source of about one half of the
world's clandestine coca harvest. But violence from guerrillas will undoubtedly
be a major obstacle.

Army Commander Wounded

In the last month, heavy fighting in the area has claimed the lives of over 160
people -- Army soldiers, peasants, and Shining Path guerrillas. On Oct. 19,
guerrillas ambushed and severely wounded the regional army commander, Gen. Mario
Britto Romero. The general's jeep driver and two bystanders were killed.

Even with peace, a free-market environment and access to rural credit, peasants
may not be interested in dropping cultivation of coca leaves, which are the most
profitable crop in Peru.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
For Vietnam, The Price Of Progress Is Cambodia

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 4; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 942 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


THERE are two Southeast Asias, Prime Minister Chatichai Choonhavan of Thailand
is fond of saying: one thriving and capitalist, the other socialist and
stagnant.

So it should be no surprise that even the famously stubborn Vietnamese
leadership, despite its divisions over the pace of change, has realized that it
must join the development race now or be forever left behind, floundering in a
politically unstable swamp of unemployment and inflation.

That is the prime reason Vietnam finally decided to cut a deal on Cambodia and
withdraw the bulk of its troops after an occupation of 11 years -- to end its
international isolation and attract Western investment. And it is the prime
reason that Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, went to Washington
recently, the highest-ranking Hanoi official to do so since the north became
independent in 1954.

That year, when the French left Vietnam, Hanoi was the most modern city in
Southeast Asia. In 1975, when the Americans left, the region's most advanced
city was Saigon. Both cities today have a sort of aspic charm, with moldy French
provincial buildings in Hanoi and American DeSoto buses still grinding through
the streets of Ho Chi Minh City.

The isolation and stagnation have been the price of both war and ideology. But
now Hanoi, like the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, needs the West, and seems
more willing to pay the price.

Vietnam eased central controls on the economy beginning as early as 1987. But a
Cambodia-related embargo on aid, investment and trade with Vietnam, led by
Washington, has successfully blocked vital loans from multilateral agencies like
the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank.

While more countries now trade with Vietnam, the American veto on the lending
agencies has forestalled significant Western investment and stifled domestic
development, particularly as Soviet aid declines.

A settlement in Cambodia, much more than the emotional and easily manipulated
issue of the American M.I.A.'s, has always been the key to economic and
diplomatic normalization between Washington and Hanoi. And only normalization
will open Vietnam in a serious fashion to the West.

So it is Washington's main card with Vietnam, and even the American Chamber of
Commerce, eager to do business with Vietnam, should not be surprised that the
Bush Administration will continue to play it, at least until a Cambodia
settlement is ratified.

Cambodia is also the main obstacle to normal relations between Hanoi and
Beijing, whose support for Vietnam's revolution soured quickly over its
Cambodian adventure. Hanoi's expulsion in 1979 of China's allies, the Khmer
Rouge, no matter their crimes, was an insult for which the Chinese, especially
Deng Xiaoping, were eager to extract the severest pain.

But China's own isolation over the killings near Tiananmen Square, coupled with
the collapse of Eastern Europe and Moscow's sudden retrenchment everywhere, have
also pushed Vietnam and China closer together.

Both leaderships are intensely aware of being socialist holdouts, but hope that
Asian socialism will be a more lasting brand. They cite the communitarian nature
of Asian societies and the fact that Communist rule rose from revolution and
nation-building, and was not merely imposed, as in Eastern Europe, by a
conquering army.

Still, there is an element of whistling in the dark. Vietnam's aging leaders,
like China's, hope to embrace Western aid, investment and private enterprise
while preserving the one-party nature of the Leninist state. But increasingly,
younger intellectuals and those with more experience in southern Vietnam are
expressing doubts that economic and political development can be separated -- or
that the country can walk with one leg shorter than the other, as one Politburo
member, Tran Xuan Bach, put it before being purged in March.

All this is taking place in the context of a leadership struggle. The party
General Secretary, Nguyen Van Linh, has begun the reforms but lacks the time and
strength to see them through. He has said he will retire at the next party
congress, probably in May, and the battle between conservatives and reformers
has gathered bite.

The conservatives, who had been grouped around Le Duc Tho, who died two weeks
ago, and his brother, Interior Minister Mai Chi Tho, have used the collapse of
Eastern Europe to try to brake any move toward even a Soviet-style multiparty
system.

In the last five months, the Vietnamese have had a security crackdown, arresting
as many as several hundred people, some for just a few days, especially in the
south. They include retired soldiers of the old National Liberation Front,
religious figures, businessmen and others with what the Government calls "too
much" contact with Westerners.

While the internal crackdown has now eased somewhat, there continues to be a
public campaign about the reported efforts of "reactionary forces overseas" to
sabotage the state and socialism. Two weeks ago, a court in Hanoi convicted 38
people of trying to overthrow the Government with the help of Thailand and of
Vietnamese exiles based in the United States.

While these people represent no real threat to the regime, the trial is
apparently being used to justify the crackdown and serve as a warning to others,
including the Western-leaning reformers in the leadership, among them the urbane
Mr. Thach.

But while some might see his international prominence as a stepping stone of
sorts, he will almost assuredly not be Vietnam's next General Secretary. Even in
a collective leadership, there are other, less congenial forces at play.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Editorial Notebook;
Were Military Reformers Right?

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 605 words


The United States has two theories about preparing for war -- that of the
military establishment and that of the military reformers. The right place to
test them is on the proving ground.

The establishment's doctrine is visible is the prevailing pattern of Pentagon
procurement -- build high-tech weapons that can offset the opponents' quantity
with quality. The reformers have no objection to technology, but they believe
many weapons carry high-tech features that confer no military advantage.

In their view, the contractors' desire for high-cost, high-profit systems is
abetted by the services' love of high performance for its own sake. Thus the Air
Force insists its planes be supersonic, even though pilots who fly at such
speeds for any length of time simply run out of fuel.

Most dog fights are decided by surprise and maneuverability, not speed. The Air
Force's premier fighter, the F-15, has powerful engines but unfortunately they
smoke, giving away the plane's position. The Air Force has invested enormous
sums to prepare for air combat beyond visual distance, waged by radar and
radar-guided missiles. The reformers view these systems as worse than useless.
Shooting at radar blips can be a recipe for disaster, as when the cruiser
Vincennes shot down an Iranian airliner. In any case, the plane that uses radar
to locate an enemy plane betrays its own position.

Though most of the Pentagon's arsenal is establishment products, the reformers
have managed to sneak in several systems. One is the early model F-16, a plane
designed purely for dog-fighting. Another is the highly successful Sidewinder
missile, which homes in on the target's heat. The Air Force has always preferred
the far more costly and complex radar-guided missiles, which have, since
Vietnam, a far from distinguished record.

A third reform weapon is the A-10, a plane designed to seek and destroy tanks.
The Air Force believes only high-performance jets can escape the ground fire of
the battlefield. But it's hard to spot a camouflaged tank when traveling at 500
miles per hour, let alone destroy one. The A-10 is armored to withstand ground
fire. The pilot sits in a titanium bucket and fires bullets of depleted uranium
so deadly to tanks that a second's burst is enough.

But the reformers' principal message is not about weapons, which they regard as
secondary. In their view, tactics and training are what decides battles. They
find fault with many Pentagon procedures, from the constant rotation of
personnel that destroys unit cohesion, to promotion systems that favor
good-tempered managers and select out sharp-edged warrior types.

The reformers are responsible critics, but words are cheap. Military
establishments tend to be conservative for reasons that are not all bad. The
adage that generals always prepare for the last war is true but unfair: the last
war offers the most credible test of what works and what doesn't.

Thus the establishment tends to resist novel weapons like the cruise missile,
while preferring higher-tech versions of standard platforms like tank, plane and
carrier. But these weapons too can fail catastrophically in combat. The
reformers have always insisted that new weapons should be put through realistic
tests before purchase, a procedure the establishment has strongly resisted. When
weapons have been rigorously tested, disasters like the Divad gun have come to
light.

The reformers are certainly right that it is better to try out new weapons on
the proving ground than in combat. If diplomacy prevails, the rest of their
ideas need not be tested on the battlefield.


LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENTS/RECORDINGS
AND KEEP IN MIND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 36; Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 911 words


Here are some notable releases of the last few months.

 ALL DOGS GO TO HEAVEN -- Don Bluth's film for young viewers "is so
overcomplicated that it becomes difficult to follow." (Janet Maslin) 1989.
MGM/UA. $24.98. 1 hour, 25 minutes. Closed captioned. G.

BAD INFLUENCE -- As a charming drifter who takes over the life of a Los Angeles
yuppie (James Spader), Rob Lowe helps make this "a refreshing exercise in glossy
decadence." (Vincent Canby) 1990. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. Laser disk, $34.95.
1:39. CC. R.


BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY -- Ron Kovic returns from Vietnam a bitter
paraplegic. Oliver Stone's film has "enormous visceral power." (Canby) 1989.
MCA/Universal. $91.95. LD, $39.98. 2:25. CC. R.




THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HER LOVER -- Peter Greenway's elegant, brutal
film is "so esthetically brilliant that it expands the boundaries of film
itself." (Caryn James) 1990. Vidmark. $89.95. LD, $39.95. 2:03, NC-17; 1:35, R.

 CRY-BABY -- John Waters's story of 50's high-school America is a new Presley
movie made "in the manner of a teen-crazed Cecil B. DeMille." (Canby) 1990.
MCA/Universal. $91.95. LD, $34.98. 1:26. CC. PG-13.



FIRE BIRDS -- Taught to fly helicopters, Jake (Nicolas Cage) and Brad (Tommy Lee
Jones) fly off to confront the drug crowd in a film that "looks as if it were
patched together between midnight and 3 A.M." (Canby) 1990. Touchstone. $89.95.
LD, $39.99. 1:26. CC. PG-13.




GLORY -- Edward Zwick's film about a black regiment in the Civil War "celebrates
in a manner that insists on acknowledging the sorrow." (Canby) 1989.
RCA/Columbia. $91.95. LD, $39.95. 2:02. CC. R.


THE GODS MUST BE CRAZY II -- Xixo the bushman lopes cross country amid various
unrelated subplots. "As the sun sinks slowly, everyone shares a disappointed
yawn." (Canby) 1990. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD, $34.95. 1:38. CC. PG.


THE HANDMAID'S TALE -- Volker Schlondorff's adaptation of Margaret Atwood's
novel, starring Natasha Richardson, has a "clear and insidious visual scheme."
(Maslin) 1990. HBO. $89.99. LD, $39.95. 1:49. CC. R.



HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER -- John McNaughton's "intelligent, revolting,
artistically made look at a murderer comes close to cinema of pure technique."
(James) 1990. MPI. $79.98. 1:30. No rating.


HOUSE PARTY -- Reginald Hudlin's effervescent first feature is a "buoyant,
perceptive comedy of teen-age manners." (Canby) 1990. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD,
$34.95. 1:40. CC. R.


I LOVE YOU TO DEATH -- As a philandering pizza man Kevin Kline gives a bravura
performance, "both too much and absolutely right . . . both manic and laid
back." (Canby) 1990. RCA/Columbia. $91.95. LD, $34.95. 1:37. CC. R.


IN THE SPIRIT -- In Sandra Seacat's nervous new-age comedy about a Beverly Hills
couple (Peter Falk and Elaine May) in New York, the camera is "never allowed to
linger where a performer might be shown to good advantage." (Maslin) 1990.
Academy. $89.95. 1:34. R.


THE LITTLE MERMAID -- The Hans Christian Andersen story is a marvel of skillful
animation. "The best animated Disney film in at least 30 years." (Maslin) 1989.
Disney. $26.99. LD, $29.99. 1:23. CC. G.

LORD OF THE FLIES -- In William Golding's classic story of mayhem among castaway
schoolboys, "there is almost nothing to keep the mind from wandering." (Maslin)
1990. Nelson. $89.98. LD, $34.98. 1:30. CC. R.


MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON -- In Bob Rafelson's film about the African explorations
of Sir Richard Francis Burton and John Hanning Speke, the principals look
"somewhat smaller than life." (Canby) 1990. Nelson. $89.98. LD, $34.98. 1:30.
CC. R.

NUNS ON THE RUN -- Two London hoods join the Missionary Brides of Christ in a
genial farce with "something of the licentiousness of 'A Fish Called Wanda.' "
(Canby) 1990. CBS/Fox. $89.98. 1:30. PG-13.

PETER PAN -- The inventions in the animated version of the J. M. Barrie classic
are as "skillful as they have ever been in Disney films." 1953. Disney. $24.99.
LD, $29.99. 1:16. CC. G.

PRETTY WOMAN -- Vivian (Julia Roberts) is transformed from a streetwalker to the
gracious, lovely woman who fills the void in the lonely life of Edward (Richard
Gere). "Despite a covetousness and underlying misogyny," the film is "giddily,
lighthearted escapism most of the time." (Maslin) 1990. Touchstone. $19.99. LD,
$29.99. 1:38. CC. R.

Q & A -- Nick Nolte is the grand, bigoted center in Sidney Lumet's film, which
"explores corners of the city that no director has ever set foot in before."
(Canby) 1990. HBO. $92.99. LD, $44.95. 2:12. CC. R.

ROSALIE GOES SHOPPING -- Marianne Sagebrecht is the "shrewd, beatific center" of
Percy Adlon's film about merchandise-mad America. (Maslin) 1989. Vidmark.
$89.95. 1:34. CC. PG.

STANLEY AND IRIS -- Martin Ritt's love story about two seemingly commonplace
people (played by Jane Fonda and Robert De Niro) is "honest and direct and
entertaining." (Canby) 1990. MGM/UA. $89.98. LD, $34.98. 1:47. CC. PG-13.

TEEN-AGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES: THE MOVIE -- The movie "is itself a mutant of
sorts, an unsightly hybrid of martial arts exploitation films and live-action
cartoons." (Maslin) 1990. Family Home Entertainment. $24.99. 1:36. PG.

WHERE THE HEART IS -- John Boorman's film about a New York demolition king and
his children has an "undeniable grandeur even in the midst of its broadest
lapses of sense, taste and style." (Maslin) 1990. Touchstone. $89.95. LD,
$29.99. 1:47. CC. R.9/16

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Up 'Jacob's Ladder' And Into the Hell Of a Veteran's Psyche

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 15; Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1811 words


TRAILERS FOR THE NEW FILM "Jacob's Ladder" suggest a horror flick set in a New
York City subway. The film's first sequence, in which helicopter gunships
flutter across the yellow-orange sunset of a Vietnamese sky, could open any
movie about the war there. But the director speaks of a psychological thriller,
the title points to a biblical allegory and the scriptwriter insists he has sold
Hollywood an adaptation of the Tibetan Book of the Dead.

That said, those who go to see "Jacob's Ladder," which opens on Friday, will
still be in for some surprises.

"We've been trying to raise ambiguity to an art form," Tim Robbins, the star of
the film, said of the stock answers that he and other principals have been
giving to questions like "What is it about?"

Though the film is meant to turn and twist its way to a clear, sudden
denouement, the switchbacks of plot are sharp enough to have left preview
audiences arguing over just what it is they've seen, said the film's director,
Adrian Lyne. "Focus groups" of test viewers who were scheduled to chat for half
an hour after seeing the film have dragged on twice that long.

Then again, such a result is perhaps as predictable as any that might emerge
from the unlikely collaboration led by Mr. Lyne.

The British-born director is best known for his last two films, the
velvet-soft-corish "9 1/2 Weeks" and the slick, hugely popular thriller "Fatal
Attraction." He came upon the screenplay for "Jacob's Ladder" after it had
gathered nearly a decade's worth of film-studio dust; its author, Bruce Joel
Rubin, owes much of his reputation to "Ghost," another film he wrote that became
a hit only as "Jacob's Ladder" was being completed.

For a drama about the metaphysical torments of a thoughtful Vietnam veteran, Mr.
Lyne found his leading man in Tim Robbins, the loose-jointed young pitcher of
"Bull Durham." His leading lady, Elizabeth Pena, made her first big impression
as the wife of Ritchie Valens's half-brother in "La Bamba."

Seven years after "Jacob's Ladder" was mentioned in American Film magazine as
one of Hollywood's 10 best unproduced screenplays, Mr. Rubin would like to think
that time has shepherded the right pieces for the film into place.

"A lot of directors said they loved it," he said by phone from his home in Los
Angeles. "But mostly I had 'Nightmare on Elm Street' types calling me and
saying, 'I can make this on the cheap.' I thought I was better off having one of
the 10 best unproduced screenplays and leaving it on the shelf."

Mr. Lyne, a full year from the opening of "Fatal Attraction" and still trolling
for new material, snapped it off the shelf in the fall of 1988. Brushing away
the dust, he said, he found a page-turner.

A discussion ensued on the writer's office floor. It ended, Mr. Rubin said, with
the director grabbing a telephone and ordering his agent to back him out of a
commitment to direct the screen adaptation of Tom Wolfe's novel "The Bonfire of
the Vanities."

Yet even with Mr. Lyne as its champion, "Jacob's Ladder" evoked some queasiness
in those holding purse strings. After a palace coup at Paramount Pictures, where
the director had already produced two huge hits, a new regime ordered the
project scrapped. It was eventually revived by Carolco Pictures.

Mr. Lyne does not quite sneer at the hurdles. But over many cups of morning
coffee in his apartment in the TriBeCa section of Manhattan, the director, who
at 49 wears his blond hair shaggy and his white T-shirt the way men his age used
to before white T-shirts became fashionable, could not quite suppress cackles
when he said of "Jacob's Ladder," "It's a very strange story, and I'm lucky I
got $25 million to make it."

Most of the strange things in question happen to one Jacob (Jake) Singer, an
upper-caste doctor of philosophy self-exiled to the working class. After an
infantry stint in Vietnam, he appears to find himself back in the United States
and back in uniform as a Brooklyn mailman.

Having been thrown out by his wife, Jake is lazily involved with Jezzie, the
sexy postal clerk played by Miss Pena. He seems reasonably unconcerned about his
plight -- until he begins to see demons.

Like Mr. Rubin's "Ghost," "Jacob's Ladder" is broadly about a man coming to
grips with the idea of his death. But what in "Ghosts" is fantasized with
special effects and softened with comedic touches, Mr. Lyne explores more with
memories than with mirrors.

Notwithstanding a layer of allusions to Jacob's Old Testament dream of a ladder
reaching from earth to heaven, Mr. Rubin, a 47-year-old Detroit native who once
lived in a Buddhist monastery in Nepal, said the chief theological referents for
his script came from religions of the East.

"I don't think life begins at birth, or even conception," he said. "I see us as
spiritual beings that come into earthly experience for a reason, and leave it.
My movies are kind of polemics on that."

The polemics of creating "Jacob's Ladder," however, had as much to do with
imagery as theology.

As first written, the script called for what Mr. Rubin described as "hellfire
and brimstone" -- elaborate, ethereal sets and monsters, horned and winged, that
might have recalled tableaux of the Flemish painter Hieronymous Bosch. Mr. Lyne
thought that a bit too much, too unrealistic. "The Liberace version," he called
it.

So for a year, the two men said, they brainstormed, bartered and argued
violently. Mr. Lyne said he watched endless documentary film about Vietnam, read
countless chronicles of near-death experiences and visited every major special
effects laboratory in the United States seeking an original look for his
underworld.

Finally, they came up with what they thought a more understated, believable
vision of hell, inspired among others by the English painter Francis Bacon, the
English engraver-poet William Blake and the American photographer Diane Arbus.

"It was intimidating, because of the biblical imagery," Mr. Lyne said. "How the
hell to do it? And how to do it without people laughing apart from everything
else."

Although the casting was barely less laborious, it was less mysterious. Both Mr.
Robbins and Miss Pena auditioned early, and while neither had carried a feature
film before, their videotapes held up under withering competition. Among the
dozens of actors who reportedly sought the role of Jacob were Dustin Hoffman, Al
Pacino and Richard Gere; the roughly 300 who auditioned to play Jezzie included
Julia Roberts, Andie MacDowell and Madonna.

Much as Miss Pena might have seemed an unlikely choice for a character Mr. Rubin
conceived of as having Midwestern farm roots, it is Mr. Robbins who in "Jacob's
Ladder" breaks more sharply from his major roles past. Those include appearances
in "Eric the Viking," "Cadillac Man" and "Five Corners."

"I'm always looking for something that takes a left turn, and this was a great
opportunity to go in a different direction," Mr. Robbins said. "I love doing
comedy, but I know I can do other things as well."

Both Mr. Robbins and Mr. Rubin said they initially felt some trepidation that
the thickly layered material had fallen into the hands of Mr. Lyne. Critics have
often branded the director -- one of a half-dozen English contemporaries (Allan
Parker, Hugh Hudson and Tony Scott are others) who moved from British television
commercials to blockbuster American features -- as a high priest of film style,
low on substance.

But oddly, some of the most arresting aspects of "Jacob's Ladder" are in what
the film leaves out, and its lack of cinematic affectation in distinguishing
dream from reality -- or at least what appear to be dream and reality.

"We wanted to find a way to allow these demons to come in subliminally," Mr.
Rubin said. "If you see the whole thing," Mr. Lyne added, "then it instantly
loses its terror."

True to fans of his earlier films, Mr. Lyne remains fascinated in "Jacob's
Ladder" by the lines between sex and violence, sensuality and gore, comfort and
vulnerability. He looks for tension in everything from a morning shave to the
way a shyster lawyer chomps his ice cubes, and his camera fixes everywhere from
the spinning wheel of a hospital gurney to between the legs of a car-driving
Government agent.

Nor, Mr. Lyne says, does he feel at all shy as a foreigner dealing with as
emotional an American subject as the Vietnam War. But he and others involved in
making the film agree that if "Jacob's Ladder" can be connected to the cathartic
gush of Vietnam films of the 1980's, it would be at the cycle's end.

"Vietnam was really a means to an end," said the film's producer, Alan Marshall.
"It was a plot device rather than something we were trying to make a huge issue
of."

Finally, though, Mr. Lyne may further the reputation he gained with "9 1/2
Weeks" and "Fatal Attraction" as a director unusually willing to cut into a film
where it fails to move test audiences. After early viewers said they felt
overwhelmed by "Jacob's Ladder," about half an hour of film was cut, mostly from
the conclusion.

"The truth is, the original end didn't work," Mr. Lyne said. "People love to
imagine ranks of marketing people sitting in the back of the theater saying,
'Well, we'll do this and that and that'll add a bit to the grosses.' It's
nonsense. I always wonder why they don't give Woody Allen the same tough time;
he, at times, reshoots 100 percent of his movie. Why don't they ask him what he
left out?"

After almost a decade making films in the United States, Mr. Lyne said he is
still far from exhausting his fascination with American themes. For his next
film, he plans to shake the worm can of American race relations, adapting the
James Kennaway novel, "Silence." Against a backdrop of Chicago race riots, the
book chronicles the love between a middle-aged white doctor and a mute young
black woman.

"That's not going to be an obvious commercial one, because one of the
protagonists doesn't speak," Mr. Lyne said, cackling again with satisfaction.

If Mr. Lyne seems not quite respectful enough of his own success, he has no
ready apologies. But at one point in a few hours of conversation, he fondly
recalled a day in the mid-1970's when, as a young director of commercials in
London, he received a call from the director Stanley Kubrick, then filming
"Barry Lyndon," asking his advice on a particular camera filter.

"I was petrified," Mr. Lyne said. "It was like talking to God."

Until asked, he doesn't mention that his other project in the works is a remake
of Mr. Kubrick's 1962 film of the Vladimir Nabokov novel "Lolita."

And pleased as he is with the results in "Jacob's Ladder," Mr. Lyne is not above
blurting out at one point, with a startling edge of sincerity, "Do you really
think anyone will come to this?"

Shot back the same question, Mr. Lyne though for only a second. "I haven't a
clue."


LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Tim Robbins, center, as a Vietnam vet, struggles with John
Capodice and John Patrick McLaughlin in "Jacob's Ladder." (Tri-Star Pictures);
The director Adrian Lyne at work on the film opening Friday (Tri-Star Pictures)
(pg. 15); Tim Robbins as the film's tormented hero, Jacob Singer (Tri-Star
Pictures) (pg. 16)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Travel Advisory

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1355 words



Eastern Europe Introduces Rail Pass

The new European East Pass will allow unlimited travel in first class on the
national railroads of Austria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland, starting Jan.
1. The pass will work like Eurailpass, which allows discount travel in 17
countries, including Austria and Hungary.

FrenchRail, the agent for the new pass in North America, will offer two passes
valid in first class: one for $160 a person that allows five days of travel
within a 15-day period and the other for $259 a person that allows 10 days of
travel within a month.

Bernard Frelat, president of FrenchRail, said travelers would be able to travel
by train with rail passes from the Atlantic to the Polish-Soviet border.
Austrian officials hope that vacationers will use Vienna as a gateway to Eastern
Europe.

The European East Pass, which is expected to be available through travel agents
in December, will offer substantial savings to the traveler making several
journeys, rail officials say, particularly if some trips are taken in Austria,
where train tickets cost much more than in Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland.
It is believed that eventually there will be one pass for the whole of Europe.
Meanwhile, the two passes must be used separately, and there is no discount plan
for purchasing both. Information: FrenchRail, 226 Westchester Avenue, White
Plains, N.Y. 10604; 800-848-7245.

Subway Section Opens in Rome

ROME -- A new six-mile section of Rome's slowly expanding subway system opened
this month. An extension of Line B, it links the northeastern outskirts with the
central railroad terminal (Stazione Termini), the hub of the Metropolitana
subway network. The old section of Line B, opened in 1955, runs from the rail
terminal to the Colosseum, the modern World's Fair quarter and the Cecchignola
military barracks, with a branch from the Ostiense stop to the seaside at Ostia,
13 miles from the center. The 10-year-old Line A runs from the southeastern
outskirts near the Alban Hills to the rail terminal and to Via Ottaviano, a
10-minute walk from St. Peter's Square. A westward extension is planned.

The new Line B section provides a link between the Tiburtina railroad station in
the northeast and the central railroad terminal. It is welcomed by many rail
passengers because some long-distance trains between northern and southern
Italy, including Sicily,stop only at Tiburtina, where it is often hard to get a
cab, but not at Stazione Termini. A ride on the Roman subways still costs 61
cents, but the fare will soon go up.

A major reason subway construction in Rome is being competed gingerly is the
city's buried past. Wherever digging starts, fragments of ancient statuary,
remains of pagan temples and other finds come to light, and contractors have to
suspend work until the archeologists are satisfied. -- PAUL HOFMANN

Eastern Starts Flights to Ponce

Daily nonstop flights between Newark and Ponce, P.R., are to be introduced by
Eastern Airlines on Thursday, giving travelers a second major gateway to Puerto
Rico and the opportunity to bypass the San Juan airport. The service to Ponce,
the port city on the Caribbean on the island's southern coast, is the first from
the mainland. The airport has been expanded to accommodate wide-bodied aircraft
such as the Boeing 757 that Eastern will use on the route. The flights are
scheduled to leave Newark daily at 7:15 A.M., arriving in Ponce at 11:45 A.M.
Return flights leave Ponce at 12:50 P.M. and arrive in Newark at 3:40 P.M.
Eastern said fares would be from $248 round trip in coach.

O'Hare Data On 900 Number

FlightCall, an information system on a 900 telephone number, gives status
reports for all 2,200 daily flights arriving and departing O'Hare International
Airport in Chicago. Official Airline Guides, the travel information company that
started the O'Hare service last month, says it plans similar phone lines at 13
other major airports in the next few months.

Travelers can call 900-786-8686 at 75 cents a minute, and they are promised
access to the line after the first ring. The caller also gets gate and baggage
carousel information and news of delays. The company says the information comes
from the airlines' data displays in the airport and is revised every 10 minutes.

Official Airline Guides says it hopes to include the next available departure
for travelers whose flights have been delayed or canceled. Similar services are
to be set up for Kennedy and La Guardia Airports by Thanksgiving. Dallas-Fort
Worth, Atlanta, Denver, Boston, Miami, Orlando, San Francisco, Los Angeles
National and Dulles will get the service afterward.

Fourth Airport For Queensland

A plan to upgrade the Proserpine Airport in Queensland will offer travelers a
fourth international airport when visiting the northeastern Australian state,
which includes the Great Barrier Reef.

The project, being developed by Ansett Airlines and Aqua Del Ray International
(a Japanese development company), calls for the existing air strip to be
extended by about 650 feet and the runway shoulders widened to meet
international standards and accommodate long-range aircraft. Construction of the
$5 million first phase, which has yet to receive the necessary governmental
approvals, is expected to be completed by 1993.

The upgraded airport, which will be renamed Whitsunday International Airport,
will ease the burden on Queensland's three existing international airports at
Brisbane, Cairns and Townsville.

Future plans call for construction of a new international arrivals terminal and
possibly extending the runway another 3,000 feet to handle longer-range 747
aircraft.

Vietnamese Art In Hong Kong

Hong Kong harbors large populations of Vietnamese boat people, some 55,000 -- a
population that is, by most accounts, ignored by most Hong Kong residents. One
step toward creating awareness is an show of art by the boat people, on display
through Nov. 8 at the Hong Kong Arts Center, Harbour Road, Wan Chai.

"Still Lives," an exhibit of 70 paintings and drawings by 18 Vietnamese,
explores the trials and slim joys of daily life in Hong Kong's detention camps,
where boat people await word whether they will be given asylum or be forcibly
returned to Vietnam. The show came together thanks largely to the efforts of
Veronique Saunier, a French public relations consultant who spends time as a
volunteer working in the refugee camps.

The result is a hauntingly eloquent vision of life in the camps. A scene of
people lining up for their daily rations was painted by a law student, Tran Van
Hung. The scene used for the exhibition's poster was painted by Hoang Quoc Bien.
In it, a young boy stands on an upended garbage can, straining to talk to a girl
on the other side of a barbed wire fence -- the Statue of Liberty watches over
the lovers' meeting.

A WHALE HABITAT IN BALTIMORE

The National Aquarium in Baltimore is scheduled to open its $35 million Marine
Mammal Pavilion on Dec. 26. The main feature of the 94,000-square-foot addition
is a habitat for three beluga whales and six Atlantic bottlenose dolphins
surrounded by a 1,300-seat amphitheater. A 30-minute presentation about whales
will be given in the amphitheater several times a day. The 1.2-million-gallon
pool has large acrylic windows that provide views of the creatures underwater.
The new pavilion also houses two classrooms, a laboratory, an arcade with
exhibits about whales and dolphins and a life-size sculpture of a humpback
whale, plus a gift shop and food counter.

The aquarium is at Pier 3, 501 East Pratt Street (301-576-3860) in the Inner
Harbor area. Among the 5,000 aquatic animals are sharks, ocean rays, large
gamefish and seals, and there is a rain forest with Amazon parrots and iguanas
and other reptiles.

The aquarium is open daily from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. (to 8 P.M. Friday) through May
14. Summer hours: 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. Monday to Thursday and 9 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Friday through Sunday. Admission charges are being increased on Dec. 26 from
$9.25 to $10.75; and from $5.50 to $6.50 for children aged 3 to 11.


LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A beluga whale to be on display at the National Aquarium. (Rick
Miller); Map of Queensland showing location of Proserpine. Graph showing foreign
tourism rate. (Source: U.S. Travel and Tourism Administration)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

About Men;
Lasting Commitment

BYLINE: BY NICOLAUS MILLS; Nicolaus Mills, a professor of literature at Sarah
Lawrence College, wrote "Culture in an Age of Money: The Legacy of the 1980's in
America."

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1103 words


SINCE IT WENT UP last year, Maya Lin's new civil rights memorial in Montgomery,
Ala., has become a tourist attraction. I know how popular her Vietnam Veterans
Memorial in Washington is, but I'm still surprised. Up to now I've thought the
best that could be hoped for by way of civil rights memorials was the plaque in
the Mount Zion Methodist Church in Philadelphia, Miss., honoring the murdered
civil rights workers James Chaney, Michael Schwerner and Andrew Goodman.

The reception given Maya Lin's memorial has made me think once again of my own
rite of passage as a civil rights worker. Growing up in Ohio during the 1950's,
I most admired those men who had served in battle during World War II. Nothing
about these men distinguished the way they looked from those I knew who had
taken Government jobs in Washington or worked in a factory during the war. But
there was, I always thought, something deeper about them. They had seen death
firsthand. They had done what was asked of them in the face of danger. They
didn't have to guess about their courage.

I still admire the World War II vets I know. But I don't envy these men the way
I once did. I think those of us who went South during the civil rights movement
of the 1960's had a rite of passage richer than that of any generation of
Americans in our century.

In his memoir about the late 1960's, "The Making of an Un-American," Paul Cowan
tells of overhearing a young civil rights worker yell at her mother: "If someone
in Nazi Germany had done what we're doing, then your brother would still be
alive." That phone conversation rings true for me. For my Northern, middle-class
generation there was an analogy between the fate of Jews in Nazi Germany and the
fate of blacks in the South. To stand by and watch the latter lynched and
segregated was in our eyes acting like those "good Germans" who insisted they
never knew about the concentration camps. Throughout the 1960's I was always
embarrassed when someone asked me to explain why I went South. What should have
been asked -- angrily I think -- is why I waited so long. Why did I wait until
1965 and the blood bath on the bridge at Selma to act?

There were many occasions to go South during the 1960's. Best known was the
Freedom Summer of 1964, but between the Freedom Rides of 1961 and the James
Meredith march of 1966 -- a period longer than America's participation in World
War II -- scarcely a month went by without some sort of civil rights
confrontation.

"Invasion" was the word The Jackson Clarion-Ledger used to describe the Freedom
Summer. It was an accurate description of the way most white Southerners saw the
civil rights movement; but what I remember most from my time in Mississippi and
Alabama was being part of an army that was prepared to be killed but not to
kill. Sooner or later most soldiers, no matter how noble their cause, are
prepared to be as ruthless as their enemy in order to survive. What made the
civil rights movement so different was that it reversed that tradition. Count up
the dead from the Mississippi Summer Project and they are all civil rights
workers.

It wasn't, however, only being part of a nonviolent army that made the civil
rights movement such a different rite of passage. There was also the
vulnerability that it fostered. Soldiers typically think of themselves as
rescuing a helpless people. But in the South those of us who stayed for any
length of time realized that our lives depended on the black families sheltering
us.

I had gone South admiring the courage of the young Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee field secretaries who dared organize a voting rights
campaign in Mississippi. But I came away thinking the bravest of the brave were
the black men and women I met who weren't young, who couldn't survive on a
S.N.C.C. salary or start a new life in the North. When they risked their lives
or their jobs to give one of us shelter, they risked everything.

Being told you were brave when you returned North only heightened those feelings
of admiration for the families you left behind. It was, however, praise that
felt good. More common and much harder to bear was the criticism that followed.

At the start of the Mississippi Summer Project, the country opposed students
going South by 65 percent to 35 percent, according to a Harris survey, and the
following year, polls continued to show a widespread belief that the civil
rights movement was going "too fast."

When I returned from Selma, I wrote a short article on my experiences there, and
for weeks afterward, I received hate calls, always anonymous, always late at
night. A black minister with whom I had gone South had it much worse. He not
only got the hate calls, but a paper cutout of a lynched man. For the minister
and me, the final chapter in our Selma experience was learning how many people
thought we had chosen the wrong side, put our noses where they didn't belong.

Later many of us joined the antiwar movement. It was a natural transition. After
leaving the South, doing anything less than opposing the war in Vietnam seemed
like a betrayal. Taking on an unpopular cause, even the prospect of jail, didn't
seem overwhelming when you'd faced a sheriff on an isolated Mississippi road or
had the Freedom School you were teaching in burned to the ground.

Follow-up studies of the Mississippi Summer Project show that most of its
participants have remained committed to the values that originally brought them
South. I'm not surprised, but I think just as important to note is the
restlessness that followed so many civil rights workers home. Following
Mississippi, I went to California and worked as an organizer for the United Farm
Workers, and today I find that I remain distrustful of the times in my life when
I feel safe, when I am not required to stand at moral attention.

Restlessness -- even a constant dissatisfaction with ordinary life -- isn't, I
think, too high a price to pay for a rite of passage. If a rite of passage means
anything, it's not just that it changes you but that it keeps you focused on a
time when you were most alive and so becomes the standard by which you judge all
else.

Looking back on his own involvement in the civil rights movement, John Lewis,
currently a Representative from Georgia and the chairman of S.N.C.C. in the
1960's, wrote: "Most of all there was an all-pervading sense that one was
involved in a movement larger than oneself, almost like a Holy Crusade, an idea
whose time had come."

I don't think Lewis exaggerates. I just wish there were more of us who knew
firsthand the time he describes.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Elmer Bernstein Finds Himself in Tune With Movies

BYLINE: By FINTAN O'TOOLE; Fintan O'Toole is a columnist for The Irish Times.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 18; Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1273 words

DATELINE: DUBLIN


ELMER BERNSTEIN, THE film composer, is sitting at the sound desk in a recording
studio that used to be a pool hall, in a decidedly downbeat part of Dublin. It
is an Irish summer, which means that the sky is bright gray instead of dark gray
and the rain is tepid rather than chilly.

In another part of town, Jim Sheridan, director of "The Field," the film Mr.
Bernstein is scoring, is still making last-minute changes in the drama of a
bitter fight over a parcel of grassy hillside in Connemara. All of this should
have been finished months ago, and Mr. Bernstein has just noticed that a piece
he had written for a scene in the film is now too long because Mr. Sheridan has
changed it.

The chaos comes from the fact that Mr. Sheridan doesn't work like an efficient
Hollywood technician, and partly because "My Left Foot," which he directed and
Mr. Bernstein composed the score for -- unexpectedly received four Oscar
nominations and then two Oscars, taking Mr. Sheridan away to the United States
when he should have been finishing "The Field."

But Mr. Bernstein is enjoying himself enormously, making music amid the madness.
He listens to the piece he has just recorded, his head thrown back, eyes closed,
then smiles at his musicians. "That was good," he says, beaming. "In fact, that
was so good we're going to do it again."


A concert pianist and classically trained composer who studied under Aaron
Copland, Mr. Bernstein has been writing film scores for 40 years. He established
himself with his jazz-based score for "The Man With the Golden Arm" in 1955, and
his subsequent work, on films as different as "The Ten Commandments," "The
Magnificent Seven," "To Kill a Mockingbird" and "Ghostbusters," has made him
virtually indispensible to Hollywood and earned him 12 Oscar nominations.

But he turns down films if he dislikes their content, as he did frequently with
gung-ho pictures about the Vietnam War. "There are certain films I won't do
because I dislike their social attitude," he says.

From the beginning, Mr. Bernstein never believed that being a film composer was
about merely adding sound to pictures. He grew up in a left-wing Jewish
household in New York City; his parents were Austrian and Russian immigrants.
His upbringing made him temperamentally incapable of divorcing the music from
what is being said on the screen. (It was the film business that took him to
Ireland for the first time in 1968, but the country's politics were already a
part of his childhood lore, a picture of the Irish revolutionary James Connolly
that hung in the family home.)

Enough of this background stayed with him to cause him problems during the
McCarthy era. "I was what you'd call graylisted," explains Mr. Bernstein. "I
wasn't one of the big wheels of the Communist Party or anything, but I'd done
enough left-wing things that between about 1953 and 1955, the major studios
would have been very loathe to employ me. During that period I did such stellar
things as 'Robot Monster,' 'Cat Women on the Moon,' 'Miss Robin Crusoe,' stuff
like that. I wasn't rehabilitated until 1955, thanks very largely to Cecil B.
DeMille, of all people, who decided I was O.K."


Mr. Bernstein's concern with a film's content is as much a part of his art as
his politics. When asked what makes a good film composer, he is very definite
that, apart from musical ability,the most needed attribute is "being a
dramatist. Unless you are really interested in, willing to get into and
understand, what's happening in a dramatic sense, your chances of success are
very slim."

This is often not what a director expects or wants from a composer. "I think
there's less understanding of the function of film music now than there was 30
years ago, and much more fear of music on the part of young directors. Music
comes at the end of the process as a sort of odd stranger, and there's no
question that the film changes when the music goes into it.

"Some young directors are totally thrown by that, and very many of them don't
seem to have a great feel for music at all. They think music is something you
just kind of slap on a film like wallpaper. But if you're going to have music in
a film at all, you have to understand that it's going to change the film, by
pointing things up, supporting things, toning things down. It's going to do
something. And therefore, the director really has to be ready to make it a part
of the process."

He feels very much a part of the process working with Mr. Sheridan and Noel
Pearson, who produced "My Left Foot" and "The Field," scheduled to open in the
United States just before Christmas. Which is why, as Mr. Bernstein stands in
front of a small orchestra, calculating timing in his head, making the music fit
without making it unmusical, he is patient and benign.

He met Mr. Pearson in 1968 on the first night he ever spent in Ireland. They
became fast friends, so much so that Mr. Pearson spent much of his honeymoon in
Mr. Bernstein's house. All the time, Mr. Pearson, who was a theater producer and
had little to do with the film business, kept talking about wanting to make a
film about the disabled Irish writer Christy Brown. It became a kind of running
joke between the two men, Mr. Bernstein promising lightheartedly that "when you
do get to produce a movie, I'll do the score for you for nothing." When at last
Mr. Pearson made "My Left Foot," Mr. Bernstein kept his promise.

Thanks to this relationship with Mr. Pearson, Mr. Bernstein has been involved
with "The Field" from the time there was a complete script, talking, thinking,
arguing. "I like that way of working with Jim. The composer and the director
always have problems of communication, unless the director happens to be a
musician, which is very unusual.

"Jim can talk about drama and character and images in a way that's easily
translated into music. He thinks so well, and his mind works in a way that makes
me think of things I wouldn't have thought of myself." Even when Mr. Sheridan is
driving him out of his mind, he keeps his faith that "Jim Sheridan could easily
become one of cinema's great directors, and I mean great directors."


Back in the studio, Mr. Bernstein calls out yet another list of changes to the
musicians, then waits. On the monitor, Richard Harris as the Bull McCabe spills
onto the street of an Irish village 60 years ago and drives his cart into the
open landscape before stopping to look down on a rich field of pasture that
gives the film its title. Later, he will kill a young man, played by Tom
Berenger, over that field, and the music for this passage is the longest, most
intricate and most thematically important segment of the score.

It has to suggest both the character's almost mystical attachment to the land
and the gnarled anger that will turn that mysticism to murder. It is brooding,
atmospheric, dark, the blare of tubas and trombones intercut with the weaving
patterns of the traditional Irish uileann pipes, an instrument Mr. Bernstein
taught himself to write for from a book bought in Dublin two months before.

It is an impossible piece to get right at one take, and the control room is
tense, eyes darting from the monitor to Elmer Bernstein's weaving hands. But the
timing is perfect, the scene and the music ending at the same split second. He
smiles and says, "One of our little miracles," then pauses, thinks and mutters,
"I don't want to be sorry about this later." And he makes them do it again. He
has, after all, been in the movie business long enough to know that art has to
be combined with perseverence, that even miracles can use a second take.


NAME: Elmer Bernstein

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Elmer Bernstein at home--making music amid madness (Gary
Moss/Outline for The New York Times) (pg. 18); Richard Harris in a scene from
the forthcoming movie "The Field," directed by Jim Sheridan, who made 'My Left
Foot' (Avenue Pictures) (pg. 26)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

An Early Victim of the Cold War

BYLINE: By Michael Janeway; Michael Janeway is dean of the Medill School of
Journalism at Northwestern University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2386 words



THE POLK CONSPIRACY
Murder and Cover-Up in the Case of CBS News Correspondent George Polk.
By Kati Marton.
Illustrated. 369 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $22.95.

A MARK of a fine news organization is its ability to shelter and deploy a
particular breed of reporter, the serious troublemaker. Abroad, such a
journalist is a loner at odds with the local regime and his (sometimes her)
country's embassy. The targets of his reporting are out to shut off his leads,
blacken his name, get him transferred or get him canned. Such efforts only
sharpen his instinct for the stories that matter and his skill at getting them
first. For making such trouble in Greece in 1948, George Washington Polk Jr., 34
at the time, was murdered.

Were his killers Communists, as charged by Greece's corrupt royalist Government?
Was that charge itself the cover-up for an officially sanctioned right-wing
execution? Was Polk trapped in something more sinister still -- a prototype of a
John le Carre conspiracy involving elements of the British Government? From the
start, cold war politics drove the theories about the case. Walter Lippmann
headed a prestigious committee that dispatched Wild Bill Donovan of O.S.S. fame
to probe it; they botched the job. For more than 40 years there has been no end
to the trail from those cold war theories to any conclusive truth about who
killed George Polk.

In "The Polk Conspiracy," her dramatic study of the case, Kati Marton, a former
Bonn bureau chief for ABC News and the author of a biography of Raoul
Wallenberg, sets the scene well. Greece had long been Britain's ward. The part
of the wartime deal with Moscow that London cared about most kept Greece this
side of what, in Winston Churchill's words, was now an Iron Curtain. In the fall
of 1946, Greece's King George II returned from his London exile, but Communist
insurgents controlled much of his domain. In the brutal winter of 1946-47, a
weakened Britain handed off its role as the world's policeman to the United
States, with Greece one of the most dangerous blocks on the beat. The Truman
Doctrine, carrying a payload of $400 million for Greece and Turkey and ushered
in with ringing rhetoric and brilliant orchestration, marked formal American
assumption of superpower status and cold war posture.

A handful of American correspondents feared that the rhetoric would blind
Washington to reality. "The path to greatness should not start in the mire of
Greek politics," said CBS's Joseph Harsch. Writing in Harper's magazine, his CBS
colleague George Polk attacked Greece's "ruling clique" and their "system
designed to squeeze from the country every penny possible." Believing that the
Athens regime was "stimulating instead of curing Greece's civil strife," Polk
resolved to become the first American journalist to get behind the lines of the
Communist guerrilla movements springing up on Western turf.

Like the United States, Polk, a lateral descendant of an American President, had
a reputation for toughness on the outside, naivete within. Kati Marton's idea is
to weave into one gripping, angry, energetically researched narrative the
parallel and prophetic tales of American involvement in Greece and Polk's fatal
coverage of it. Her reporting throws a powerful light on Polk's murder and
honors his martyrdom, but her presentation of it is in some respects troubling.

The prophecy implicit in "The Polk Conspiracy," of course, is Vietnam, and we
know the truth about what happened there, as distinct from the official story,
in large part because of courageous reporters like David Halberstam and Neil
Sheehan. (Winners of the coveted award given in memory of Polk since 1949 to
journalists who "valued an important story more highly than personal safety"
include, among the ranks of those who reported from Vietnam and Cambodia, Mr.
Halberstam, Malcolm Browne, Morley Safer, Frances FitzGerald, Harrison
Salisbury, R. W. Apple, Gloria Emerson and Sydney Schanberg.)

George Polk of CBS, one of Edward R. Murrow's crack team, but far more ornery
and antiestablishmentarian than his mentor, helped found the modern school of
reportage that, in the field, has discerned stupidity and corruption behind
high-toned foreign policy and grand American interventions, and has said so. In
Greece as in Vietnam, the official response was to question such reporters'
loyalty. Polk had problems, but fellow-traveling wasn't one of them.

His father was a wealthy Fort Worth lawyer ruined by the Depression. His beloved
mother held things together by becoming a school librarian at $900 a year. Polk
dropped out of the Virginia Military Institute; knockabout jobs in California
and Alaska and prewar hitches reporting for an English language newspaper in
Shanghai, then for the Herald Tribune in Paris and New York, were his
apprenticeship. Wartime combat as a Navy fighter pilot stationed with the
Marines left him "permanently scarred in body and spirit," Ms. Marton writes,
and by 1947 his baggage included nightmare re-enactments of hand-to-hand combat
on Guadalcanal, permanent injuries from subsequent accidents and recurrent
malaria. His first wife sometimes tied him to their bedposts at night.

AT CBS, gallantry defined Polk in the eyes of his colleagues. To John Donovan of
NBC, he was "hardworking, quiet, reflective . . . extremely polite. He stood by
his guns and had strong convictions. But he wasn't the John Wayne type. He was
the Gary Cooper quiet type. Which is just what appealed to Murrow." Everyone
noted his physical presence and looks -- "like a blond Errol Flynn," said his
CBS colleague Howard K. Smith. But some of Murrow's boys worried about the
troublemaker inside. As William L. Shirer put it, "George was more passionately
involved in his work than most. Once he got to Greece, I wondered if he realized
whom he was playing against."

From Greece, Polk wrote to relatives in the summer of 1947 that "it appears
we're going to pour money down Athens' hole for any of the government's rats to
get at." "If you've been hearing any of my numerous broadcasts," he wrote to his
family, "I've been letting [the regime] have it right between the eyes. It's
fascist and below the belt in every way. On top of that, our Mr. Dwight P.
Griswold, the new American Aid Administrator, is an unmitigated jerk." But his
reporting was also tough on the Communists, noting, for example, their plan to
"bleed" the regime by "preventing the planting and harvesting of crops, by
looting and burning villages, and by forcing more and more peaceful Greeks to
become new refugees." Condemnations of his reporting by the regime, echoed by
the United States Embassy and punctuated by anonymous phone calls threatening
him with death and charging him with Communism, warned him that, as he wrote Ed
Murrow, "somebody is likely to get hurt."

Then came unexpected pay dirt: a letter, and here Ms. Marton appears to advance
the Polk case dramatically, from a man claiming to be an employee of the Chase
Manhattan Bank in New York stating that the Greek Foreign Minister and
right-wing strongman, Constantine Tsaldaris, was illegally smuggling money to an
account there. A less forthright reporter than Polk might have played this lead
in subtle ways; he confronted Tsaldaris with it at the Foreign Ministry. A few
days later, in Salonika looking for safe passage to report on the Communist
insurgents, Polk was kidnapped and shot, and his body dumped in Salonika Bay.
The letter from the man at Chase and another crucial document linking the murder
to Foreign Minister Tsaldaris disappeared from Polk's files within days, though
mention of the Chase bank account survives in other papers the author has
reviewed. Students of the case will probably have further comment on the extent
to which it is, as Ms. Marton argues, the Polk case's indisputable smoking gun.

Polk's murder was the curtain-raiser for a deadly web of police, government and
journalistic maneuvers to find a suspect and cap the case, lest outrage over it
become a threat to the American-Greek alliance and the Truman Doctrine. Ms.
Marton's narrative up to this point is good, solid nonfiction thriller fare,
crisp, clear and suspenseful. But with the post-mortem she enters a tangle of
conflicting and partial evidence, possible leads, disinformation, confessions
and frame-ups.

To compress and simplify a densely convoluted saga: the Greek police, perhaps
guided by old-line British intelligence officials and American understudies,
charged on dubious evidence that Polk had reached the Communist insurgents he
wanted to report on and that, beasts that they were, they had done the poor
fellow in. But, unable to make an arrest, the police forced Gregory
Staktopoulos, a hapless political chameleon, to confess that he had witnessed
the murder; then they tried and convicted him. American and British officials,
backed by the press establishment in the form of Walter Lippmann's Overseas
Writers Special Committee, sought to keep this official story in place.
Skeptics, led by I. F. Stone (who called Polk "the first casualty of the Cold
War") and the unfortunate Mr. Staktopoulos (who recanted), have been knocking it
apart since the early 1950's. But theories within theories about the motive and
the scope of the conspiracy have proliferated in the meantime.

THIS would be enough to caution scholars, and it has. Ms. Marton plows through
with her blunt, clear thesis, but with a style and supporting methodology that,
in the latter half of her book, keep veering away from the conventions of
history and journalism toward docudrama. Key players depicted in shades of gray
in other accounts (notably General Donovan's chief investigator, Col. James
Kellis) are here pulled in distinctly noble or villainous directions. Ms.
Marton's notes turn vague at crucial moments, often asserting rather than
demonstrating documentation. It is unclear whether the most important papers are
open to review and evaluation by other reporters and scholars. And her narrative
detours into reconstructed "You Are There" detail and dialogue derived from
source materials of uneven reliability.

Thus: "Over lunch in the chapel-like hush of Washington's Metropolitan Club,
'Walter' [Lippmann] and 'Bill' [Donovan] raised their crystal tumblers to toast
their new partnership. They agreed that the Polk case was charged with
troublesome implications for both Lippmann's profession and one of the linchpins
of America's Cold War foreign policy: unlimited support for Greece.

" 'I will choose my own man [as chief investigator], Walter,' Donovan announced
in his rich baritone. 'Someone I can trust enough to leave behind in Greece.'

"Did it occur to Walter Lippmann that Donovan's first loyalty would surely [be]
. . . to the world he had nurtured into existence, the secret world of
intelligence?"

These lapses into a pop voice may sell books, but they tend to impose a
simplistic hindsight on the uncertainties and nuances of the world as it was in
1948, and to undermine the confidence one wants to have in Ms. Marton's work.

One final criticism: Oddly, given the extent of her research, Ms. Marton's
bibliography and notes omit any mention of the other recent book on the subject,
"The Salonika Bay Murder: Cold War Politics and the Polk Affair," by Edmund
Keeley. That book, well and extensively reviewed last year, examines many
records of the Polk case in painstaking, carefully reasoned and judicious detail
(thanking Ms. Marton in passing for sharing research materials) and comes to
many parallel conclusions. Though Mr. Keeley did not match Ms. Marton's
enterprise in gaining access to the Tsaldaris bank account material, and has no
smoking gun, his book may be read as a corrective to Ms. Marton's on the gray
areas along the way.

Kati Marton tells the story of George Polk's life skillfully, reminding us how
lonely, perilous and heroic a reporter's lot can be. She is less successful with
the mystery and malfeasance that haunt his death. And yet, for all the flaws in
her account, it marks another point along the trail whereby those who knew and
loved George Polk, and those who followed, have tried to divine exactly how, in
1948 in Greece, a fine American troublemaker became a martyr.



SIFTING THE EVIDENCE



Kati Marton was 7 years old the day she wandered outside her home in Budapest to
find her 8-year-old sister screaming hysterically and the Hungarian secret
police pushing her mother into a car. Ms. Marton's parents were journalists
working for American wire services when they were arrested as "C.I.A. spies" in
1955. Later they were released and the family eventually fled to the United
States, where on the first day in their new country they were whisked to a
reception at which Ms. Marton's parents accepted a journalism award named for
the slain CBS correspondent George Polk.

"I really approached this story as a detective, and tried to leave my emotional
and political baggage behind," said Ms. Marton, whose new book, "The Polk
Conspiracy," examines the 1948 killing of CBS's man in Athens, whose body was
found in Salonika Bay. In the cover-up that followed, Greek Communists were
blamed for Polk's death.

"It's quite apparent from my background that my natural sympathies would be to
confirm the official story," Ms. Marton observed in a recent interview at her
home in Manhattan. "But there was simply no evidence to back that up."

For three years, Ms. Marton sifted through the evidence, cajoling old spymasters
and diplomats in Washington and Greece, tracking down hundreds of leads. Her
files are now boxed and stored in a liquor closet in the spacious apartment
overlooking Central Park that she shares with her husband, Peter Jennings, the
ABC anchorman, and their two children.

Ms. Marton, a former television correspondent in Europe and Africa, is also the
author of a biography of Raoul Wallenberg and a novel. But the writing of this
new book was a particular challenge. "There were nights when I asked myself,
'Why the hell am I not at some chic New York dinner party?' " she recalled
wryly. "Isn't that what anchormen's wives are meant to do, instead of being in
some dump in Salonika, sitting bolt upright at every creak in the night?" --
JOSEPH A.  CINCOTTI

NAME: George Polk

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: George Washington Polk Jr. (UPI/Bettmann)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 28, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Man in the Van

BYLINE: By Scott Simon; Scott Simon is the host and chief correspondent of
National Public Radio's "Weekend Edition."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1098 words



A LIFE ON THE ROAD
By Charles Kuralt.
Illustrated. 253 pp. New York:
G. P. Putnam's Sons. $19.95.

AN object in motion tends to stay in motion. It's all the roving that seems to
create the center of gravity in Charles Kuralt, whose great gift as a reporter
has often been to have a stranger's sense of place, in place after place. "I lay
awake listening to the sirens that seemed never to stop, police cars, fire
trucks and ambulances, sirens close by and far away," he recalls of his first
visit to New York City for a job interview. "It seemed to me that some terrible
calamity must have struck Manhattan for there to be so much loud urgency down in
the streets." Mr. Kuralt's interest in how people make their lives apart from
the daily alarms of life's calamities is what seems to have kept him, for two
decades, in such productive transit.

"A Life on the Road" is a professional memoir of a gifted, good-humored and
gracious man who has made a living in television for the past 35 years. He often
redeems the war stories that are too common in journalism with a saving
self-assessment. Once, while Mr. Kuralt was covering civil war in Congo in the
early 1960's, his cameraman had him shine an intense television spotlight onto a
storm of besotted soldiers who had come into the courtyard of their hotel,
calling for the scalp of the French hotelier. The soldiers were momentarily
startled by the light, then flattered, as if they were about to be introduced at
a soccer match. Seemingly sobered by the light, they departed peacefully.

"I have heard the argument that television news can never quite be true to life
because the camera's presence alters events," remarks Mr. Kuralt. "Well, it did
that time, thank God."

The inspiration for what became the "On the Road" stories that have formed the
center of Mr. Kuralt's career came in 1967. Mr. Kuralt and his producer, Jim
Wilson, were flying from New York to Cleveland, when Mr. Wilson pointed down
into the speckling of lights twinkling between the big cities.

"Look down there," he said to Mr. Kuralt. "Every one of those lights has a story
to tell."

Over the past 23 years, the "On the Road" van has found quite a few stories.
(Incidentally, there are probably more stories about the vagaries and
deficiencies of vans in this book than there are about the defects and failures
of commercial television. There is so much about vans grinding down on highways
and blowing out on their wheels that you begin to wonder if a
recreational-vehicle company holds a contract for the space shuttle.)

Much of the book has the feel of good conversation on a long trip. Stories set
off more stories. There is one about a man out in the West Elk Mountains of
Colorado named George Norris; Mr. Kuralt watches wild deer spring into Mr.
Norris's backyard to be fed out of his hand. Another relates how the famed
Alaskan bush pilot Don Sheldon told Mr. Kuralt and his cameraman Isadore
Bleckman that they must stay the night on a glacier below the great Denali
mountain because the snow had turned soft; they spent it in the small cabin of a
vagabond priest named Father Ron, who gave them stew and brandy and a bedroll
beneath what Mr. Kuralt calls "a big Wurlitzer jukebox in the sky," the lights
of the aurora borealis.

"I wonder," he writes, "whether Don Sheldon sized us up as a couple of guys who
thought we were in a bigger hurry than we really were and would benefit from a
night to slow down and look around and think about this place where we were."
(Mr. Kuralt writes with bracing affection for Mr. Bleckman, his colleague and
companion for most of his travels. Over the years Mr. Bleckman apparently has
deftly driven and repaired the van, saved a variety of auto wreck and drowning
victims, and taken outstanding television pictures.)

Some of the better stories have just been lying along the road between stops.
One wonders if even Mr. Kuralt is any longer permitted to be so methodically
casual. After scrubbing out on several stories in Ohio, Mr. Kuralt writes, he
and Mr. Bleckman saw a sign on a farmhouse: "WELCOME HOME, ROGER!" They
discovered a family waiting for the return of their son from the Vietnam War.
Roger's mother was baking him a chocolate cake; his wife was holding the baby
son he had never seen. Another time, they were startled by the beauty of
just-bloomed wildflowers waving from along the highways of Wyoming; finally, it
was Mr. Bleckman who suggested, hey, maybe they should stop and take some
television pictures.

BY now, Mr. Kuralt's audaciously gentle stories have become so well known that
worm hunters in Sopchoppy, Fla., welcomed the "On the Road" crew to town saying,
"I knew you guys would show up here sooner or later." A more sinister
consequence is imitation. On networks (including Mr. Kuralt's own, CBS) and at
local stations all over the United States, searching for softer, "Kuraltish"
stories is often license for soft-minded hokum. Mr. Kuralt himself, while
casting no specific aspersions, says he and his crew have adopted the "Tricycle
Principle," avoiding the error of a Midwestern television reporter they saw
demean a charming sequence of pictures of children riding tricycles by
clambering onto one himself.

Mr. Kuralt's work has miles more dignity, depth and wit than that. But there are
just enough glints of steam puffing from his solidly gentle nature to make me
wish that this memoir, good company as it is, had ventured deeper.

For example, Mr. Kuralt writes with regret about his first marriage and family
becoming casualties of his unwillingness to come off the road for even a few
days. "I didn't want a place to live," he writes; "I had nothing to do there. I
didn't want days off; I had no way to fill empty days. All I wanted was stories,
the wilder the better."

The words would not be surprising from many celebrated reporters, but they are
almost startling coming from Mr. Kuralt. Part of what has made him so appealing
is a sense that while a rambunctious world flickers by in foolish, shallow
reflections between commercials, Charles Kuralt takes a breath, takes his time
and stays steady in the winds of nonsense.

One day I would like to read the book in which Mr. Kuralt, in addition to
offering road recollections and recommendations ("Do not eat in a restaurant on
the top of a building. If you must eat in a restaurant on the top of a building,
never eat in one that revolves"), turns on himself his grace for eliciting rapid
intimacy in those he encounters. I think it would be interesting, and I'm sure
it would be honest.


NAME: Charles Kuralt

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Charles Kuralt, on the road in 1987, plans another journey from
the driver's seat of a CBS van. (CBS)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Striking News Workers Remember Inky Legacy

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 782 words


"From when we were little kids, my father brought home The Daily News," Howard
Grantz remembered. "That's all we knew."

The father was a pressman at The Daily News and so, as a matter of course, were
his two sons. Howard Grantz has worked on the presses for 31 of his 48 years;
his younger brother, Stuart, at 40, has 23 years on the job.

Now they stood with other strikers in a cold, raw night wind whipping up Pacific
Avenue, picketing the Brooklyn plant where they had put in so many shifts on the
big, noisy presses.

"I don't think we'll ever be back," Howard Grantz said glumly.

"It was dirty, noisy," Stuart Grantz recalled almost fondly. "Very noisy, like
four subways coming into the station all at once."

"Before we got the air conditioning a few years ago, it was 120 degrees in the
summer," Stuart said. "You couldn't see from one end to the other because of the
ink mist. I'd be coughing up black stuff on my day off."

"It was the worst, a dungeon," agreed Howard, saying almost in the same breath:
"I love the Daily News. It's my life. It's what I do."

Like the other strikers, the brothers grew up in a time when New York was a
union town. Jobs in newspaper production were handed down like family legacies
and the News was the largest paper in the country and the voice of blue-collar
workers and civil servants in the city's ethnic neighborhoods.

"The News is like a cup of coffee in the morning," Stuart Grantz said. "People
got to have it."

Hurling Eggs or Stones

The strikers, mostly heavyset men who earned their livings with their backs and
arms, are clustered behind blue wooden police barricades at the entrances to the
plant, facing the dozens of police officers who are joined by mounted officers
and escort cars when delivery trucks or buses of newly hired workers enter or
leave the plant.

"Scab, scab," the strikers scream, many hurling eggs or stones as well, when the
buses and trucks pass. "Your wife should get cancer."

One set of barricades includes a small coffee shop called the Winner's Circle in
a building next to the plant, where strikers and the police escape the cold.
Nearby, behind a battered metal door, is a bar where the walls are covered with
union slogans, American and Confederate flags and a faded Vietnam-era sticker
urging "Boycott Jane Fonda . . . traitor."

Striking drivers vow to stop the management-produced version of The Daily News
from reaching the stands.

On Friday night, a driver named Carlos burst into the Winner's Circle and
showered strikers with a big bundle of that morning's paper he had taken from a
newsstand.

'This Is My Livelihood'

"Here's how you get The Daily News!" he shouted to cheers. "Take it off the
stand."

"I'll tell you how it is," Carlos said later on a street corner, between
whispered directions about stockpiling bricks. "This is my livelihood. I'm going
to a stand and tell them not to take The News. Or else I'm going to take down
the whole stand."

Since the strike began, there have been 41 arrests, mostly of striking drivers,
for weapons possession and for incidents that have included attacks on delivery
trucks and buses with baseball bats and golf balls. The Daily News says that
eight of its delivery trucks have been destroyed by arson and 70 others damaged.

Alexander Grantz, the two drivers' father, died of lung cancer in 1974 --
"pressroom related," said Howard -- but the brothers kept working on the presses
in the Brooklyn plant, the newest dating from 1956, plating up the dozen
presses, hurrying to get them back in motion if they stopped. A cousin is a
pressman at The New York Times, as was his father.

'Used to Working Nights'

"If you start at 18, when you're 30 and you realize maybe you should have gone
to college, you got children, it's too late," Howard said. "And you get used to
working nights.

"If my father was a lawyer, I might have been a lawyer," he said. "My father was
a pressman, so I became a pressman."

Pressmen begin their careers as "casuals," to fill vacancies or provide extra
manpower. If a worker can accumulate enough shifts in a six-month period -- a
number that fluctuates around 120, Howard Grantz said -- he gets a union card as
an apprentice pressman, and begins the long march toward acquiring enough
seniority for the scarce journeyman's card, with priority for easier tasks.

"I just made my card about a year and a half ago," Howard said. Before that, he
had spent years as the head of the "juniors," a union position in which he had
considerable say in allocating jobs and choosing casual workers.

Would they want their sons to work on the presses?

"No," said Howard.

"No," said Stuart.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Stuart, left, and Howard Grantz with an effigy of James Hoge,
the Daily News publisher, on the picket line outside the News printing plant on
Pacific Avenue in Brooklyn. (Dith Pran/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 30, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Put War to a Vote

BYLINE: By Gary M. Stern; Gary M. Stern is a legislative counsel in the
Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union.

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 556 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Democracy must really have taken hold in the Soviet Union if an astounding news
report from Moscow is true: The Soviet Government promised that it would not
commit troops to the Persian Gulf without prior approval from the legislature.
Now if only this ultimate democratic check on executive power, conceived by the
authors of the Constitution, were regarded as something other than blasphemy by
our President.

President Bush, like Presidents Reagan, Ford and Nixon before him, has refused
to abide by the War Powers Resolution, which prohibits the President from
continuing a war for more than 60 days without the approval of Congress. Rather,
he has asserted that Congress has absolutely no role to play in deciding whether
we should go to war. He maintains his position despite the plain language of the
Constitution, which states thatCongress has the "power to declare war."

The Framers' purpose in vesting power in Congress was simple: to separate the
power to go to war from the power to carry it out. As James Madison wrote,
"Those who are to conduct a war cannot in the nature of things be proper or safe
judges of whether a war ought to be commenced, continued or concluded. They are
barred from the latter functions by a great principle in free government,
analogous to that which separates the sword from the purse, or the power of
executing from the power of enacting laws."

A good many scholars and policymakers alike, who believe in original intent here
at home and condemn authoritarian aggression abroad, continue to promote a
dictatorial power for the U.S. President when it comes to war.

For 45 years of the cold war, Presidents and their advisers claimed an inherent
war-making power, devoid of Congressional interference, as necessary to combat
the unchecked, totalitarian power of the Soviet Union. Now, with the cold war
ended, their claim lies exposed as a convenient excuse for circumventing an
essential democratic safeguard.

The Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, has acknowledged that the
tragic Soviet intervention in Afghanistan was the result of a lack of a
democratic check on his Government. "This is not 1979, a year of great tragedy,
when the decision was made to send Soviet troops into Afghanistan," Mr.
Shevardnadze said. "Any use of Soviet troops outside the country demands a
decision of the Soviet Parliament."

President Bush would do well to recognize the wisdom of the Constitution, as Mr.
Shevardnadze apparently has, by obtaining the consent of Congress before
committing the nation to war in the Middle East. And Congress, if need be,
should reconvene after the elections to take up the issue and decide whether,
and to what extent, the President would be able to use force in that region and
in any other part of the world.

Before we commit our forces to go to war in the name of democracy, we should try
to follow our own democratic model.l

Congress learned the lesson of Vietnam when it passed the War Powers Resolution
in 1973 over President Nixon's veto. The Soviets seemed to have learned their
Afghanistan lesson as well. President Bush, it seems, is the lone holdout.

With a new international order upon us, President Bush should apply this basic
and fundamental democratic procedure. If the Soviet Union can embrace it, surely
Mr. Bush can too.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

For Vietnamese-Americans, a Victory in Congress

BYLINE: By KATHERINE BISHOP, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 874 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Oct. 30


Legislation passed in the final hours of the 101st Congress provides an
exemption to a 200-year-old law that will for the first time allow fishermen who
are not American citizens to legally own and pilot commercial fishing vessels
off the California coast.

The legislation, sponsored by Representative Norman Y. Mineta, Democrat of San
Jose, was drafted in response to the plight of several hundred Vietnam-born
fishermen who earn their living fishing out of harbors here and in Los Angeles
and Monterey on refitted old boats bought by pooling the money of several
families. Last year the Coast Guard began stepped-up enforcement of an
18th-century law that makes it illegal for the Vietnamese-Americans and other
legal aliens to own and pilot their boats unless they are citizens.

"This is one of my happiest days," Chieu Pham, president of the Vietnamese
Fishermen Association of America, said today. "For me, it's just like a dream
come true. Fishing is the only thing we know. We want to be productive citizens,
and now we have a chance to do it."

About 120 fishing boats owned by Vietnamese-Americans operate off the California
coast, Mr. Pham said, and each generally has a crew of four.

Fines and Threats

Because they fled their homeland as refugees and have not as yet achieved
citizenship in the United States, owning and piloting their own fishing boats
has been in contravention of a 1789 law, the Jones Act, and its subsequent
amendments. The law was intended to insure coastal security in time of war and
to protect the domestic fishing industry from foreign competition.

Last year the United States Coast Guard fined many of the Vietnam-born fishermen
and threatened to confiscate their boat-registration documents. In September
1989, Mr. Pham's association brought a civil lawsuit against the Coast Guard,
arguing that the Jones Act violates the fundamental liberty to earn a
livelihood. Two months later the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth
Circuit, in San Francisco, granted the association an emergency injunction
barring enforcement of the act pending a full hearing.

Under the legislation passed Sunday, aliens who have been lawfully admitted to
the United States for permanent residence would be treated as citizens for the
purposes of operating fishing vessels. The measure is part of the Federal
Maritime Commission authorization bill, which President Bush is expected to
sign.

Qualms in Alaska

Mr. Mineta said today that the measure was passed on a unanimous voice vote
after it was amended to limit it to fishing off California. The Alaska fishing
industry had argued that otherwise the measure might provide a loophole to open
Alaskan waters to large commercial fishing enterprises from Canada.

The Jones Act was generally not at issue in conflicts between
Vietnamese-American fishermen and native fishermen along the Gulf of Mexico
coast in the early 1980's, because those disputes involved shrimp boats, which
are usually too small to fall under its jurisdiction. The act applies to boats
weighing five tons or more.

Referring to the Vietnamese-Americans in California, Mr. Mineta said today, "The
issue was right, their cause was right and there was recognition by Congress of
the injustice and inequity they were facing."

Dennis W. Hayashi, a lawyer with the Asian Law Caucus in Oakland, Calif., which,
along with the American Civil Liberties Union and two private law firms,
represents the fishermen in their civil suit, said the suit would be withdrawn
as soon as Mr. Bush signed the legislation.

Mr. Hayashi said the case represented the first time Vietnamese-Americans here
had gone to Washington to lobby on behalf of a domestic issue of vital interest
to them. "This is historic legislation for the Vietnamese-American community,"
he said, "because it is the first time they have politically been able to
empower themselves through the legislative process."

Pessimism About a Court Victory

The legislation comes at a time when the fishermen's chances of winning a suit
brought on constitutional grounds appeared bleak.

At a hearing before a panel of the appeals court in July, Anne L. Weisman, a
lawyer with the civil divison of the Justice Department representing the Coast
Guard, argued that Congress had reviewed the Jones Act several times and had
found its purposes still valid. Congress has the power to make laws bearing upon
the national security and to conserve the resources of the county for citizens,
she argued, and those laws cannot be overturned by the courts unless a violation
of a constitutional right is shown.

The lawyer representing the fishermen, Alan W. Sparer, conceded that no
fundamental constitutional right was at stake, but he argued that the fishermen
would be forced to give up their boats or to hire American citizens who would
act as paper owners of the boats and be paid to sit on board as "pilots" to
satisfy the letter of the law.

In addition, Mr. Sparer said, the Vietnamese-Americans were not in direct
competition with the traditional industry fishing for salmon, halibut and
herring, Instead, he said, they fish for species like kingfish and hagfish that
are popular in Asian markets and restaurants.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Representative Norman Y. Mineta, sponsor of legislation allowing
fishermen who are not American citizens to own and pilot commercial boats off
the California coast. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

With Gains by Khmer Rouge, Congress Looks to Hun Sen

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 577 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 30


In response to Khmer Rouge advances on the battlefield, Congress has passed
legislation intended to press the Administration to broaden ties with the
Vietnamese-backed Government of Cambodia.

Ever since Vietnam invaded Cambodia to topple the Khmer Rouge from power and
installed a sympathetic Government in 1979, Washington has shunned that
leadership in Phnom Penh and instead supported a guerrilla coalition.

The Bush Administration shifted policy in July by dropping its diplomatic
support for the guerrilla coalition and opening contacts with Cambodia and
Vietnam to increase the chances of a negotiated settlement. But it has continued
to grant noncombat assistance to two non-Communist rebel groups loosely aligned
with the Khmer Rouge, which was responsible for the deaths of at least a million
Cambodians during its four years in power.

Congressional critics charge that Administration policy risks helping the Khmer
Rouge retake power if the negotiations between the guerrillas and the Phnom Penh
Government now headed by Prime Minister Hun Sen break down. In recent months,
the Khmer Rouge has made military gains and has constructed an effective
political organization in preparation for elections that are being pushed by the
United States and the Soviet Union.

Recognition Not Imminent

Congress has acted to bolster the position of the Hun Sen Government, even
though the Administration said it will not consider recognizing it soon. The
Government is suffering from a drop in Soviet and Vietnamese aid, as well as
from infighting.

The 1991 foreign aid bill passed Saturday includes a $20 million Cambodia aid
amendment, and an additional $5 million for Cambodian children. This was the
first time that Congress mandated that aid be allocated to areas ruled by the
Hun Sen Government. Previously, nearly all humanitarian aid had been directed
only to refugee camps controlled by anti-Government forces along the
Thai-Cambodian border.

The foreign aid legislation obliges the Agency for International Development to
send a team to Phnom Penh within four months to write a "needs assessment
report" to be used as a guide for allocating millions of dollars in aid this
fiscal year. Since the agency is expected to consult with Phnom Penh officials,
some backers of the legislation hope that such contacts will help push a
normalization of relations.

Potentially the most significant language in the Cambodia amendment is a
provision that calls on Congress and the Administration to "consult" to lift the
United States trade embargo on Cambodia within 30 days of an international peace
conference, which is expected to be held in Paris in the next few months.

No Help for Khmer Rouge

"The real contest in Cambodia is between the Khmer Rouge and the Government,"
said Senator John C. Danforth, Republican of Missouri, in a speech Oct. 12 on
the Senate floor promoting the legislation.

He said the Congressional action was "designed to rescue the people of this
God-forsaken country and to turn our policy away from our assistance, albeit
indirect assistance, for the most bloodthirsty political organization since Nazi
Germany, and that is the Khmer Rouge."

Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d lobbied vigorously against the Cambodia
amendment offered by Mr. Danforth and Senator George J. Mitchell, Democrat of
Maine, arguing that Congress was attempting to manage policy, a senior
Administration official said.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

George W. Shine, 80, Leader in M.I.A. Group

SECTION: Section D; Page 26; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 164 words


George W. Shine, a retired vice president of Avon Products and an official in an
organization pressing for information about soldiers missing in Vietnam, died on
Monday at his home in Southbury, Conn.  He was 80 years old.

He died of cancer, his wife, Helen, said.

Mr. Shine was a 1932 graduate of Boston College and served in the Army in Europe
during World War II and with the Air Force during the Korean War. He was with
Dennison manufacturing in Manhattan before joining Avon, where he was a vice
president when he retired in 1971. He lost two sons in Vietnam. One, Jonathan,
was killed in action, and the other, Anthony, is listed as missing in action. He
was affiliated with the National League of Families of American P.O.W.'s and
M.I.A.'s for about 10 years and was the organization's treasurer when he died.

In addition to his wife, he is survived by a son, Alexander, of Culver, Ind.; a
daughter, Lieut. Col. Sarah Shine of San Antonio, and six grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Bulgarian A-Plant Reactors Are Shut Down After Mishap

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 141 words

DATELINE: SOFIA, Bulgaria, Oct. 30


Technicians at Bulgaria's sole nuclear plant closed down two of its five
reactors today because of a breakdown, the official news agency reported.

The brief dispatch said the mishap had occurred outside the plant's nuclear
reactor core, but it gave no other details. It said the two reactors, one with a
capacity of 440 megawatts and another of 1,000 megawatts, were closed down as a
precaution.

The breakdown occurred less than a week after international experts expressed
concern about safety at the plant at Kozlodui, on the Danube River in northern
Bulgaria. German officials, citing safety problems, have decided to close five
reactors of the same Soviet design as the 440-megawatt reactor at Kozlodui.

Prime Minister Andrei Lukanov said on Monday that the plant would be mothballed
unless it could meet international safety standards.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
The War Option

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 747 words


President Bush and Secretary of State Baker are trying, as they must, to bring
maximum psychological pressure on Saddam Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait. The
danger is that they may paint themselves into a corner from which they can
escape only through a bloody and ill-conceived war against Iraq.

In separate speeches -- Mr. Bush's at a campaign rally in California -- they
delivered the same message: "We will not rule out a possible use of force if
Iraq continues to occupy Kuwait." And both heightened the goosebump effect with
lurid tales of Iraqi atrocities.

Almost simultaneously, however, Mikhail Gorbachev declared flatly that "it is
unacceptable to have a military solution to [the Kuwait] question" -- a position
that emphasizes a major weakness of war as a deliberate option:

It would be a Western war, primarily an American-British war, begun by a
decision in Washington, against an Arab nation or nations. That's because a
calculated attack on Iraq almost certainly would make Saddam Hussein a martyr as
well as a hero in the Arab world, and shatter the East-West-third-world alliance
that has made possible such an impressive collective-security effort against
further Iraqi aggression. Soviet support would be sacrificed, and that of even
the allied Arab nations could not be relied upon.

King Fahd of Saudi Arabia, Hafez al-Assad of Syria and Hosni Mubarak of Egypt no
doubt want to see Saddam Hussein brought down. That does not mean that the
sentiments of their Arab populations would permit them to join in a Western war
on another Arab nation; if they did, popular opposition could prevent them from
making a major military effort, or from sustaining it for months, perhaps years.
If Mr. Hussein responded to war by attacking Israel, as he probably would, other
Arab nations would be far more likely to join than oppose him.

All that would be bad enough in itself. It also would dash the promising
beginnings -- it's not too much to say the bright hope -- of a post-cold-war
world in which the United States and the Soviet Union would cooperate in
international arrangements to maintain the peace. Such cooperation, building on
the remarkable collective-security success already achieved under American
leadership, could well be the most important result of the Middle East crisis --
unless, of course, it ends in war directed from Washington.

That war, it should also be remembered, would result in devastating casualties
for United States forces, the real possibility of a long deadlock rather than a
glorious victory, domestic political division on the same scale as in the
Vietnam years, and disastrous financial and political diversions from far more
pressing American problems at home and in the world.

But, reasonable people ask, if Saddam Hussein won't get out of Kuwait, how can
his aggression be allowed to stand? And how can the issue be negotiated without
in some way rewarding him for that aggression?  Wouldn't negotiation amount to
appeasement?

No. To leave open a line of retreat for an opponent, to make compromise possible
for him, is not necessarily to reward him. If Mr. Hussein believes he has no
alternative except ignominious surrender -- which an unconditional withdrawal
from Kuwait certainly would be -- war might be preferable to him. But if he
knows through Arab channels that withdrawal could bring about whatever he and
other Arab leaders could agree upon to address his legitimate complaints -- and
he has some -- the continuing pressures of boycott and embargo might cause him
to seek such an end to the confrontation on the Saudi border.

The way then would be open for collective-security efforts to contain any threat
of future Iraqi aggression, even to impose international controls against Iraqi
development of nuclear and other exotic weapons. Impractical? No more so than
the alliance Mr. Bush already has assembled in the desert, particularly if the
United States and the Soviet Union stand together in the effort.

As for the ghosts of appeasement, this is not 1939, Iraq is not Nazi Germany,
Saddam Hussein is not Hitler, and George Bush need be neither Chamberlain nor
Churchill. Mr. Hussein needs to be convinced of American resolve, but he is not
the only one who needs a line of retreat. Too much Presidential talk about
waging war may persuade too many Americans that war is not only inevitable but
necessary, and leave President Bush no other way out of a corner he painted
himself into.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1990 CAMPAIGN;
Kerry in Nasty Race in Massachusetts

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 25; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1159 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


In his re-election battle against Jim Rappaport, a Republican upstart, Senator
John Kerry sometimes tells voters, "I'm not Rappaport," a playful political
appropriation of the title of the Broadway show by that name.

Mr. Rappaport, a wealthy anti-tax conservative with no previous political
experience, laughs as hard as anybody. He says Mr. Kerry, a first-term Democrat,
is really Michael Dukakis.

And that brings no laugh from Senator Kerry.

To many voters here and elsewhere, Mr. Dukakis, the Governor of Massachusetts
who was the Democratic Party's much-maligned Presidential candidate in 1988,
seems the embodiment of political ineptitude and failed tax-and-spend
liberalism. To such voters, Mr. Dukakis is as good an explanation as any for the
anti-incumbent tide that is sweeping across Massachusetts and much of the rest
of the nation this fall.

So Senator Kerry, a 46-year-old Massachusetts Brahmin who rose to national
prominence as a founder of Vietnam Veterans Against the War, finds himself in
political trouble, running hard to escape that tide.

Depth of Voter Angst

In the latest polls he is leading Mr. Rappaport, a 34-year-old developer and
heir to a real estate fortune. But hardly anyone thinks the contest is over,
given the depth of voter angst here and the slashing, personal attacks that both
candidates have mounted.

Although Mr. Rappaport is a newcomer to Bay State politics, through aggressive
stumping and intensive television advertising he appears to have persuaded large
numbers of voters that Senator Kerry, along with Governor Dukakis, is
responsible for the economic hard times that have left Massachusetts in bad
financial shape.

The Senator, Mr. Rappaport remainds voters, was Mr. Dukakis's Lieutenant
Governor before heading to Washington six years ago. There, Mr. Rappaport says,
Mr. Kerry has become the Governor's "ambassador."

Lest anyone miss this attempt at guilt by association, Mr. Rappaport is flooding
the airwaves with a television advertisement called "Metamorphosis," in which
Mr. Dukakis's face slowly evolves into the face of John Kerry. "He's back!" a
doom-filled voice says.

Mr. Kerry counters that he is his own political man and is as aware as anyone
that Massachusetts voters are angry and frustrated to the point that they have
moderated their once unalloyed liberalism, particularly when it comes to taxes
and spending. He says Mr. Rappaport is an inexperienced candidate, a political
opportunist who has spent much of his life outside Massachusetts and has now
returned with more than $3 million of the family fortune to buy his way into the
Senate.

And, lest anyone miss his point, one of Senator Kerry's television
advertisements, entitled "Hot Heir," features a balloon on which Mr. Rappaport's
face has been painted. The balloon bounces around the country until it reaches
Washington, where it pops.

"I'm not part of the problem," the Senator tells voters as he travels the state.
"People like Jim Rappaport are the problem. I'm part of the solution."

Mr. Kerry says he has not only represented his state in Washington but has also
been in the forefront of the war on drugs, winning a seat on the prestigeous
Senate Foreign Relations Committee and heading one of its investigations into
the narcotics trade in Central America.

Mr. Rappaport counters that Mr. Kerry has been an obedient, tax-and-spend
Democrat on Capitol Hill and has become too enamored of political and social
Washington at the expense of Massachusetts. "He's more concerned about Central
America that central Massachusetts," Mr. Rappaport says.

One reason Senator Kerry seems to be in political trouble is that he got off to
a lackadaisical start in countering Mr. Rappaport's attack, and has thus found
himself on the defensive throughout most of the campaign.

Mr. Kerry, who is slow to smile and clap a back, also suffers from an image of
being cool and distant. In the view of some constituents, he has, as a Senator,
failed to establish strong bonds with his constituency.

"Kerry hurt himself by being mostly invisible throughout the early part of the
campaign," said John Gorman of Opinion Dynamics, a Massachusets-based
organization that does political and market polling. "That made him especially
vulnerable since he's never had particulaly high favorability or visibility in
the state, though down in Washington he's been much better. But he's beginning
to pick up some speed with his television spots and now that more and more
reporters have begun to scrutinize Rappaport."

Increasingly, the challenger finds himself fending off questions about his lack
of political experience, why he will not release all his tax returns, whether
his Vermont farm should be eligible for Federal agriculture subsidies and how he
got in on a highly profitable real estate deal in Hawaii.

Quick with a boyish smile, eager to clap the nearest back, Mr. Rappaport tells
his critics that being a political novice is an advantage when an anti-incumbent
tide is running. As for his finances, he says they are "all in correct order."

 Undecideds Make it Close

The first Kerry-Rappaport polls, conducted more than six weeks ago, showed the
Senator with a lead of fewer than five percentage points. By contrast, he was
elected to the Senate six years ago with 55 percent of the vote.

The latest polls, conducted about 10 days ago, show that Mr. Kerry has opened
his lead over Mr. Rappaport to about 15 points. But they also showed a undecided
vote of 10 points or so, and many politicians and pollsters here say that vote
could go to the challenger.

"That would keep it a close race," said Brad Bannon, another Massachusetts poll
taker. "Incumbents usually have a hard time getting the undecideds. And in a
year like this, with so much voter anger, that task is even more difficult."

Many of the undecideds are thought to be political independents. Over the years,
Massachusetts has swung from being heavily Republican to heavily Democratic, and
has recently become increasingly independent. The latest voter breakdown is
estimated to be 44 percent independent, 42 percent Democratic and 14 percent
Republican.

But Mr. Rappaport can take little encouragement from one other significant
political development undercovered by the latest polls. They showed that the
percentage of voters who had a favorable view of him was declining, while the
percentage of voters who viewed him unfavorably was increasing. Senator Kerry's
favorable-unfavorable ratings changed little from earlier polls.

Such ratings hint, as much as anything, at a candidate's ability to hold
supporters and pull them to the polls.

"Rappaport may have overplayed his hand with his ads and his attacks," said Mr.
Gorman, the pollster for oPinion Dynamics. "Then on top of that you can add
Kerry's attacks and a lot of media pieces about Rappaport, especially attacks by
columnists. It's beginning to cut."

NAME: John Kerry; Jim Rappaport

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 1, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
What Presidents Should Have Done

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 26; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 983 words



Presidential Power and the Modern Presidents
The Politics of Leadership From Roosevelt to Reagan
By Richard E. Neustadt
371 pages. Free Press/Macmillan. $22.95.

The original edition of the present book was published 30 years ago under the
title "Presidential Power." It treated the administrations of Harry S. Truman
and Dwight D. Eisenhower (against the shadow of Franklin D. Roosevelt's), and
examined in detail how these Presidents went about carrying out some of their
major decisions, both successfully and otherwise.

The book's fundamental revelation was that a President doesn't simply issue
orders and have them carried out. As Truman summed up the problem of
Presidential power: "I sit here all day trying to persuade people to do the
things they ought to have sense enough to do without my persuading them. . . .
That's all the powers of the President amount to."

Moreover, Mr. Neustadt concluded, a President must always consider the effect of
his decisions on his prospects for the successful exercise of Presidential power
in the future: "The better they think about power in prospective terms, the
likelier they are to buttress future influence and also chosen policy."

The product of Mr. Neustadt's analysis was celebrated as a modern version of
Machiavelli's Renaissance study of power, "The Prince." "Presidential Power" was
taught in political science departments, assigned to White House staffs, and
even read by Presidents themselves.

Mr. Neustadt has periodically revised his book, adding piecemeal the
Presidencies of John F. Kennedy, Lyndon B. Johnson, Richard M. Nixon, Gerald R.
Ford and Jimmy Carter. Many of the new exercises of power analyzed by Mr.
Neustadt have had negative results: Johnson's handling of Vietnam, Mr. Nixon's
involvement in Watergate, Mr. Carter's treatment of the Bert Lance affair. Now
in the latest edition, "Presidential Power and the Modern Presidents," Mr.
Neustadt crowns his study with an analysis of Ronald Reagan's Administration and
the harm done to it in 1986 by the Iran-contra affair, which the author
considers a "textbook case" of a President's failing to exercise judicious
power.

Given the preponderance of negative material in the various revisions, one would
have to conclude that Mr. Neu stadt's advice to Presidents is not proving
successful.

This remark is not meant to be entirely facetious. Of course, Mr. Neustadt's
texts are intended to be analyses of exercises in power, and as such they are
acute and informative, whether comparing Truman's Korea with Johnson's Vietnam,
or figuring out why Kennedy was able to overcome the Bay of Pigs fiasco while
Mr. Carter failed to survive the series of "piglets" that undermined his
Administration.

But "Presidential Power" is also meant to teach by example. Mr. Neustadt keeps
referring to the "lesson" to be drawn, and he writes in the penultimate chapter
of this new edition: "Why bother to advise at all?  But that is the point of the
exercise. I never had much interest in exposing problems, period. The point is
to pursue at least the glimmerings of possible solutions.  Will-o'-the-wisps?
Perhaps. Still, they ought to be pursued. Presidents and their staffs seek
advice; they need it; they deserve the best the rest of us can offer."

What Mr. Neustadt offers can be confusing at times. He likes to enumerate the
elements of power. He begins by stating: "A modern President is bound to face
demands for aid and service from five more or less distinguishable sources: from
executive officialdom, from Congress, from his partisans, from citizens at
large, and from abroad." Later he adds that "at least five common factors" are
at work behind "the ready execution" of Presidential orders.

Still later: "In appraising the personal performance of a President, it is
useful to ask four questions." By 1976, these sources, factors, and questions
have to be considered in the light of six altered emphases or reinterpretations.
And so it goes, ad infinitum. To practice Presidential power, one apparently
needs a cue card of the sort that card-counting blackjack players sneak into
casinos.

Then, as if to dispel whatever confusion all the enumerations may have created,
Mr. Neustadt makes pronouncements whose meaning no one can mistake. "No
President can make most of what happens in his time occur or stop to suit his
popularity." "A President can only think about the things he is aware of." "The
things a President must think about if he would build his influence are not
unlike those bearing on the viability of public policy." Am I missing something
here?

Mr. Neustadt's crowning lesson, like most of his case studies, is far from
uninstructive. He concludes that Mr. Reagan was not a "stupid" President but
wonders how he got trapped by the Iran-contra affair. To answer, he examines how
Eisenhower in 1954 sidestepped American support of the French at the siege of
Dien Bien Phu, and how Kennedy defused the Cuban missile crisis. Eisenhower had
the necessary experience, the author concludes, and Kennedy asked the right
questions.

But Mr. Reagan being Mr. Reagan, the most "incurious" yet "committed" President
in memory, had neither experience nor questions. And he let William Casey, his
Director of Central Intelligence, cut him off from the person Mr. Neustadt
believes to have been his most reliable adviser: Nancy, his wife.

"Never let your Nancy be immobilized, could be a rule of thumb for future
Presidents," Mr. Neustadt concludes. Words to govern by. In short, though his
sense of history remains sharp, his stance as a teacher of Presidents has grown
fatuous.  What his teaching amounts to is that one should be whoever one happens
to be.  Unless being so has proved harmful to one's Presidency. In which case
one should be someone else. So long as one thinks about what one is aware of.

Which ought to be by now:

Power.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard E. Neustadt (Martha Stewart/Free Press/Macmillan)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 1, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

How to Rattle Iraq

SECTION: Section A; Page 28; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 521 words


President Bush is clearly seeking ways to put new pressure on Saddam Hussein.
But he's floundering. He warns Iraq that he's prepared to attack, and snarls at
mistreatment of American hostages. In the next breath, he tells Congress that
U.S. troops in the Persian Gulf are in no imminent danger of war. He can't have
it both ways and still send a credible message.

There's a better way: Invite Congress to debate the tough question of what
happens if his present strategy of economic sanctions and military buildup fails
to move Iraq. Mr. Bush has been reluctant to do that. Instead he hints at going
to war on his own authority. He thus misses a chance to rally Americans behind
his strategy and truly show Iraq that America intends to stay the course.

Why debate the possibility of war at all, especially if such a debate reveals
serious disagreements, and thus risk increasing Saddam Hussein's intransigence?
One reason is that for the President not to take the people into his confidence
now invites recrimination later if war in fact occurs and casualties mount.

And the other side of the coin is even more urgent. To move Saddam Hussein out
of Kuwait without a war, Mr. Bush needs both economic sanctions and a credible
threat of war. To make it credible, he has to convince Iraq that the American
people back him all the way.

Some people suggest that one way to begin the discussion would be for either Mr.
Bush or Congress to invoke the War Powers Act. The act allows the President to
dispatch troops abroad but requires that they be withdrawn within 60 days unless
Congress votes for them to remain. Mr. Bush has shied away from invoking the
act, contending that U.S. troops are in no imminent danger of hostilities.
Closing its eyes, Congress accepted his claim, and then authorized him to call
up reserves for 360 days without declaring a state of emergency.

Mr. Bush seems intent on going it alone. "History is replete with examples where
the President has to take action," he said Monday.

He'd do well to reflect further on precisely those examples. Harry Truman,
fearing a partisan debate over Korea, avoided Congress and went to the U.N.
instead. That cost him popular support. Lyndon Johnson, instead of debating his
Vietnam strategy openly, escalated by stealth. That undid his Presidency. And
Richard Nixon made war on Cambodia without telling Congress. That alienated even
some of his own partisans.

Presidents pay when they don't come clean with Congress. And there are other
ways for Mr. Bush to do so short of the War Powers Act or a declaration of war.
Congress could reconvene after the election and hold hearings on his gulf
strategy. And the President could seek a joint resolution endorsing that
strategy.

Whatever the method, the President and Congress have a duty to discuss and
explain the circumstances under which they might take America to war, their
reasons for doing so and the ends for which the war would be waged. The better
the explanation of the policy, the more the public will support it. The more the
public supports it, the less likely war becomes.



LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 2, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Excerpts From Interview With Commander of American Forces in Gulf

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1611 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, Nov. 1


Following are excerpts from an interview here today with Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf, commander of American forces in the Persian Gulf region:

Q. How many troops do we have here? The Pentagon said another 100,000 are
coming, so where are we heading? What's the ultimate number?

A. I am not sure the Pentagon ever announced another 100,000 men. I think there
were a lot of discussions about it. We have over 210,000 troops here now, and we
are continuing to flow into the area. No upper limits were ever established over
the number of troops we were going to have in countries and, so we are
continuing to build robustness into the forces we have here.

Q. How much is enough?

A. For a military man you can never have enough. I think it is fair to say that
President Bush has announced that he wants to let the sanctions have an
opportunity to work, and, if the sanctions don't work, then he is prepared to
pursue other options. It is my job to make sure that we continue to flow forces
until I am sure that I am prepared to execute whatever options the President is
prepared to select.

 How Long a Fight?

Q. When battle-time comes, how tough and how long a battle is it likely to be?
Hours, as some Saudis say, days, longer, or you just don't know?

A. I think that is the correct answer. We just don't know. As a military
commander I have to prepare for the worst. And, that's exactly what I am doing.
I think we have vastly superior fire power and technology and I can assure you
that if we have to go to war, I am going to use every single thing that is
available to me to bring as much destruction to the Iraqi forces as rapidly as I
possibly can in the hopes of winning victory as quickly as possible.

And, you know you can think of all sorts of different scenarios that would cause
it to be over quickly, But on the other hand, I can think of other scenarios
that could cause it not to be over quickly, too.

The most dangerous thing a commander could do, or that a country can do, in
planning for battle is assume away the capabilities of the enemy.

 The Strategic Goal

Q. What is the strategic goal? We know the mission, but what is the basic idea?
Is it to liberate Kuwait or to remove the whole Saddam regime?

A. . . . There are alternatives to destroying Saddam Hussein or to destroying
his regime. I like to think that the ultimate objective is to make sure that we
have peace, stability and a correct balance of power in the Middle East, so that
all nations can continue to prosper without the fear of being attacked or
blackmailed by a neighboring state. There are many ways you can accomplish that.
Obviously one way would be the total destruction of Iraq, but I am not sure that
is in the interest of the long-term balance of power in this region.

So, and again, President Bush has stated again and again, our argument is not
with the Iraqi people, and that would cause thousands and thousands of innocent
casualties and I don't think anybody wants that. So, as a military man,
obviously these decisions are going to be made at a level far higher than mine
as to the long-term geopolitical situation in this part of the world, but I do
think there are other alternatives to having to drive on to Baghdad and
literally dig out the entire Baathist regime and destroy them all in order to
have peace and stability in the area.

I think there are some arrangements, long-term security arrangements. I hesitate
to fall back on the NATO model because I don't want to sound like I am
advocating something, but you know NATO was a great success. We've only found
that out now, after all those years of questioning the validity of NATO and the
way NATO worked, lo and behold, you know, we now have reunified Germany. We have
peace in Europe and NATO was a great success.

NATO was containment, but not necessarily U.S. presence. We've made it very
clear from the outset that if invited, we would come, and that when asked to
leave, we would go, and we are not seeking permanent bases in this region.

Obviously, if in the future we were asked to stay that's something that will
have to be addressed by people much higher than ours, but it doesn't have to be
necessarily U.S. forces. There are a lot of areas where peace has been
maintained by other forces. Right now there are peacekeeping forces in a lot of
areas of the world that are maintaining the peace, and perhaps that's an
alternative. So it doesn't necessarily demand the destruction of Saddam Hussein,
although it personally wouldn't bother me if he were to step aside and make life
a lot easier for all of us.

 A Close Encounter

Q. There is a story going around that says you ran into some Iraqis.

A. It is true that I was on the border, and I was looking out in front of me
with binoculars like Beau Geste, looking over the sands, and the border post
commanders said, "Would you like to see some Iraqi trucks?" and I said, "Sure,"
and he said, "Well, they are right in front of you."

Of course I was looking out thousands of kilometers and there was nothing out
there.

And he said, "No, they are right in front of you." And I said, "I am looking out
there," and he said they were right down below me. They were trucks. Then I
said, "Where are the people in the trucks?" and he said, "They are right
downstairs," and my security people went crazy, as you can well imagine. But I
did go out and checked the equipment. It's in terrible shape. I was delighted. .
. .

 A Dove or a Hawk?

Q. Your last interview struck me as, shall we say, dovish? It was taken as a
strong desire to avoid a conflict. What are you assuming on terms of losses, and
how resolved are you to take losses?

A. I don't consider myself dovish. And, I certainly don't consider myself
hawkish. Maybe I would describe myself as owlish -- that is, wise enough to
understand that you want to do everything possible to avoid war -- that once
you're committed to war, then ferocious enough to do whatever is necessary to
get it over as quickly as possible in victory.

If we have to fight, I am going to use everything that is available to me to
inflict the maximum number of casualties on the enemy as possble. Now, why do I
do that? I do that because I want to minimize the casualties in my troops and
the way to do that is to make the enemy pay dearly rather than make your own
forces dearly. The reason whey we have generals, I think, the reason that we
have people that devote their lives to the military is to train people how to
accomplish their mission, but also to train them how to do it with the least
cost in human lives.

Q. What about the welfare of the hostages stuck in Iraq?

A. I think if it comes to war, you obviously have to consider the hostage, but
you shouldn't be constrained severely because of the hostages.

 Being Prepared

Q. You are talking as though you have plenty of time?

A. No. I am ready. The last thing my commanders do every night before they go to
sleep is ask themselves, "Are we ready to go to war tomorrow morning if it
happens?" And that is one of the requirements that I have placed upon them. So,
I am confident that if we have to go to war tomorrow morning we are ready. If we
are attacked tomorrow morning we are going to be prepared for it no matter how
that attack comes.

Q. Now when is that for -- next week, the week after, by Christmas?

A. I have already told you, I hope it doesn't come. What I hope is that Saddam
Hussein understands, you know, finally that he is going to lose. There is no
question about the fact that he has got the entire world lined up against him.

 Troop Rotation

Q. What do you do about rotation of troops? This is a tough place to take, even
for those of us who are staying in Riyadh.

A. If we are over here for any length of time, we're going to have to have a
rotation policy, just as we did in Vietnam. In Vietnam the rotation policy was a
year. I think the rotation policy over here would be shorter than that. I have
already made my recommendation to the Department of Defense and they are being
considered right now and we may see a rotation policy announced shortly. Again,
that is totally dependent, of course on how long we're here. Which at this
point, we could start going home tomorrow, if Saddam Hussein comes to his
senses.

We are looking to six to eight months to rotate the combat units home, something
like that. I don't think the combat units will stay a year over here because as
you say it is a very severe environment. . . .

 Assessing the Enemy

Q. What do you think of Saddam? What kind of enemy are you facing? How do you
read the man?

A. I've read a good deal about him. Some of the best writing has been done by
Arabs. If you study his childhood and the things that happened that formed this
man that is Saddam Hussein, I think you come to the conclusion that this is an
island of a man, who is really both isolated and insulated himself from the
entire rest of the world.

I think he is obsessed with his own sense of history. I do think he is a
megalomaniac. I have used this term before. He wants to be the leader of the
Arab people, no matter what it costs. And, certainly no matter how it costs the
people of his own country. He is a ruthless man, but he is not stupid. And, I
would hope that within this conflict he would understand that to continue down
this road where we are going is going to lead to his destruction. And,
therefore, he will not accomplish any of these things that he has in mind. . . .

Q. Do you think you will be here on Christmas?

A. I hope not, but I think so. But that, again, depends very much on Saddam
Hussein.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 2, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
U.S. Commander Urges Caution on Attacking Iraq

BYLINE: By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1514 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, Nov. 1


The commander of the American forces facing Iraq said today that his troops
could obliterate Iraq, but cautioned that total destruction of that country
might not be "in the interest of the long-term balance of power in this region."

"President Bush has stated again and again, our argument is not with the Iraqi
people, and that would cause thousands and thousands of innocent casualties,"
the commander, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, said in an interview. "I do think
there are other alternatives to having to drive on to Baghdad and literally dig
out the entire Baathist regime and destroy them all in order to have peace and
stability in the area." [Excerpts, page A8.]

The general said the decision on the kind of military action that might be taken
against Iraq rested with Mr. Bush and leaders in the Persian Gulf region.

General Schwarzkopf, who came to Riyadh late in August and commands the more
than 210,000 American troops in Saudi Arabia and the gulf region, indicated that
while he believed a war could erupt "anytime," he did not expect military action
soon.

Urges 6-to-8-Month Rotation

The American commander made these points in the hourlong interview today:

*He has recommended to the Pentagon that American combat units in Saudi Arabia
be rotated out of the country every six to eight months. This would be a
departure from the policy followed in Vietnam, under which enlisted men were
rotated home after 13-month tours. The Army wants to maintain unit integrity to
preserve morale and fighting cohesion, military officials said. This means that
the American troops who arrived in August and September may very well remain
here past Christmas, he said.

*Iraqi missiles will have only a modest effect on the conduct of any battle
because they are highly inaccurate and because the Iraqis have a relatively
small number of rocket launchers. General Schwarzkopf played down Iraq's ability
to mount chemical warheads on its missiles.

*The continued operation of Saudi oilfields and production plants is
substantially immune to Iraqi attacks, which to cause serious damage would have
to be carried out by the Iraqi Air Force in repeated strikes. He said that such
a possibility was virtually nil, given the superiority of the allied air forces
and anti-missile defenses.

*Many Iraqi Army generals who performed well in the eight-year war with Iran
have been executed by President Saddam Hussein so he would not have to share the
limelight with them, and several other generals who planned the Iraqi occupation
of Kuwait have also been eliminated, creating widespread fear and distrust in
the upper echelons of the Iraqi Army.

The American four-star general also gave his assessment of the quality of Iraq's
estimated 430,000 troops in southern Iraq and Kuwait that are facing his forces.
He said that while the members of the Iraqi Republican Guard were of a high
standard, they were kept away from the front lines, leaving those positions to
be manned by the worst elements in the Iraqi Army, who "know they've been put
out here to die, and that that is why they have low morale."

Sipping ice-cold water throughout the interview, General Schwarzkopf, dressed in
his battle fatigues, said he had long studied the character and psychological
profile of Mr. Hussein, a man the general described as "an island of a man, who
has really both isolated and insulated himself from the entire rest of the
world."

He said the Iraqi "wants to be the leader of the Arab people no matter what it
costs -- and certainly no matter what it costs the people of his own country."

The general has given about 20 interviews since arriving in Saudi Arabia, and
has carefully avoided any discussion of detailed battle plans like the remarks
that led to the dismissal of Gen. Michael J. Dugan, the Air Force Chief of
Staff, in September. General Dugan was dismissed for saying the Joint Chiefs of
Staff believed that the only effective military option for driving Iraq out of
Kuwait was heavy bombing of Baghdad to "decapitate" the senior Iraqi leadership.

General Schwarzkopf -- a 6-foot, 3-inch-tall man whose troops nicknamed him "the
Bear" and "Stormin' Norman" -- exuded confidence, asserting at several points
that he had not the slightest doubt that his troops would decisively defeat the
Iraqi Army in any war.

The Objective Is Peace

Speaking of the objectives of the 300,000 American-led allied troops
concentrated here, he said the force had the technological advantage and
sufficient firepower to obliterate Iraq if so ordered. But he added, "I would
like to think that the ultimate objective is to make sure that we have peace,
stability and a correct balance of power in the Middle East so that nations can
continue to prosper without the fear of being attacked or blackmailed by a
neighboring state."

He said one way to do that, after an Iraqi defeat or retreat, would be to
establish a peacekeeping force of regional powers, with Americans taking part
only if they were asked to do so.

He expressed his fervent hope that a war can be avoided as Mr. Hussein, whom he
described as a "megalomaniac" and a "ruthless" man, realizes he is facing
impossible odds.

"He is not stupid," General Schwarzkopf said of the Iraqi. "And I would hope
that within this conflict he would understand that to continue down this road
where we are going, is going to lead to his destruction, and, therefore, he will
not accomplish any of these things that he has in mind."

The general cast strong doubts on the effectiveness of Iraqi missiles to hit
targets in Saudi Arabia accurately or in any significant numbers.

"I cannot say that no missile will come in," he said. "It would be foolish for
me to say that. But I can tell you that I discount their rhetoric about their
missiles because we know a great deal about their missiles, and the things that
they claim they can do we do not think they can do."

The general interrupted the interview -- which was held in an air-conditioned
Government office that cannot be identified under military briefing rules -- at
about 3 P.M. Saudi time to take a 15-minute telephone call from the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Colin L. Powell, who he said calls at the same
hour almost every day, at 7 A.M. in Washington.

General Schwarzkopf also said the Saudi oilfields, which lie largely in Eastern
province of this country near the Persian Gulf coast, were by and large immune
to major disruptions by Iraqi missile or air attacks. He said, however, that the
Iraqis could seriously damage Kuwait's oil installations.

The general said there were no major problems of coordination among the forces
gathered here -- the Americans, as well as thousands of British, Egyptian,
French, Syrian, Moroccan, Pakistani and other forces.

"Anytime you have this many forces involved in an operation, it's complicated,"
he said. "It's complicated even if you have this many forces involved from only
one nation. So it is not a simple business at all, but I am satisfied that
currently we have as good a coordination as possible, as could be asked for."

Although he did not say so, the general left little doubt that if a war started,
it would be American commanders, and ultimately himself, who would direct the
forces.

Three Goals Set Forth

Asked whether all the nations whose armies are gathered here agree on their
strategic objective, General Schwarzkopf said his military mission had three
clear goals: the defense of Saudi Arabia, the liberation of Kuwait with the
restoration of its legitimate Government and the establishment of stability and
peace in the region, an objective he acknowledged needed to be clarified
further.

While he refused to be pinned down on how long the confrontation may last, he
said he had already recommended that the American troops here since August
should be rotated to ease the strain of the austere social climate and harsh
weather conditions of Saudi Arabia.

"I have already made my recommendation to the Department of Defense, and they
are being considered right now, and we may see a rotation policy announced
shortly," he said.

He said he was considering rotating combat troops every six to eight months,
adding, "From the standpoint of combat readiness, it is not smart to send them
home after they've been here a short time."

The general was asked about numerous accounts of troops getting lost in the
desert or experiencing difficulties operating their complex equipment as fine
sand gets into the machinery and of pilots becoming confused by complicated
desert landscape despite their night-vision equipment. "Most of that is an
exaggeration," he said.

"The status of our equipment is equal to or better than that of any units that I
have ever commanded in the United States of America, he said. "And we are
learning more every day about maintaining the equipment."

"Yes, the sand does give us some difficulties, but we are adjusting to that,
changing the filters more often for tanks, putting tape on our helicopter
blades," he said.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 7, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf, commander of American forces facing Iraq, referred incorrectly in
some editions to the regular tour of duty for Americans in Vietnam. The tour for
members of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force and the Coast Guard was 12 months;
for the Marines, it was 13 months.

GRAPHIC: Photos: American forces in the Persian Gulf could obliterate Iraq,
according to their commander, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, shown in September.
(David Turnley/Black Star) (pg. A1); Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf said Iraqi
troops in the front lines "know they've been put out here to die and that is why
they have low morale." On Wednesday, he spoke to troops from the 354th Tactical
Air Force Wing, an A-10 unit, at a base in Saudi Arabia. (Pool photo via
Reuters) (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 2, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE 1990 CAMPAIGN;
The Ones to Watch: Snapshots of Some of the Hottest Contests for the House

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1647 words



California

 17TH DISTRICT.  Calvin Dooley, the Democratic candidate, appears to be
benefiting greatly from the headlines in the Fresno area about the six-term
incumbent, Charles (Chip) Pashayan Jr., a Republican, and his ties to the
savings and loan industry and Charles H. Keating Jr. Mr. Pashayan is not the
target of any inquiries, but he received $26,000 in contributions from Mr.
Keating in 1986 and shortly after wrote letters and introduced legislation to
help the S.& L. industry.

36TH DISTRICT.  For two decades, George E. Brown Jr., a Democrat, has
represented the San Bernardino area. But now he faces a strong challenge from
Bob Hammock, a Republican, who while on the City Council and County Board, built
strong ties to Hispanic voters, who make up a quarter of the district.

37TH DISTRICT.  In the Palm Springs area, the incumbent, Alfred A. McCandless, a
Republican, represents a district that has seen such a population boom that lots
of new voters do not know him, leaving him vulnerable to challenge from the
actor Ralph Waite, a Democrat best known as the father on the Waltons television
show.

 Connecticut

 FIFTH DISTRICT.  Toby Moffett, a Democrat, faces Gary A. Franks, a Republican,
for a seat John Rowland vacated to run for governor. Mr. Franks, a three-term
Waterbury alderman, is a conservative black Republican, and Mr. Moffett is a
former Congressman who lost races for the Senate and governor in the 1980's. Mr.
Moffett is trying to avoid the carpetbagger label, based on his recent move into
the district. Mr. Franks, a real estate owner, has been criticized for failing
to release income tax data.

 Florida

 FOURTH DISTRICT.  Craig T. James, a freshman Representative and a Republican,
faces a strong challenge in northeastern Florida from Reid Hughes, a wealthy
former oil distributor who is trying to tap anti-incumbent sentiment by
portraying Mr. James as a tool of special interests.

11TH DISTRICT.  Bill Nelson, a Democrat, vacated the seat representing
east-central Florida to run for the nomination for governor, which he lost.
Republicans hold the registration advanatage, but Jim Bacchus, a Democratic
Orlando lawyer, has run a strong race. The Republican candiate is Bill Tolley,
who ran against Mr. Nelson in 1988.

 Georgia

 FOURTH DISTRICT.  Ben Jones, a Democrat, won this district in 1988 from Pat
Swindall, who was under indictment on ethics charges. The Republican, John
Linder, is trying to win it back by painting Mr. Jones as too liberal, although
he seems to have trouble getting his race to take hold in the district, just
outside Atlanta.

 Idaho

 FIRST DISTRICT.  Democrats hope Larry LaRocco, a Boise stockbroker, can win
this seat back for them against C. A. (Skip) Smyser, a Republican lawyer and
longtime state senator. The incumbent Republican, Larry Craig, is running for
governor. Both candidates are using anti-incumbent tactics, but both are
restrained: Mr. Smyser because of his political career, Mr. LaRocco because the
neighboring district in Eastern Washington is represented by Thomas S. Foley, a
fellow Democrat and the Speaker of the House.

 Illinois

 11TH DISTRICT.  Frank Annunzio, the 75-year-old Democrat who has held this seat
in northwest Chicago for 13 terms, faces a strong challenge from Walter Dudycz,
a Republican who is making much of Mr. Annunzio's contributions from Charles J.
Keating Jr.

16TH DISTRICT.  John Cox, a Democrat and former prosecutor for Joe Daviess
County in the state's northwest corner, is battling to overcome implications by
his Republican opponent, John Hallock, a state representative, that Mr. Cox
wants to meddle with the Social Security trust fund. The charge is based on a
proposal Mr. Cox made that has been oversimplified. Lynn Martin vacated this
seat to run for the Senate.

 Indiana

THIRD DISTRICT.  John Hiler has been in a competitive election every two years
since he won this seat, representing north-central Indiana, including South
Bend, from John Brademas in 1980. His Democratic opponent is Tim Roemer, a
legislative staff worker in Washington.

FOURTH DISTRICT.  Jill Long, a freshman Democrat in Vice President Dan Quayle's
old seat from northeast Indiana, is running against spending and taxes. That is
how she won a special election in 1989, and it is how she hopes to keep her seat
against Rick Hawks, a Republican former television minister. It's a real baby
boomer race: She is 38; he is 37.

 Iowa

 SECOND DISTRICT.  Thanks to a sound farm economy, this district that includes
Dubuque and Cedar Rapids, is enjoying relatively stable economic times, so the
contest between Eric Tabor, the Democratic farmer, and Jim Nussle, a Republican
prosecutor, has consisted largely of personal attacks, based on charges like
misrepresentations of their work histories. Tom Tauke gave up the seat to run
for the Senate.

 Maine

 FIRST DISTRICT.  David F. Emery, a Republican who held this seat in south Maine
from 1975 to 1983, is trying to get it back, with Joe Brennan's leaving to run
for Governor. Mr. Emery, with solid conservative credentials, is trying to paint
his more populist Democratic opponent, State Senator Thomas H. Andrews, as a
liberal, but not with limited success. Mr. Andrews has succeeded in portraying
himself as an economic development advocate.

 Maryland

 FIRST DISTRICT.  Roy Dyson, despite being under attack for close ties to
military contractors, was renominated in the state's southern district. But new
disclosures of ties to contractors have hurt the incumbent Democrat since. Wayne
Gilchrest, a Republican high school teacher who nearly beat Mr. Dyson in 1988,
is playing up his service in Vietnam. Mr. Dyson was a conscientious objector.

 Massachusetts

 FIFTH DISTRICT.  Chester Atkins is state Democratic chairman, and that is not a
good thing to be this year in Massachusetts, where voters are consumed by
anti-government fury. State Representative John MacGovern, a Republican, is
trying to paint Mr. Atkins as a clone of the unpopular Gov. Michael S. Dukakis.
The district is northwest of Boston.

 Minnesota

 SEVENTH DISTRICT.  Arlan Strangeland, the Republican who has represented the
district that includes St. Cloud since 1977, may be in peril. The cause is a
character issue revolving around his use of Congressional telephones for
personal calls. Collin Peterson, a Democrat making his fifth try at unseating
Mr. Strangeland, has unified party backing this time.

 New Jersey

 FIRST DISTRICT.  The anti-tax furor in New Jersey has given Republicans hope in
a district where they normally would not have much. This is Gov. Jim Florio's
old seat, in southwestern New Jersey, and it is Mr. Florio's tax increases that
have provoked voter outrage. Still, the Republican, Dan Mangini, with a
relatively modest campaign, is in an uphill fight against Rob Andrews, the
Democrat who has a huge, well-financed organization.

 North Carolina

 11TH DISTRICT.  This district has changed hands more than any other in the
1980's. Jamie Clark is now in his second term, the longest anyone has served in
more than a decade. Former State Senator Charles Taylor, a tree farmer, is the
Republican. He nearly beat Mr. Clark in 1988. Mr. Clark has more money but Mr.
Taylor has Jesse Helms at the top of the ticket in this rural district that
includes Asheville.

 Oregon

 FIFTH DISTRICT.  Denny Smith, the Republican, is among the most vulnerable
incumbents in the country, largely because of his well-publicized savings and
loan links, which resulted in a House ethics complaint. Mike Kopetski came
within a few hundred votes of beating Mr. Smith two years ago in this district
in state's northwest corner. Now he has the S.& L. issue and has avoided being
painted as a sympathizer with radical environmentalists.

 Rhode Island

 SECOND DISTRICT.  Claudine Schneider gave up this seat, representing western
Rhode Island, to run for the Senate. State Representative Jack Reed is the
Democratic candidate against Trudy Coxe. Ms. Coxe is a well-known
environmentalist, and Republicans hope that will protect her against the effects
of the souring economy, which seem to be working to Mr. Reed's benefit.

 Texas

 11TH DISTRICT.  With the retirement of Marvin Leath, Democrats are scrambling
to hang on here, near the center of the state. Chet Edwards, a Democratic state
senator, and Hugh Shine, a Republican state representative, both aim to portray
themselves as in tune with the true Texas of the 1990's. In a state that has
been tipping gradually to Republicans, this conservative central Texas district
with a long Democratic history is being seen as indicative of 90's trends.

13TH DISTRICT.  Bill Sarpalius, a Democrat, is in danger of losing the seat he
has held for one term. This Panhandle district, with an economy based on
agricultural and minerals, is the most Republican part of the state, and Mr.
Sarpalius's Republican challenger, State Representative Dick Waterfield, is
running a better-financed campaign.

 Vermont

 FIRST DISTRICT.  Peter Smith, the Republican Representative completing his
first term from this one-district state, is facing a challenge from an
independent socialist, Bernie Sanders, a former Mayor of Burlington. The
Democratic candidate in this race is barely a factor.

 Washington

 THIRD DISTRICT.  Jolene Unsoeld, a Democrat, was elected from this southwest
Washington district, in the closest election in country in 1988. Bob Williams,
the Republican challenger, a strong supporter of the gun-owner rights, is
attacking her for reversals on gun control, yet the National Rifle Assiciation
has endorsed Ms. Unsoeld because she voted for the gun group's position on
domestic production of semiautmoatic weapons.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 3, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A chart yesterday listing two dozen Congressional races around the country
misidentified a Republican incumbent in Minnesota. He is Arlan Stangeland.


                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 2, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
It's Scary, Yes, and Death Has a Role

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 12; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 979 words


It's tempting to look skeptically at the hits that have made Adrian Lyne a
director to be reckoned with, but there's no denying Mr. Lyne's acumen. With
"Flashdance," "Fatal Attraction" and even "9 1/2 Weeks," this exceptionally
talented commercial film maker has repeatedly touched the pulse of something
vital in his audiences' imagination.

Now, with "Jacob's Ladder," Mr. Lyne has done it again, although with an
important difference: the pulse that he touches has stopped. "Jacob's Ladder" is
a slick, riveting, viscerally scary film about what in other hands would be a
decidedly unsalable subject, namely death.

Clever as he is, Mr. Lyne knows better than to present it that way. "Jacob's
Ladder" looks and feels like a thriller steeped in Hollywood mysticism, with as
substantial a debt to "The Twilight Zone" as to Ambrose Bierce, whose
"Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge" is one of the film's main inspirations. There
is even a marketable trace of a Vietnam War story in the mix, although it is
little more than a pretext for setting the events of "Jacob's Ladder" in motion.

"Events" is not precisely the word, since by the end of the film the existence
of certain objects, actions and even whole characters in "Jacob's Ladder" has
been called into question. If Mr. Lyne's great flair is for giving these things
a powerfully physical immediacy, his biggest difficulty is in keeping them
straight. At times, unable to reconcile its complicated spiritual elements, the
film breaks its own spell by falling back on broad hints, convenient catch-all
explanations and garden-variety horror effects. These things play less like an
attempt to touch base with reality than like a loss of nerve.

With a screenplay by Bruce Joel Rubin, who wrote the similarly wide-ranging and
marketably morbid "Ghost," "Jacob's Ladder" begins on a battlefield. There in
the Mekong Delta, Jacob Singer (Tim Robbins) and his fellow soldiers are seen
joking about human existence at its most corporeal and raw. Seconds later, all
hell breaks loose, as represented by explosions, convulsions, jerky hand-held
camera movements and miscellaneous eruptions of pure, nightmarish fury. This, it
would appear, is the dream from which Jacob is trying to awaken.

After being wounded in battle, Jacob is next seen on a New York subway train,
reading Camus's "Stranger" and beginning to notice the particular eeriness of
his surroundings. This sequence, which was the jumping-off point for Mr. Rubin's
screenplay and is rife with Mr.  Lyne's most alarming atmospheric touches,
highlights the film's flair for finding potent visual representations of
free-floating terror.

Mr. Lyne, in devising a relatively homey and quotidian vision of purgatory,
anchors Jacob in the real urban world of his everyday experience only to pull
the rug out from under him at every opportunity. In the case of this subway
sequence, the chained exits, silent companions, flashing blue lights and wraiths
hurtling past in the distance offer some small inkling of the film's potential
for unsettling, impenetrable effects.

"Jacob's Ladder" follows the guileless, wide-eyed Jake (played with disarming
ease and sharp, frightening urgency by Mr. Robbins), back to his job as a
mailman, to the Brooklyn housing project where he shares an apartment with the
tempestuous Jezzie (Elizabeth Pena), and to his memories of an earlier life with
Sarah (Patricia Kalember), a marriage destroyed by domestic tragedy. It proceeds
to reverberate among these different poles, spurred by clever congruences and
facile yet startling transitions. For instance, when Jake's friend and
chiropractor, the angelic Louis (Danny Aiello), gives him a sudden violent
adjustment, the shock sends Jake's imagination straight back to that battlefield
in Vietnam.

From high fever to ice bath, "Jacob's Ladder" careens though a succession of
mood swings intended to keep the audience hooked and the film's real purpose
slightly out of reach. Taking stock is eventually shown to be Jake's objective,
and in the end it will be the viewer's, too. There is much to admire in the way
the pieces of this elaborate puzzle come together, but there are too many
disappointing compromises. Whole characters, particularly Ms. Pena's warmly
carnal Jezzie, seem to have left their larger purpose somewhere on the
cutting-room floor.

Mr. Lyne is best in working suggestively with seemingly ordinary images, from
the stockings draped over a shower rod to the gruesome slab of meat in someone's
refrigerator. Even the physical poses of the characters (Jake is frequently
photographed on his back, for one reason or another) can in Mr. Lyne's hands
take on a formidably insinuating effect. Except in those occasional sequences
involving horror tricks, the film works relatively straightforwardly. Mr. Lyne
can achieve maximum visceral energy in remarkably unobtrusive ways.

The ending of "Jacob's Ladder," when it finally arrives, is, like much of the
film, both quaint and devastating. It is at least powerful enough to outweigh a
dopey conspiracy theory, a dramatically irrelevant class-action suit, and a
quick robbery conducted by Santa Claus. Even Santa, in the context of the film's
larger aura, manages to seem a chilling mixture of the demonic and the divine.

"Jacob's Ladder" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult
guardian). It has profanity, graphic violence and sexual suggestiveness.

Jacob's Ladder

Directed by Adrian Lyne; written by Bruce Joel Rubin; director of photography,
Jeffrey L. Kimball; edited by Tom Rolf; music by Maurice Jarre; produced by Alan
Marshall; released by Tri-Star Pictures. Running time: 115 minutes. This film is
rated R.

Jacob . . . Tim Robbins
Jezzie . . . Elizabth Pena
Louis . . . Danny Aiello
Michael . . . Matt Craven
Sarah . . . Patricia Kalember


LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 2, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At the Movies

BYLINE: Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 12; Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words


Fresh From Baltimore

Barry Levinson and Mark Johnson are going to spread their talent around.

Mr. Levinson, who is best known as a director, and Mr. Johnson, who has produced
all the Levinson films since "Diner" -- an assemblage that ranges from "The
Natural" and "Young Sherlock Holmes" to "Good Morning, Vietnam" and the Academy
Award-winning "Rain Man" -- have formed a company called Baltimore Pictures.

"Avalon," Mr. Levinson's autobiographical film about a Russian immigrant family
in Baltimore during a 50-year period beginning in 1914, was the first film to
bear the company's name. But, Mr. Johnson said, "The business of Baltimore
Pictures is not only to make Barry Levinson films, but also for Barry and me to
produce or executive produce other people's movies.

"By that I mean other directors, other writers, other producers -- people we
admire and people who bring us projects we feel we have an honest chance to make
a real contribution to."

Mr. Johnson said the company was formed about a year and a half ago. "Barry and
I have been doing movies one right after the other, more than one a year, and
I've always said, 'Gee, you have all these ideas and I have a couple of ideas.
Why don't we put us in a position where we can help make some of these other
movies?' "

The lineup is now extensive. Already, Steven Soderbergh is at work on his first
film since "Sex, Lies and Videotape." He is in Prague for Baltimore Pictures,
making "Kafka," with a cast that includes Jeremy Irons (in the title role), Sir
Alec Guinness, Ian Holm, Joel Grey, Jeroen Krabbe and Armin Mueller-Stahl, who
stars in "Avalon."

Coming up are "Donnie Brasco," about an F.B.I. agent who infiltrates the Mafia;
"Wilder Napalm," a quirky comedy about two telekinetic brothers, written by
Vince Gilligan (who was discovered by Mr. Johnson when he was a juror for a
screenwriting contest sponsored by the Governor of Virginia); "South of Heaven,"
based on a Jim Thompson novel about young lovers on a Texas pipeline crew in the
Depression; "Unholy City," based on a William Goldman script about corruption in
Los Angeles in the 1930's, and "Bugsy Siegel," with Mr. Levinson directing
Warren Beatty from a James Toback script that takes a romantic look at the
notorious gangster in Hollywood in the 1940's.

Mr. Johnson said the next Baltimore film to go before the cameras would be
"Donnie Brasco," to be directed by Stephen Frears, who made "My Beautiful
Laundrette," "Dangerous Liaisons" and the forthcoming "Grifters," with Anjelica
Huston, John Cusack and Annette Bening. Filming of "Donnie Brasco" is scheduled
to begin in New York City in February. "Strictly speaking," Mr. Johnson said,
"it's not a gangster movie. It's about a man's search for family."

Schroeder's 'Reversal'

Where do directors get their inspiration?

Not infrequently, right out of the news.

Take Barbet Schroeder and "Reversal of Fortune."

While Mr. Schroeder was in Los Angeles making his 1987 film "Barfly," based on
the writings of Charles Bukowski, he found himself irresistibly drawn to
accounts of the case of Claus von Bulow, who was charged with assault with
intent to murder his aristocratic wife, Martha (Sunny), by injecting her with
insulin.

"I felt there was a movie there," Mr. Schroeder said, "but at the same time I
decided there is no movie: how can you make a movie in which von Bulow would be
the main character, the hero?"

Still, Mr. Schroeder remained fascinated by the case. "It had all the elements
of a classic melodrama," he said. "It was almost too good to be true -- the
maid, the soap-opera actress who was von Bulow's mistress, the horrible way the
crime was supposed to have been done, with needles, with injections. It was very
campy, but then, of course, there was something else: there were real people
behind all this, and the whole thing became more and more interesting when you
discovered the real characters."

A year passed, and Mr. Schroeder reached a point where he decided the von Bulow
project was impossible. He was planning to work on something else with the
screenwriter Nicholas Kazan, whom he knew, and when they met, Mr. Schroeder
discovered Mr. Kazan was at work on "Reversal of Fortune," based on the Harvard
law professor Alan Dershowitz's book about his successful appeal of Mr. von
Bulow's conviction.

"Well," Mr. Schroeder said, "Nick had found a solution, to use the lawyer as the
hero, and to have the hero lead us into the story -- the lawyer as a detective."

When it came to casting the role of Mr. von Bulow, Mr. Schroeder said he
regarded Jeremy Irons as the best possible choice.

"It was not an obvious choice," Mr. Schroeder said. "It was not even obvious to
Jeremy himself. I was absolutely convinced." Mr. Schroeder noted that there was
some sentiment in favor of assigning the role of the Danish-born, English-reared
Mr. von Bulow to a Germanic actor.

"In the minds of people," Mr. Schroeder said, "there is a cliche of von Bulow as
a bad German. I think it was wrong to play along with that cliche. I thought the
English side of him was interesting in terms of the ambiguity I was aiming for."
The approach he sought was "a lot of irony and humor."

Now that 'Reversal of Fortune" has opened to considerable praise, Mr. Schroeder
says he knows what he is going to do next. But all he will say is that the
project will be filmed in a distant land and that he hopes to start in June.

Not talking about future projects, he says, is his only superstition. "Every
time I broke that rule, it brought me bad luck," he said. "The movie never got
made."

In Honor of Douglas

Kirk Douglas has been selected by the American Film Institute as the recipient
of its 1991 Life Achievement Award.

The 74-year-old actor, who starred in films including "Lust for Life,"
"Spartacus," "Champion," "Young Man With a Horn," "The Big Carnival" "The Bad
and the Beautiful" and "Paths of Glory," is to be honored at a dinner at the
Beverly Hilton Hotel in Los Angeles on March 7.

Among previous recipients of the award are Gregory Peck, Jack Lemmon, Barbara
Stanwyck, Billy Wilder, Gene Kelly, James Cagney and John Ford.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Barbet Schroeder (Warner Brothers)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

90's Teen-Agers Echo 60's Spirit

BYLINE: By Jason DeParle

SECTION: Section 4; Part A; Page 42; Column 3; Education Life Supplement

LENGTH: 1372 words


THEY may not be a second Woodstock generation, but high school students
nationwide are proving they're not the quiescent group that many assume. In the
past year, students in dozens of cities have staged demonstrations, walkouts or
sit-ins to protest everything from changes in school emblems to school budget
cuts.

In Farmington, N.H., the problem was romance: about 100 students left class to
protest what they called the school's interference in a senior's relationship
with a foreign exchange student. In Selma, Ala., it was race: about 100 black
students staged a five-day high school occupation following the dismissal of the
district's black superintendent.

In the suburbs of Atlanta, Boston and San Francisco, the battle was over the
budget. Students there and elsewhere campaigned against teacher and program cuts
by staging rallies, boycotting classes and campaigning for voter referendums.

More students than ever before report taking part in a demonstration while in
high school, according to an annual survey of college freshmen. Of the 200,000
students surveyed, 36.7 percent said they had been involved in a high school
protest -- up from 16 percent in 1967 and 21 percent in 1983.


'Very Important' Goal

Similarly, more students than ever said it was a "very important" goal for them
to "influence social values" and to "influence the political structure." In both
categories, student responses had achieved all-time lows in the early to
mid-1980's.

"There's a rapidly growing opposition force that was quiet and smaller 10 years
ago," said Alexander W. Astin, a professor of higher education and director of
the Higher Education Research Institute at the University of Californiaat Los
Angeles, which has conducted the written survey every year since 1966.

Teachers and principals agree that students are changing. "They're much more
willing to be involved in things than they were five years ago," said William L.
Wong, principal at Savanna High School in Anaheim, Calif. Most of the school's
1,500 students walked out last year after the football team was disqualified
from the playoffs because it used an academically ineligible player.

But while today's students are more politically active than their recent
predecessors, Professor Astin does not liken them to the famously
anti-establishment generationof the 60's.

In part, he says, more students report going to protests now than 20 years ago
simply because protests are more socially acceptable among a wider population.

Professor Astin says today's demonstrations are more temperate than those of the
60's and more diverse.

"We don't have a big issue like the Vietnam War, but we have a long list," he
said, including racism, sexism, AIDS, contraception, the quality of education
and the environment. And he noted that unlike protests of two decades ago, those
today are less likely to run counter "to society's values and norms."

There are almost as many explanations for the surge in student protests as there
areprotests themselves. While no one argues that materialism or career anxiety
are dead, some say that students are beginning to react against an early-80's
obsession with financial success. Others wonder whether the fall of the Berlin
wall planted ideas on this side of the Atlantic. "They're seeing that changes
can be made to improve people's lives," said Mr. Wong.

Malika Sanders, a 17-year-old senior at Selma High School in Alabama, offers her
own explanation. "The problems have become so big, you can't ignore them," she
said. "You can't just say 'Who cares about the environment? Who cares about
racism?' "

Ms. Sanders herself was a leader of one of the largest high school protests in
recent memory, last year's five-day occupation of Selma High School. Students
were protesting the vote by the school board's five white members, over the
objection of its four black members, not to renew the contract of the city's
first black superintendent, Dr. Norward Roussell.


'Beautiful' Experience

Ms. Sanders describes the "beautiful" experience in a tone approaching awe. "We
just grew so much in those five days," she said. It was an opportunity only the
young could chance, she added. "Because of our youth, we can sometimes be more
courageous," she said. "We know what's wrong and right, and we can act. We don't
say, 'My job, this,' or 'My job, that.' "

Racial controversies were at the center of a number of high school protests
elsewhere in the nation last year.

In March, about 2,000 students at two Los Angeles high schools, Leuzinger and
Hawthorne, staged walkouts and demonstrations to protest the demotion of a
popular black principal. About a dozen students were arrested.

On the Santee Indian Reservation in Santee, Neb., Indian students staged a
walkout in March to protest what they called a racist administration. At Reagan
High School inHouston, about 170 students, mostly Hispanic, left class to
protest the principal's decision to add a black cheerleader to a squad already
chosen by student vote.

At Savanna High in Anaheim, race-related protests took a different turn in
September when Denise Gay joined a dozen other students in a walkout after the
school decided to phase out the Confederate flag as an emblem of its sports
teams, the "Running Rebels." Several black parents had complained that the flag
was offensive.

Ms. Gay says the flag embodies school spirit, not anti-black sentiment, and she
is pleased that her small protest earned her a chance to explain her views to
the principal, who she said was sympathetic. "You can fight City Hall," she
said.

If sit-ins and racial discord mark one end of the spectrum of new student
activity, an increase in volunteerism marks another.

"There's more interest in community service than there was five years ago," said
Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, who promotes such programs for the Maryland
Department of Education. "But what's been most striking to me is the
antipolitical flavor of the kids we've recruited. They might want to work at a
local soup kitchen, but one of our struggles has been to get them to be
advocates."

Jesse Vogel, at 16 a junior at Newton South High School in Newton, Mass., said
his youth would deprive him of credibility in the political debates of the adult
world, such as those about taxes. "They'd say, 'Oh, you don't know what
you'retalking about, kid,' " he said.

By contrast, he said, he sees clear results from his Saturday service at a
Newton hospital, where he distributes flowers to patients' rooms. "It's kind of
corny when you think about it," he said, "but it makes me happy when I cheer
them up."

But in Newton, as in many other places, students made their opinions known when
administrators threatened budget cuts. They did not go as far as the 2,000
students at four high schools in Contra Costa County, east of San Francisco, who
shut down their campuses while holding demonstrations and letter-writing
campaigns to protest proposed teacher layoffs.

But when budget cuts called for layoffs and reduced class offerings in their
area, a number of Newton students joined an effort to override Massachusetts'
Proposition 2.5, which limits property taxes.

Lorig Charkoudian, now 17 and a senior at Newton North High School, organized
forums, worked telephones and stood outside the polls on Election Day with a
sign saying, "Good Schools Equal Good Property Values."


Devoted to Service

The override attempt failed and the cuts ensued, but Ms. Charkoudian feels
anything but discouraged.

Ms. Charkoudian is active in a school group devoted to community service and is
one of four leaders of "Ethos for Equality," which organizes campus discussions
of racism and sexism. She helped organize a "Dance for Peace" and founded "Stop
AIDS Forever" to promote AIDS education.

At times she sounds like a walking "Question Authority" button, as when she
describes her first protest -- a fight in elementary school over lunchroom
privileges.

"People seem to have the impression that teen-agers don't care about anything,
that they just do drugs and drive cars," she said. "I think there are a lot of
students who care more than people think they do."

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Students demonstrating outside Las Lomas High School in Walnut
Creek, Calif., to protest proposed teacher layoffs. (Larry Strong/Contra Costa
Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Their Vietnam

BYLINE: By John Kifner; John Kifner is a New York Times correspondent who has
traveled in Afghanistan a number of times with the Mujahadeen rebels and who has
also reported from Kabul.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1080 words



RUSSIAN ROULETTE
Afghanistan Through Russian Eyes.
By Gennady Bocharov.
Translated by Alyona Kojevnikov.
187 pp. New York:
A Cornelia and Michael Bessie Book/ HarperCollins. $18.95.

THE conscript soldiers cling to the sides of a tank, a modern engine of armored
destruction suddenly vulnerable, watching for an unseen, primitive but
effective, savage enemy. They have no idea why they are in this strange land;
they know only a desperate desire to survive. That and fear. Familiar enough, it
seems, but these draftees are Russians, not Americans.

If Afghanistan was the Soviet Union's Vietnam, then Gennadi Bocharov is its
Michael Herr. Like Mr. Herr's "Dispatches," "Russian Roulette" is a deeply felt,
close-to-the-bone, often sardonic, set of vivid sketches of the grunt's war. In
one telling section, Mr. Bocharov, a young Soviet journalist who traveled with
the troops and whose reports were a startling counterpoint to the party line,
asks in turn a refugee, a soldier and the commanding general, a tough
professional he clearly admires, why Soviet forces are in Afghanistan. No one
can answer. The general says: "I'm commander of the Army. This question should
be addressed to others." In a brief afterword to his gut-wrenching description
of soldiers killed, maimed, maddened and otherwise destroyed, Mr. Bocharov
concludes: "And so it was, during all those years of the war, the longest waged
by Russia since 1813: the people lived in grief, and officialdom basked in the
glory of doctrine."

This is clearly the kind of book that would have been impossible to publish in
the Soviet Union a few years ago. In pre-glasnost days, Russian readers were
limited to such works as -- I am not making this up -- "A Tree Grows in Kabul,"
about a world-weary foreign correspondent who finds love and meaning as the
Russians help out their poor Afghan friends. But in "Russian Roulette," they can
read about "the luckiest soldier in Afghanistan" returning home dazed and partly
paralyzed; about a good simple soldier from the countryside killed defending his
comrades, who later visit a memorial to him "with the dilated pupils and moist
eyes of drug addicts"; about an attempted cover-up of a massacre; and about a
naive, eager young doctor going into an "amputation frenzy" in his first battle,
trying to cut the head off a soldier climbing out of a tank.

Alternating with these stories are chapters that present the voice of the
journalist, freely admitting his fear as an Afghan mob attacks his hotel during
his first days in Kabul, or expressing his increasing disillusionment. He is
constantly asking why. It is a question that seems to have no answer.

The parallel to Vietnam is directly drawn in a chapter on a military hospital.
Mr. Bocharov writes that several years after his tour in Afghanistan he visited
American veterans suffering post-traumatic stress syndrome. Their problems, he
notes, were similar to those of the Soviet soldiers he saw, as were the wars
themselves. "For instance, there is trouble with identifying the real enemy,
being a war waged in the midst of a civilian population; there is the necessity
to fight when most of your contemporaries and your homeland are living a normal,
peaceful life; there is the feeling of alienation upon return from a far-off
front; and there is frequently a painful disillusionment with the aims of the
war." Indeed, over the last year or so, American Vietnam veterans' groups have
been meeting with their Russian counterparts, both here and in the Soviet Union,
and have been overwhelmed by the similarities.

"Russian Roulette" is like many American books on Vietnam, too, in that the
Afghans appear only as a kind of malevolent background, mysterious, fanatic,
ultimately unknowable. With the notable exception of Frances FitzGerald's "Fire
in the Lake," American writing on Vietnam has tended to be ethnocentric and
dehumanizing, concentrating on the suffering of our own. Here, the Afghans are
called "spooks."

IN both the American and Russian cases, this distancing may be what comes of
trying to impose a foreign way of life on a resistant native culture. In
Afghanistan, shortly after the Soviet invasion, an Afghan rebel told me of the
atrocities committed when the Afghan Communists came to his village.

"They tried to teach everyone to read," he said. "Even the women." Attempting to
look properly shocked, I asked what had happened. "Well of course we killed them
all," he said.

Mr. Bocharov's soldiers are mostly victims, not villains. There is some
acknowledgment of the brutalizing effects of the war -- "the remains of the
village smoldered in the sun," he writes tersely of the aftermath of a popular
soldier's death -- but what is lacking here is a sense of the enormous
devastation and suffering inflicted on Afghanistan, including the mines and
explosive devices, estimated in the millions, that the Soviets left scattered
behind. These will be killing and crippling for years to come.

Over all, however, this is a sad, true, rather remarkable book, capably
translated by Alyona Kojevnikov. And it suggests that there is possibly a
certain universality not only about soldiers, but also about attempts at empire.




AFGHANISTAN WAS NO PARADE



He saw the dead, ruined villages along the roads -- oh, so many of them! He
encountered Afghan peasants -- probably the most oppressed and poor creatures on
earth, with their inevitable wooden plows and primitive hoes. He had peered into
damp, mud-brick huts filled with dirty, ragged children, who darted around with
the feral speed of rodents.

Yes, he saw. But seeing and understanding are two different things. All that he
had seen did not come together into an integral, meaningful picture in his mind.
It was all fragments of an alien and, in many ways, frightening existence. No
more than that. . . .

The words revolution and internationalism did not, as concepts, arouse any
special emotions in Nikolai's breast -- neither positive nor negative ones.
Admittedly, when he heard them on the parade ground, standing in line with flags
flying and music playing, he did experience something akin to emotional uplift.
That was so. And felt himself to be a defender of something elevated and
necessary. But that was only on the parade ground. Not when he was just by
himself.

Ideas and causes were heady wine to others. He was merely a conscientious,
reliable, ordinary soldier.

From "Russian Roulette."

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Adventures of Jane Wayne

BYLINE: By Ann Banks; Ann Banks has written about the military family as an
Alicia Patterson Foundation fellow.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1018 words



IN THE MEN'S HOUSE
An Inside Account of Life in the Army by
One of West Point's First Female Graduates.
By Carol Barkalow with Andrea Raab.
Illustrated. 283 pp. New York:
Poseidon Press. $19.95.

MILITARY women are much in the news. "Mom Goes to War," shout the headlines, and
dispatches from Over There are peopled with mothers, sisters, wives and
daughters. While technically these women are excluded from combat, they run the
same risks as their brothers-in-arms -- poison gas, for example. What are they
doing there?

"In the Men's House" is a timely book. Capt. Carol Barkalow (West Point '80) has
commanded a truck company in the United States and served a grueling tour at a
remote West German missile site. Today she works as a special assistant to the
Army Chief of Staff. By virtue of her aspirations and values, no soldier could
be more loyally gung ho. Yet by virtue of her gender, Captain Barkalow never
completely belongs -- and in the Army, belonging is everything. It is the edgy
tension between these states that propels her narrative forward, even through
passages swampy with military acronyms.

The first half of the book is a memoir of West Point. When 17-year-old Carol
Barkalow arrived there in 1976, she and her 118 female classmates were the first
female cadets in the academy's history. For the next four years, she kept
diaries recording daily life -- her demerits (frequent) and her triumphs (less
so). Captain Barkalow and her co-author, a New York freelance writer and editor,
Andrea Raab, have blended these diary entries with research and recollections to
create a fascinating picture of an institution under siege.

The West Point of 1976 was a thoroughly sullied shrine, its image tarnished by
Vietnam and by cheating scandals. And then came the women, marching through
Thayer Gate under a directive from the Commander in Chief himself. In the eyes
of tradition-minded male cadets, they were a further debasement of everything
the academy stood for. Inevitably, West Point's hazing customs provided the
perfect outlet for this dismay.

During room inspections, Captain Barkalow recalls upperclassmen "freaking out"
over how to determine the correct way to fold a bra. "We'd have to step in and
say, 'Hey, Sir, relax. It's just one cup inside the other.' " One upperclassman
convinced himself that a female plebe was in defiance of the no-makeup
regulations. He made her stand at attention while he scrubbed her naturally rosy
cheeks until they burned. Some incidents were severely pathological. At least
one woman was sexually assaulted, Captain Barkalow writes, and her senior-year
roommate found a ketchup-drenched saber driven through her pillow.

The West Point brass struggled to reshape the academy into a coed institution,
but they often tended to focus on the trivial, according to Captain Barkalow.
During a dance, administrators were troubled by the sight of look-alike couples
dancing in short hair and gray dress trousers. A rule was passed that women
could attend future dances in trousers, but they had to wear skirts if they
wanted to dance.

"In the Men's House" is filled with such revealing anecdotes, from the
horrifying to the hilarious. Yet Captain Barkalow has more on her mind than
simply telling war stories. She explains that the phrase "in the men's house" is
taken from Kate Millett's "Sexual Politics." Indeed, sexual politics is
precisely what "In the Men's House" is about. The author describes how she
stormed some of society's most entrenched male bastions -- and how the
experience changed her. At first she believed that success was to be found in
being as tough as the men, tougher if possible. As a platoon leader fresh out of
West Point, she seemed pleased when her troops dubbed her "Jane Wayne."

At one point, this naive determination to become the ideal woman warrior
threatened to derail her career. While waiting to assume command of the 57th
Transportation Light-Medium Truck Company at Fort Lee, Va., Captain Barkalow
took up competitive bodybuilding. It seemed, she writes, "an appropriate
endeavor for a professional whose primary purpose was to inspire subordinates to
feats of heroism and sacrifice with mythical images of physical prowess."
Despite this lofty rationale, the outcome was predictably farcical. She won a
prize in her class, and soon after the post newspaper published a photograph of
her posing in a bikini. This quickly became the hottest pinup in the barracks, a
development that nearly cost Captain Barkalow her promised command.

SHE was outraged that her physique inspired prurience rather than respect. "If I
were a man," she fumes, "I felt certain the battalion would have been proud that
the 57th Trans was getting such a fit commander." She is not a man, though, and
gradually she discovers it isn't necessary to be one to succeed in the Army.
Once she took on the responsibilities of command, she gained the confidence to
be her own kind of soldier. She developed her nurturing impulses -- and those of
her troops -- calling for volunteers to join her in helping out at a nearby
apartment house for the elderly. She also decided to liven up the physical
training routine by substituting aerobic dance for calisthenics one morning a
week. Convinced that aerobics was a "sissy" exercise, the male soldiers "quickly
changed their minds after the first five minutes of the first day," she reports
somewhat smugly.

When the time came for her to relinquish command of her company, Captain
Barkalow admits to shedding tears. In the final pages of the book, she writes,
"I realized I had accomplished what I'd set out to do at seventeen. I'd held
positions of leadership and been responsible for people's welfare." Captain
Barkalow may be content to end the story here, but I, for one, would like an
update. Just how is this young West Pointer -- a bit hotheaded, a bit
stiff-necked -- faring in her fancy Pentagon staff job? How does she feel about
seeing so many women deployed to a war zone? And what impact will this book have
on her Army career? Perhaps she will write a sequel.


LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Capt. Carol Barkalow, with other soldiers in the weight room at
Fort Lee, Va. in 1985. (Anthony Edgeworth)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CRIME

BYLINE: By Marilyn Stasio

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1106 words


"I know every bayou and channel from Sabine Pass over to Barataria," boasts Dave
Robicheaux, the Cajun detective who works this swampy Louisiana territory in
James Lee Burke's lushly descriptive crime novels. In A MORNING FOR FLAMINGOS
(Little, Brown, $18.95), the tough but principled hero loses heart (as well as
face) when two convicts escape his charge on their way to the penitentiary for
execution, forcing him to plead with one of them for his life. Partly in penance
and partly for vengeance, Dave leaves his rural home on Bayou Teche to set up a
sting operation for the Feds in New Orleans.

Once undercover in the Big Easy, Dave maneuvers himself into the confidence of
his sting target, a Mafia drug lord who is haunted by his war experiences in
Vietnam and sees a kindred sufferer in Dave. As their odd friendship grows, so
does the menace of one of the footloose convicts, a certifiable crazy who has
landed a mob contract on the Mafioso's life. Dave wrestles with his conflicting
loyalties to several people who figure in this complicated plot and then does
the decent thing, in a throat-burning finale that scorches the moss-hung
landscape from New Iberia to the Pearl River basin.

"This started out as a story about my own fear," muses Dave, who happily resists
the impulse to indulge his psychic aches and pains to the numbing depths he did
in three earlier books. "Instead," he says, "it became a story of others." And
in the process, we must add, Mr. Burke also discovered -- in these rich
characters, in the idiosyncratic freshness of their language and in the brazen
originality of the evil they introduce to Acadia -- something worth writing
about beyond his hero and the picturesque but stagnant scenery.

If you think of the act of writing as a game of chicken between the author and
his talent, then Derek Raymond is one author who achieves his ecstasy by sailing
off cliffs.

Everything about I WAS DORA SUAREZ (Available Press/Ballantine, Paper, $7.95)
shrieks of the joy and pain of going too far. No. 4 in the English writer's
procedural series about an unnamed detective's garbage-detail job in London's
Bureau of Unexplained Deaths, this hair-raising narrative opens in the midst of
a double murder whose graphic horrors would be unreadable were it not for the
author's unflinching insights into the killer's madness -- glimpsed through
"eyes that had perished violently centuries ago" -- and for the appalling beauty
of the prose. Just as there are no limits to the vileness of the crimes
uncovered during the police investigation, which leads to a nightclub that
traffics in loathsome debaucheries, so, too, there is no bottom to the
detective's rage and anguish.

"Do you know I cry in my sleep?" demands this mournful witness to the inhumanity
he sees throughout society. "My tears were not for me," he makes clear, "they
were for the rightful fury of the people." Truth to tell, the life of Dora
Suarez would move anyone to tears. "I was constructed to have a nature that
could neither bend nor speak, nor be of a kind to ask for help," the murdered
woman wrote in her journal. "I wanted to keep my sense of my own dignity, but it
is the most difficult thing of all to keep when you are poor."

Touched by her story, the detective kisses the dead woman's hair and makes the
only promise he can make to her and to all other violated human beings:
retribution and respect. "We'll get our dignity back," he swears to the victims;
"whether alive or dead, we shall all be as we used to be." No less obsessive
than the maniacal killer he is stalking, the detective employs methods that are
brutal and probably illegal. But there is something angelic about his fierce
sense of justice.


Nature asserts a harsh presence in Archer Mayor's BORDERLINES (Putnam, $19.95),
whose violent events occur during that dead-eyed non season in New England after
the leaves fall and before the snow flies. "T'Aint Season," they call it in the
sparsely populated and economically depressed area of Vermont known as the
Northeast Kingdom. Hunting season is another name for it. Either way, it's the
killing season, and Mr. Mayor's bracing police procedural captures the bone-cold
chill in the air.

Joe Gunther, the veteran Brattleboro police officer first encountered in "Open
Season," is on temporary assignment up north when five members of a religious
cult that has taken over his hometown are killed in an arson fire. As part of
the state police team investigating the homicides, Gunther slowly becomes
sensitized to the changes in his old friends, observing in their hardened faces
the deeper social disintegration of "this high, cold country [where] the law had
less to do with rules, and more with personal honor."

Mr. Mayor writes invigorating outdoor action scenes, and his authoritative
handling of forensic procedures has us marveling at his thorough knowledge of
knife wounds and body burns. The formal beauty of this ugly detail is matched in
tone by the crisp dialogue and tense confrontations he writes for characters who
don't care to waste words or squander emotions. For a writer so new at this
game, Mr. Mayor has astonishing control of his craft.

Sharon McCone, the sensible and rational legal investigator in Marcia Muller's
journeyman mysteries, bristles whenever one of her colleagues at the All Souls
Legal Cooperative calls her sensible and rational. In TROPHIES AND DEAD THINGS
(Mysterious Press/Warner, $16.95), the San Francisco operative prefers to
describe herself as a realist, while admitting that she is "the white sheep in a
family of rebels" and still envious of those who dare to challenge authority.
That wistful admiration for the spirit of rebellion, along with her own sturdy
reliability, makes Sharon the perfect detective for this mystery about a 1960's
cell of radical Berkeley students whose past comes back to haunt -- and in some
cases to kill -- certain remnants of their number.

The investigation opens when the victim of a sniper's bullet leaves a will that
disinherits his children and grants large legacies to four nobodies. After some
very smart legwork that takes Sharon into the past and present lives of these
secretive beneficiaries, the detective finally pries out information that not
only solves the case but also strips away "what little remained of the mythic
charm of the 1960s."

Like her heroine, Ms. Muller works in a style more admirable for its clarity and
efficiency than for boldness or brilliance. Her dense plots are models of
construction, and if her characters lack spark, they are observed in a manner
both sensible and rational.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONNECTICUT Q&A: THOMAS HART BENTON EWALD;
A Hostage Returns from the Persian Gulf

BYLINE: By JOHN ARUNDEL

SECTION: Section 12; Page 3; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1555 words


FOR six weeks in August and September, Thomas Hart Benton Ewald, a 25-year-old
from Greenwich, was held hostage in Kuwait and Iraq. He had gone to Kuwait on
July 30 to work in a bank, but when Iraqi troops invaded the emirate on Aug. 2,
Mr. Ewald and hundreds of other Westerners went into hiding.

When he resurfaced four weeks after the invasion, he was detained by Iraqi
police and told he would be shot. He was taken to Baghdad and then moved to an
Iraqi installation, where he spent nine days in captivity as a "human shield."

His ordeal ended on Sept. 14 after his mother, Mary E. Ewald, made an appeal to
the Iraqi President. Her letter called the Ewald family "a staunch friend of the
Arabs" and said that her son, an asthmatic, "needs medication and a doctor's
care."

Mr. Ewald, who graduated from Harvard University in 1987, had worked in
Manhattan for Barclays Bank for three years before going to Kuwait.  In an
interview in Washington, where he had given testimony to a Congressional
committee, Mr. Ewald discussed his experience.  Here are some excerpts of the
conversation:

Q. When you arrived in Kuwait, did you hear any talk about an invasion?

A. There was a general feeling that Saddam Hussein was just saber rattling. As a
matter of fact, I didn't find a single person who thought there would be an
invasion. He had hostile neighbors on his borders, including Iranians and
Syrians who were just looking to carve him up, so an invasion of Kuwait didn't
make much sense.


Q. Recount what you saw and heard on the morning of the invasion.

A. I woke up at 6:30, flipped on CNN and saw that Iraq had invaded. But I
thought it was just a border skirmish, so I got dressed for work.

There was tremendous confusion on the streets, with people looking around not
knowing what was going on and massive gridlock. There were Iraqi soldiers
everywhere and Kuwaiti soldiers trying to get to their bases. Most had no idea
the Iraqis were almost fully in control of Kuwait City. At work, we watched
through the windows as the Emir's palace was attacked. We would hear explosions
and see flashes of light and smoke.


Q. Did you see or hear of valorous acts by the Kuwaiti resistance?

A. A hospital the Iraqis had taken over was the subject of a truck bombing. In a
sense, this was surprising, because everyone thought of Kuwaiti men as wealthy
playboys headed for Monte Carlo or London with their millions. And you think
about the sort of person it takes to drive a bomb into a building, and you think
of the Shiites or the Islamic fundamentalists, certainly not the Kuwaitis.


Q. Did the Iraqi soldiers you met shed any light on their thinking?

A. I think they were confused and concerned about the situation. Some were very
scared. One time, three Iraqi soldiers approached me and asked if I could get
them out of the country. But an Iraqi officer walked up, and they quickly
scattered.

Another time, some soldiers were digging a foxhole, and I walked up and asked
them what would happen if a war broke out. "We'll all die," they said. It didn't
seem like the common foot soldier had any illusions about how that fight would
end up.

On another occasion, one of the soldiers said: "You guys are safe as long as
there is no war. But as soon as the war starts, we're going to kill you all."

They also had this idea that if a war breaks out, that the Iranians will be
attacking Iraq, and that they will be directly aligned with the U.S.


Q. How did they feel about fighting against their Arab neighbors?

A. They were confused, because Kuwait had always been a friend. They realized
they weren't coming in and liberating Kuwait, no matter what kind of propoganda
spin their superior officers had put on it.


Q. Did you witness any atrocities committed by Iraqi soldiers?

A. I never saw any atrocities on a mass scale. But I did see a woman entering
the hotel who had just been raped by a soldier. The Iraqis were absolutely
furious, probably because they are Muslims, and Muslims are not supposed to
rape.


Q. Stories have surfaced about Kuwaitis being taken from their homes, questioned
and tortured.

A. One man I knew of suffered a nervous breakdown after the Iraqis detained him
for flying a Kuwaiti flag over his home. They blindfolded him and for three
hours pulled back the hammer of a gun next to his eardrums, saying over and
over, "We're now going to kill you."

I'm sure they are taking out and shooting a lot of Kuwaitis, because there's a
fierce resistance going on. People accuse the U.S. of atrocities in Vietnam, and
we're probably one of the most humane armies in the world. So it would stun me
if the Iraqis weren't doing most of the things for which they are being accused.

Q. How were you treated by the Iraqi soldiers?

A. They were under strict orders to keep us happy, healthy and safe. They said
they were there to protect us, because they were worried the Kuwaitis were going
shoot me and blame it on them.


Q. What about the reports of widespread looting Kuwait?

A. There's no question that was going on. When I was taken to the Iraqi
installation, we would watch a stolen Kuwaiti videocassette on a stolen Kuwaiti
VCR on a stolen Kuwaiti TV set. We ate food that had been stolen from Kuwait,
and we were transported around in stolen Kuwaiti vehicles.

The soldiers took anything of value, including the stoplights and street signs.
They have gone in and even taken the blackboards out of the schools. There were
always big trucks going to Baghdad with all sorts of different things, from rugs
to television sets. In many cases, they had gone through homes and shops and
warehouses and just piled everything of value into the back. One of the first
things the Iraqis did was take down all the street signs to make it much more
difficult for the Kuwaitis to find their way around.


Q. You went into hiding at one point. What was that like?

A. I read a lot, exercised and watched television. I stepped outside only
occasionally, because I didn't want to be too visible. Several people who had
been captured said that neighbors had turned them in, probably out of fear. I
decided to return to the hotel, because I was running out of books and I was
bored.


Q. That was when you were taken in by the police?

A. Yes. They asked where I had been, and I told them I had been in the hotel.
The head of the secret police unit pointed his AK-47 at my chest and said,
"We'll shoot you in 15 minutes unless you tell us where you've been." Then he
flipped the gun from safety to automatic and walked away.

Q. Did you try to escape?

A. At one point, I managed to. I climbed the hotel wall and hid in a nearby
house. But the soldiers eventually saw me, so I waved my white shirt out the
window, and they took me away.


Q. That is when you were taken to Baghdad?

A. Right. It was a 13-hour hot, dusty bus trip. We were brought to the Mansour
Amelia Hotel in downtown Baghdad. We thought we would be there for the duration,
which was actually O.K., because the hotel had a whirlpool, sauna, squash
courts, tennis courts, disco bar and an in-house movie that ironically was
showing "Top Gun" at the time. We knew we were now part of this human shield we
had heard about on the news. So I was taken to an installation with five British
men.

They were very nice to us. Technically, we were the guests of Saddam Hussein,
and by nature the Arabs are very friendly and hospitable people. Also, I really
think they felt bad about what they were doing. All of these things conspired to
make it a very, very nice time for us.

When I returned to the United States, the reporters were really disappointed
when they heard that I had been well treated. They wanted stories of me getting
paddled and beaten mercilessly.


Q. The story of your release has become well noted. What happened?

A. One morning, one of the British hostages came in, and midway through
conversation he said, "Oh, by the way you're getting out of here today." He just
plunked down The Baghdad Observer, and there it was on the front page:
'President Orders American Set Free.'

My mother had written Saddam Hussein a letter from her perspective, that she had
sent her youngest son over to work in the Middle East, and that it was unfair
that he had been grabbed as a hostage. The family had always been good friends
of the Arabs and were interested in their culture. Saddam agreed, and I was
allowed to leave.


Q. Were you relieved?

A. I was mildly surprised. The whole experience from beginning to end had been
so strange that it just seemed like this was one more strange thing that had
happened. It seemed completely plausible.

I was brought back to Baghdad and released to American Embassy officials. I
stayed in one of the embassy-related buildings before getting on an Air Iraq
chartered plane for London. The soldiers sat in the first-class section while
the women and children, many of whom were sick, were forced sit in tourist
class.


Q Will Kuwait ever be restored?

A. I would love to return to a free Kuwait. I think the structure of the country
can be restored because, they can always buy new blackboards. But the human
lives that have been lost can obviously never be replaced.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas Hart Benton Ewald, formerly a hostage in Iraq.
(Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Film Patrons Dread 'The End'

BYLINE: By CHARLOTTE LIBOV

SECTION: Section 12; Page 1; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1260 words


LAST summer, "Cinema Paradiso," a sentimental film about a little movie theater
in Sicily, was a big hit at a little movie theater in Bantam. So the
Oscar-winning film is being brought back for a return engagement.

But instead of looking forward to it, many in the northwestern Connecticut town
are dreading the film's arrival, because it may signal the closing of their
theater, Cinema IV Bantam.

The theater, opened in 1929, is believed to be the oldest continuously operating
movie house in Connecticut. It seems a relic these days -- an ivy-covered red
barnlike single-screen theater in a world of multiscreen complexes.

But the theater's practice of showing foreign films like "Cinema Paradiso" makes
it invaluable to loyal patrons, some of whom drive more than an hour to see
movies here.

"This audience, who thinks of the theater as their living room, is a literate,
passionately devoted audience," said the theater's owner, James Bohnen.

From Elvis to Art Films

Mr. Bohnen, a theatrical director who lives in Chicago, has owned the 255-seat
theater since 1984. Unless he finds a buyer, he said, he will close the theater
on Dec. 23, following a three-night showing of "Cinema Paradiso."

Built in the era of silent films, the theater went on to show "terrible films
starring Jerry Lewis, Elvis Presley and John Wayne," recalled Michael Mabry of
Litchfield, who bought the theater in 1969 after moving to the area from New
York City.

"The one thing we truly missed was seeing good movies," Mr. Mabry said. "I found
Bantam geographically situated to cater to a large audience, so away we went.

"My feeling was to show the best films, be they foreign, American, British, as
well as revivals of classic films. That was my programming policy, and when Jim
Bohnen bought the theater, he shared my views."

Mr. Mabry said he looked into the theater's history and believes it to be the
state's oldest continously operating movie house. He also bestowed on the
current tongue-in-cheek name on what had been known as the Bantam Theater. "It
was a bit of whimsy," he said. "When I bought it, Cinema One-Two-Three in
Waterbury had just opened, so this was kind of a play on words. It was a cinema
for Bantam, so I called it Cinema IV."

Among the theater's longtime patrons are the artist Cleve Gray and his wife, the
author Francine du Plessix Gray, who live in nearby Warren. Mr. Gray, who has
lived in the area for 43 years, said he has gone to the theater since the days
when it was "more like a general movie house," he said.

"After Michael Mabry bought it, we were both very happy," Mr. Gray said. "We
both feel the theater is extremely important for our happiness here in this part
of the country. The films are wonderful, and we depend on it every week, so
we're very distressed about the place possibly closing."

For Mr. Bohnen, purchasing the theater was a longtime dream. When he bought it,
he was living in Colorado, he said, but he visited Litchfield County frequently.

"I was directing plays at the time and used to write about film," he said. "I
was always talking with friends and bemoaning the decline of art theaters. Then
I learned the theater was for sale. I had always been amazed this good a little
art theater could exist out in the country, so I just decided to do it."

On a visit in October to Connecticut to direct the play "Speed-the-Plow" in
Hartford, Mr. Bohnen walked around the movie theater and reminisced.

He fell in love with the place when he walked upstairs to the projection room,
he said. "Going up the stairs and seeing the projection booth was the the final
touch," he said. "There's just something beautiful and romantic about it."

5,000-Name Mailing List

The old-fashioned equipment must be operated by a projectionist at all times,
Mr. Bonhen said, adding that for movie purists, this is the only way.

From Chicago, Mr. Bohnen books the theater's films and writes a schedule, which
is sent out to a 5,000-name mailing list.

When he put the theater on the market several months ago, it was priced at
$330,000 for both the building and the land, he said. He has since reduced the
price to $270,000.

"Trying to sell an art theater in this climate is very difficult," Mr. Bohnen
said.

The audience for such films in theaters is diminishing due to the popularity of
videocassettes, he noted.  And "audience tastes have changed," he said. "People
can't deal with subtitles. As supportive as my audience is, people don't want to
see serious movies.

"I showed 'Black Rain,' about Hiroshima, which was a very beautiful movie, and
almost no one came out to see it. People don't want to be reminded of such
things. But that's why theater exists."

He said the theater might be more viable as a nonprofit venture, perhaps
presenting concerts as well as films.

Mr. Bohnen depends on a part-time manager to oversee the theater's day-to-day
operations. During his three-and-a-half-year tenure as manager, Alan Goldsmith
of Washington added several distinctive touches before he quit in the spring to
devote his time to his own video-production business.

'Empathy Snacks'

"I started some forums on contemporary issues related to the films," Mr.
Goldsmith said. "We were showing 'Platoon,' so we had a panel of three local
Vietnam veterans, who spoke about how what was portrayed in the films related to
their own experiences.

"When we showed "The Last Temptation of Christ," which was so controversial, we
had a discussion between two clergymen. We had discussions on the Holocaust, an
open forum on unwanted pregnancy and a whole week of seminars on homelessness."

Mr. Goldsmith also introduced what became known locally as "empathy snacks,"
refreshments inspired by the films.

"If a particular kind of food was featured in the movie, wherever it was
possible, we would try to serve that as a refreshment," he said.  "When we
showed 'The Name of the Rose,' " which takes place in a monastery, "we had
monk's bread. For 'Do The Right Thing,' we had pizza."

The current manager, Shannon Dow, a freelance writer living in Morris, finds
that people are very worried the theater may close.

"Patrons come in every night and ask what will happen," she said.

Even though he is no longer the manager, Mr. Goldsmith said he often gets
inquiries, too.

'Theater Needs Bodies'

"People love the theater," he said.

"So many say, 'Oh, what a shame it's going to have to close.' These
well-intentioned, well-meaning people aren't hypocrites at all, but they don't
get to the theater often enough. It's not enough to have the good feeling and
the reputation. That theater needs bodies to fill the seats."

On one Sunday in mid-October, a matinee showing of "Monsieur Hire," a French
film, drew only a few dozen people, despite its four-star reviews. But those who
did come said they were grateful for the opportunity.

Ellen Richard of Waterbury said she discovered the theater nearly 20 years ago,
when she was a college student and came to see a film for an assignment. "I come
here often and bring my friends," she said. "The theater has character. People
should get together to support it."

Florence Gruen of Southbury said: "We would feel very badly if it closed. It's
the only place that has the films that we enjoy."

For Mr. Goldsmith, the most surprising thing about Cinema IV Bantam is its
longevity.

"I think people will miss it a lot if it does close," he said. "But a lot of
things have gone in modern life, and we'll never see them again."


LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Shannon Dow, manager of Cinema IV Bantam, in Bantam. Theater,
opened in 1929, may close on Dec. 23 (pg. 1); the candy concession at the
theater, believed to be the oldest in the state (Stephen Castagneto for The New
York Times) (pg. 12) .

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Senators Urge Bush to Lift Vietnam Embargo

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 522 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 3


The chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and seven other
Democratic and Republican Senators have written to President Bush requesting the
lifting of the 15-year-old trade embargo on Vietnam.

The letter comes at a time when the Administration is slowly building relations
with Vietnam, having recently opened talks with Hanoi to help resolve the
Cambodian civil war and reinvigorating joint efforts to identify and return
American servicemen still unaccounted for from the Vietnam War.Two weeks ago,
the Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, became the first Vietnamese
official of Cabinet rank to visit Washington since the war.

The chairman of the committee, Senator Claiborne Pell, Democrat of Rhode Island,
and Senator Richard G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana, who is probably the most
influential Republican in the Senate on foreign policy matters, complimented the
Administration's efforts "for the expansion of contacts," but said it was time
to quicken the improvement.

"The time has come for putting the Vietnam War behind us and opening anew
chapter in U.S.-Vietnam relations," said the letter of Oct. 29, which was also
signed by Senators Alan Cranston, Democrat of California, Joseph R. Biden Jr.,
Democrat of Delaware, John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, Christopher J.
Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, Frank H. Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, and
Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon. "We urge you to act promptly to lift the
U.S. trade embargo on Vietnam and we pledge our full support."

The Administration had no immediate comment on the letter. It has consistently
said normalization of diplomatic and economic relations canoccur after Vietnam
helps account for 1,677 American servicemen still listed as missing and the
Cambodian civil war is settled.

Washington has urged Hanoi, the primary backer of the Cambodian Government, to
push Phnom Penh to join three guerrilla groups in an interim coalition
Government until United Nations-sponsored elections can be held.

The letter from the Senators said the Administration was mistaken to link the
Cambodian conflict to an improvement in relations with Vietnam.

"We should not allow the prolonged end game in the Cambodian peace negotiations
to prevent us from taking the next step of lifting the trade embargo with
Vietnam," it said. "Conclusion of a comprehensive peace in Cambodia,
establishment of a substantial U.N. presence, and conduct of free andfair
elections in war-torn Cambodia could take years."

The Senators wrote that they were not entirely satisfied by the Vietnamese
position on the war dead and prisoners of war, but that "we have seen
considerable progress in recent months."

The letter continued: "In addition, we are heartened by the significant support
for market economic principles that has been demonstrated by some members of the
Vietnamese Government. These developments warrant a significant U.S. response."

The letter should reinforce increasing pressure from a growing number of
American business executives and economists who argue that Vietnam could become
a significant trading partner.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1990 CAMPAIGN;
As Election Day Nears, Poll Finds Nation's Voters in a Gloomy Mood

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 2009 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 3


As Election Day draws near, Americans are more pessimistic about the future than
at any time in a decade, according to the latest poll by The New York Times and
CBS News.

The dour mood coincides with deepening pessimism about the economy and is also
linked to a collapse of faith in the ability of government and politicians to
make things better, the telephone survey of 1,445 adults found.

For the first time since the days of stagnant economic growth and high inflation
in the Administration of Jimmy Carter, a plurality of Americans surveyed, nearly
4 in 10, said they expected things would get worse in the country over the next
five years. Only 3 in 10 said things would get better in the poll, conducted
last Sunday through Wednesday.

Cynicism Grows Deeper

Substantial majorities of Americans said that they believed the economy is in
bad shape (66 percent) and that it was harder to make ends meet (57 percent).
And in the face of this hardship, 77 percent of those surveyed said they
believed government is run by a few big interests looking out for themselves
rather than for the benefit of all the people. That was the highest figure ever
recorded in the quarter of a century that various researchers have been taking
this measure of cynicism toward government.

The pessimism is in sharp contrast to the upbeat days after the Los Angeles
Olympics and Ronald Reagan's 1984 re-election when nearly half of those polled
said they thought things would be getting better and only 2 out of 10 thought
things would get worse.

"Things were better five years ago, I reckon, but I guess that was the time that
we spent and borrowed too much," Vivian J. Martin, a retired poultry farm worker
from Boones Mill in southwestern Virginia, said in an interview after
participating in the poll. "Now, the future doesn't look too bright. We owe too
much and we've gotten ourselves in a bad way."

This dark mood forms the backdrop for the first election of the 1990's. Both
President Bush, who will not be on the ballot on Tuesday, and members of
Congress, who will, have fallen precipitously in the public's esteem over the
last few weeks, a period marked by wrangling over the Federal deficit and a
standoff in the Persian Gulf.

But many voters also made it clear in interviews after the poll that their
anger, which they expressed forcefully, would not translate directly at the
ballot box on Tuesday, either because they viewed their own politicians as an
exception or because they did not really know who was up for election.

Amid this prevailing mood, President Bush's approval rating has taken one of the
worst slides in public approval of any modern President. In The Times/CBS News
Poll, Mr. Bush's handling of his job was approved by 52 percent of the public,
in the low point so far in his Presidency and a 21-point decline in little more
than a month, compared to a Gallup Poll in mid-September.

That fall is at least as great, although perhaps not quite as sudden, as the
decline in President Gerald R. Ford's approval rating after he pardoned former
President Richard Nixon for his conduct in the Watergate scandal and the tumble
that President Ronald Reagan took after disclosure of the Iran-contra affair.

The fall in Mr. Bush's approval has been all the steeper because of the rise he
enjoyed in August as the public rallied around him after his decision to send
troops to the Mideast in the wake of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. At that point
his approval rating stood at 76 in The Times/CBS News Poll.

Mr. Bush's still stands higher than the 42 percent approval rating that Mr.
Reagan received in a Gallup Poll at this point in his first term at the depths
of the 1982 recession when unemployment topped 10 percent as against the current
jobless rate of 5.7 percent. President Carter, just before the 1978 midterm
elections, had a 49 percent approval rating in a Gallup poll, only marginally
different from Mr. Bush's latest rating.

When Mr. Bush took office in January 1989, the nation's mood was considerably
more buoyant than now, with just under 4 in 10 Americans saying they thought
things would get better and 3 in 10 expecting they would get worse.

Mideast Support Improves

The latest Times/CBS News survey was conducted just after Congress finally
adjourned its longest election-year regular session since World war II and as
Mr. Bush began an effort to refocus American attention on the Persian Gulf
confrontation.

Support for America's commitment in the Gulf improved slightly in the latest
survey, but approval of Mr. Bush's handling of foreign policy, always his
strength, continued to slip.

The survey should be accurate, according to statistical theory, to within plus
or minus 3 percentage points of what would have been found if it were possible
to seek out and try to ask the same questions of all Americans.

Albert H. Cantril, a public opinion analyst, said the nation's pessimism is
particularly stark because Americans are historically an optimistic bunch with a
"can-do spirit" of faith in their nation's ability to muster ingenuity and
resources to solve problems.

"When that spirit runs up against intractable sets of issues, whether it's the
deficit or gridlock in the Gulf, it's a very difficult situation for the public
to deal with," Mr. Cantril said.

Mood and Elections

The nation's mood is an important -- and many would say the most important --
factor in the outcome of elections. The last time polling measured pessimism
this deep was in 1979. In the elections in 1980, the Democrats lost the White
House as well as 37 House seats and 12 Senate seats. In 1982, with the nation in
the depths of a recession, the Republicans lost 26 seats in the House.

Politicians have not been forecasting such dramatic changes this year, but with
four days until the election they remain edgy in the face of a country obviously
dissatisfied with the status quo.

Fred Steeper, a Republican poll-taker, said that this year remained different
from previous years when the nation was in a bad mood, the most recent ones
being 1982, 1980 and 1974. In all three of those years, voters directed their
anger clearly at one party,-- the Republicans in 1974 and 1982 and the Democrats
in 1980, Mr. Steeper said.

While many poll-takers and politicians have reported a trend toward Democrats in
recent weeks, Mr. Steeper said that the general anger remains far more
bipartisan than in any of the past years. This makes it harder to predict how it
will influence individual races, he said.

Disapproval of Congress reached an all time high for the 16 years in which both
The New York Times and The Gallup Poll have been asking the question. Sixty-nine
percent of the public said they disapproved of the way Congress was doing its
job and 23 percent said they approved.

Congressional leaders are fond of pointing out that Americans may hate Congress
but still like their individual representatives. "It's hard to throw the other
rascal out," Thomas S. Foley, the Speaker of the House and a Washington
Democrat, said Friday.

But the standing of individual members has suffered, too, in recent weeks,
although they still stand higher than Congress as an institution. Only 51
percent of those surveyed said they approved of the way their own representative
is handling his or her job. Thirty percent said they disapproved and 19 percent
said they did not know.

Most incumbents will still be re-elected, either because they have no real
opposition or because even with all the disaffection they may still look better
than the alternative. But the figures raise real fear for those members who in
past years might have won narrowly.

In the new poll, without being told the names of the candidates in their
district, 44 percent of the probable electorate said they would vote for the
Democratic House candidate, while 39 percent said they would vote for the
Republican candidate.

Americans are in one of their gloomiest moods when asked about faith in their
government; this is why political challengers all across the country this year
have been trying to tap this mood with attacks that paint incumbent office
holders as tools, puppets and handmaidens of political action committees.

Pessimism about the country's future and cynicism about government were linked
in the latest survey. The deepest pessimism about the future of the country was
found among Americans who also said that candidates for public office are less
qualified today than they were 10 years ago.

Deepest Negative Feelings

Since 1964 researchers have been asking Americans whether they thought
government was run by a few big interests looking out for themselves or for the
benefit of all the people. They have never measured a result as negative as the
one in the latest New York Times/CBS News survey.

In 1964, before Vietnam and Watergate, only 29 percent said the government was
run for special interests and 64 percent said for all the people. But the number
responding special interests reached 70 percent in the economic troubles of Mr.
Carter's last year of 1980, and then retreated into the mid-50's and low 60's
during the Reagan years, as measured in polls by the University of Michigan.

The public's overall mood was measured in The Times/CBS New Poll by a series of
questions that asked people to rate "the way things are going in the United
States" on a scale of 1 to 10 -- with 1 the worst and 10 the best. They were
asked to do this for the present, as well as for five years ago and five years
in the future.

The public gave an average overall rating to the nation's current situation of
4.91, the lowest since November 1979, when the public rated the national
situation at 4.83 on average.

The public gave the future a 4.96 rating on average, showing little sign of
optimism that the future would be better than today. Asked to look back five
years, the public saw a better time, rating conditions at the start of Mr.
Reagan's second term at 6.25 on average.

HOW THE POLL WAS TAKEN

The latest New York Times/ CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews
conducted Oct. 28-31 with 1,445 adults around the United States, excluding
Alaska and Hawaii.

The sample of telephone exchanges called was selected by a computer from a
complete list of exchanges in the country. The exchanges were chosen so as to
assure that each region of the country was represented in proportion to its
population. For each exchange, the telephone numbers were formed by random
digits, thus permitting access to both listed and unlisted numbers. The numbers
were then screened to limit calls to residences.

The results have been weighted to take account of household size and number of
residential telephone lines and to adjust for variations in the sample relating
to region, race, sex, age, and education.

Some findings are reported in terms of an overall "probable electorate" which
uses responses to questions dealing with voter registration, voting history, and
the likelihood of voting in 1990 as a measure of the probability of particular
respondents' voting on Election Day.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20 the results based on such samples will differ
by no more than three percentage points in either direction from what would have
been obtained by seeking out all American adults. The potential sampling error
for smaller subgroups is larger. For example, for blacks it is plus or minus
nine percentage points.

For the question that asked respondents to rate on a scale of 1-to-10 the way
things are going in the United States at the present time, the margin of
sampling error was plus or minus 0.10; that is, in 19 cases out of 20, a mean
rating of 4.91 would be no lower than 4.81 and no higher than 5.01. For means
based on smaller subgroups the margin of sampling error is larger.

In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any
survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: charts: showing how repondents on average rated "the way things are
going in the United States" at the time of the poll, Nov. 1979; Jan. 1985; Jan.
1989. Oct. 1990; chart: voters; views on major topics, including economics,
policy issues and politics, for Republican and Democratic supporters. (Source:
The New York Times/CBS News Poll) (pg. 34)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

San Francisco Journal;
An Aging Crew Recreates a Trip on the Wild Side

BYLINE: By KATHERINE BISHOP, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 759 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Nov. 3


All over town, it has produced a giddy sense of deja vu: a wild-looking bus
covered with paintings of doves and clouds and weird squiggles and filled with
strangely dressed people playing kazoos.

While there are a lot of buses around, in San Francisco -- the pulse point for
the Age of Aquarius -- there remains a collective memory of The Bus. It recalls
the days in the mid-1960's, when the novelist Ken Kesey and his troupe of
LSD-crazed followers known as the Merry Pranksters applied a totally strange
paint job to an old school bus at Mr. Kesey's home in La Honda, 30 miles south
of here.

From there, they set off on a long journey for the cross-country promotion of
LSD that became a hit-and-run action on the silent generation and was
immortalized in Tom Wolfe's 1968 saga, "The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test."

Now Mr. Kesey, the author of "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest," is back in town
promoting his own book on that time, "The Further Inquiry," published by Viking.
To do so, he is re-creating the first adventure by hauling a load of balding
hipsters fueled with an elixir of bourbon and Evian water across the country in
the bus that his advance publicity has said will then be enshrined in the
Smithsonian Institution.

But if people have followed Mr. Kesey's long-time motto of "Never Trust a
Prankster," they would have known that he could not resist pulling off one last
cosmic joke. Despite its being painted in lurid Day-Glo psychedelia, this is not
the original 1939 International Harvester bus that helped give new meaning to
the concept of taking a trip.

People here understand that the bus was always an event more than an object.
This is not so well understood, however, at the Smithsonian, which has no
interest in the current incarnation of the bus.

It is, however, interested in obtaining and restoring the original bus. "It's
not a typical bus," said Daisy Ridgway, a public affairs officer with the
Smithsonian's National Museum of American History. "Its historical context is
important for what it meant to the literary world of a certain generation. It's
a potentially interesting object to have."

One roadblock to donating the original bus, dubbed "Furthur," is that after two
decades of sitting outdoors on the Kesey farm in Oregon, the bus is a rusted
hulk.

The Smithsonian does not see this as a problem. "We have experts in our
department of transportation who would know how to restore it," Ms. Ridgway
said.

But for Mr. Kesey, the very idea that "Furthur" could be restored by people who
have never been on the bus in any sense of the word is "something of an insult."
Over the years, it has served as everything from a party pad to a chicken coop,
and the roof is rotted through, he said. A restoration would require building an
essentially new bus and having it painted by people who never rode on it, a
thoroughly unacceptable concept.

Moreover, the bus was painted many times after the Pranksters and friends first
applied primary colors to metal. At one point in the mid-60's, for example, the
entire bus was painted blood red when it was driven in anti-Vietnam War
demonstrations. Who is to say which paint job should be the one re-created for
posterity?

The current bus incorporates important portions of the original "Furthur," Mr.
Kesey said, including the driver's seat from which Neal Cassady, the ultimate
icon of the Beat Generation, piloted the rolling affront to respectable behavior
on its first trip. But more than that, it was made "by the same spirit and
energy we've always had going," Mr. Kesey said.

After a brief cruise past the Longshoremen's Hall, the site of the infamous
Trips Festival of January 1966 where the Pranksters and others staged what
became the first strobe light and acid rock sound show intended to simulate the
LSD experience, the bus lumbered toward Golden Gate Park and the meadow where
the Summer of Love Be-ins were held.

Making the turn on to Haight Street at Ashbury, everyone sang the words with the
Bob Dylan tape, "Everybody must get stoned," and the bus was met with whoops of
support. Even though it's not the the real "Furthur" in the tangible sense, the
hoax is forgiven, because in this neighborhood, even those who were not yet born
at the time are on the bus.

A gaggle of teen-agers dressed hippie-style in tie-dyed shirts, thrift store
bell bottom trousers and love beads flashed the two-fingered peace sign. One of
them acknowledged his debt to the Prankster generation: "Without them, we
wouldn't be happening."


LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ken Kesey is recreating parts of his cross-country bus tour of
the 1960's. The Day-Glo-painted bus, however, is not the 1939 International
Harvester bus used on the original journey of the Merry Pranksters.  (Terrence
McCarthy for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 4, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Wizard Who Spun Black Rock Into Gold;
The Super Producer

BYLINE: By FRED W. FRIENDLY; Mr. Friendly, the producer of Edward R. Murrow's
"See It Now," was president of CBS News from 1964 to 1966.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 33; Column 5; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 362 words


Bill Paley gave me the worst day of my life as well as the best years. When we
quarreled over the network's coverage of the Vietnam hearings in 1966, I quit. I
now find myself celebrating those 16 years when I worked for him in his news
division.

One special memory: In 1963, I asked to see Paley in his 20th-floor office. My
mission was to remind him that the 20th anniversary of D-Day was only a year
away. I suggested he call his wartime friend Gen. Dwight Eisenhower and invite
him to accompany Walter Cronkite and the "CBS Report's" team back to the
Normandy beaches of World War II. We would spend 10 days in Normandy to produce
a 90-minute program, "D-Day Plus 20 Years."

Two minutes later, Paley was on the phone selling the idea to the former
President. He concluded our conversation with the instructions, "Fred, you've
got a date with Ike tomorrow morning in Gettysburg."

Later, when I told Paley we had a Normandy deal, he told me with glee that he
would join the production force of what we called the "Eisenhower Irregulars."
Ike's only condition was that we go by water because "Mamie just won't fly."
That July we all sailed on the old Queen Elizabeth.

Paley, ever the gourmet, booked us into every haute cuisine restaurant as we
shuttled from Ste.-Mere-Eglise to Arromanches to Cannes. In between those
memorable meals, we filmed Eisenhower and Cronkite from the map room in
Plymouth, England, where the invasion began, to Omaha Beach still with its
battle relics, to the pillboxes at Pointe du Hoc, where the American Rangers
landed around dawn on June 6, 1944.

Throughout the expedition, Paley was there -- not only as the maitre d', as he
called himself, but as the "super" executive producer, often making insightful
suggestions or helping out by cajoling Ike to drive his own Jeep, with Cronkite
as passenger.

Seventeen years later, long after the bitterness of my resignation as president
of CBS News, Paley and I met at a party. The hostess, Katherine Graham,
concerned that Paley might not remember his former employee, eased the moment:
"Bill, you remember Fred Friendly." His response: "Of course -- Normandy, 1964."


NAME: William S. Paley

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Heineken in Vietnam

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section D; Page 7; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 60 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 4


Heineken N.V., the Dutch beer company, will build a brewery in Vietnam in a
suburb of Ho Chi Minh City next year. The brewery, with a capacity of 26.4
million gallons of beer a year, will be built under a joint venture with the
government of the city, formerly Saigon. The announcement was carried last week
in a broadcast on Hanoi Radio, monitored here.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Mary Martin, 76, First Lady of Musicals, Dies

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 2807 words


Mary Martin, America's favorite leading lady of musical comedy, as Ens. Nellie
Forbush in "South Pacific," Maria von Trapp in "The Sound of Music" or the title
role in "Peter Pan," died Saturday afternoon at her home in Rancho Mirage,
Calif. She was 76 years old.

She died of cancer, said Richard Grant, who handles publicity for the actress's
son, Larry Hagman. Miss Martin, who had been hospitalized recently at the
Eisenhower Medical Center in Rancho Mirage, returned home last Tuesday.

More than any of her peers, she was what she played and she incarnated the songs
that she sang. Miss Martin was "a cockeyed optimist" and she was also the
eternal child imagined by James M. Barrie. Approaching 70, she was still saying,
"I can't help thinking I'm 19." On stage, at least figuratively, she never
stopped flying.

Echoes of Poetry

In reviewing her performance in "South Pacific," Kenneth Tynan said that she
reminded him of something Aldous Huxley wrote about the minor Caroline poets:
"They spoke in their natural voices and it was poetry." While Ethel Merman was
an entire brass section and Carol Channing was a parade, Miss Martin remained
natural and exactingly true to life -- and it was poetry.

Her voice was never the strongest instrument. She was not beautiful (though she
could be radiant). Through determination, pluck, charm, self-mocking humor and a
profound sense of self, everything converged to create an exhilarating theater
artist.

For 50 years Miss Martin projected the vitality of someone who loved her work
and knew precisely how to make other people share in her happiness. As Elia
Kazan, who directed her in her first Broadway starring role in "One Touch of
Venus," said in his autobiography, she was "full of the love of being loved."

Specialized in Long Runs

Although she made a number of films, she was devoted to the theater. She starred
in relatively few Broadway shows, but the work was valuable; one could regard
the actress herself as being the heyday of the Broadway musical.

She specialized in long runs and was known for not missing performances. In his
autobiography, Richard Rodgers called her "an extraordinary trouper," adding,
"In all the years I've known her, I have never seen her give a performance that
was anything less than the best that was in her." She did have, he said, one
unusual trait: "She cannot utter even the mildest form of profanity." The
"strongest expression" he ever heard her use was "He's a son-of-a-bear."

If there had been a darker side to Miss Martin, she certainly kept it hidden
from her public, which never failed to think of her as joyful. In her private
life, she endured tragedies (including her husband's death) and on stage was
prone to suffer accidents, but she never let anything interfere with the sheer
delight of her performance.

A Thousand Shampoos

Repeatedly she set herself challenges, many of them physical. It was at her
suggestion that Nellie Forbush literally washed that man "right out-a my hair,"
which meant that she shampooed her hair on stage for 1,000 performances.
Originally she had planned to sing another song in "South Pacific" while
cartwheeling across the stage -- until she cartwheeled right into the orchestra
pit. It was also her idea to sing a song standing on her head in "Jennie," one
of her less successful musicals. In rehearsal at the age of 63 in the Aleksei
Arbuzov play "Do You Turn Somersaults?," she turned somersaults on stage until
she fell from a revolving platform and was grounded by her doctors.

In her autobiography, "My Heart Belongs," she declared that of all her
characters Peter Pan was indisputably her favorite, for a very simple reason:
"Everyone else loves Peter so." She added, "Neverland is the way I would like
real life to be: timeless, free, mischievous, filled with gaiety, tenderness and
magic."

The key to her first Broadway success, in 1938 in the Cole Porter musical,
"Leave It to Me," was her innate ability to combine innocence and insouciance.
In that show she sang "My Heart Belongs to Daddy," a vintage Porter song in
which almost every word has a double meaning. She played against the lines,
which made them even funnier, and she did a striptease as if she was hanging up
the laundry. It was often said about that song that Miss Martin did not know
what she was singing until Sophie Tucker, who was also in the cast, explained
the worldly, witty lyrics to her. The actress was never to lose that inbred
sense of ingenuousness.

An Early Flight, A Crash Landing

 From the first, Mary Virginia Martin was self-propelled. She was born in
Weatherford, Tex., on Dec. 1, 1913 (although some reports placed the date one
year later), the younger daughter of Preston Martin, a lawyer, and Juanita
Presley Martin, a violin teacher. As one of a trio of little girls dressed as
bellhops, she sang on a bandstand outside her father's courtroom. When she was
5, she sang "When Apples Grow on the Lilac Trees" at a fireman's ball. Once she
tried to fly -- from the roof of a garage, without the mechanical assistance she
would have later as Peter Pan -- and broke her collarbone.

Frequently she sang in churches and at clubs, and learned about show business by
watching movies and imitating singers and dancers. As a young woman, she
appeared with her best friend, Bessie Mae Sue Ella Yaeger, in amateur
theatricals and later wondered why she had become a star and Bessie Mae had not.
She decided it was because "I react to an audience.

"Give me 4 people and I'm on. Give me 400 and I'm a hundred times more on."

As a tribute to Bessie Mae -- and for good luck -- she worked her friend's name
into many of her scripts, on stage and in films.

In her book Miss Martin recalled that Weatherford was famous for its
watermelons. Long after she became a star, a sign was erected on the courthouse
lawn: "Weatherford, Texas, home of watermelons and Mary Martin." Her
observation: "I never got top billing in my hometown."

Nevertheless she had, she was convinced, a very happy childhood. Her parents
sent her to Ward Belmont, a finishing school in Nashville. At 16, she married
Benjamin Hagman, a Weatherford accountant and later a lawyer. They had one
child, Larry Martin Hagman, who -- as the world knows -- became famous as J. R.
on television's "Dallas."

Dancing Her Way To Hollywood

 The actress's first marriage lasted only a few years, and the teen-age bride
brought up her son as if he were her younger brother. Miss Martin was soon
caught up in her career. At 18, she opened the Mary Hagman School of Dance in
Weatherford, then went to Hollywood to study dancing and to search for a way to
enter the movies. For several years she went back and forth between the two
states and between teaching and performing.

The dancing school flourished (until it was destroyed by fire) while her
performing career took several divergent paths. In Texas she sang on radio; in
California she sang and danced in nightclubs. One evening she performed in a
Sunday night talent show at the Trocadero nightclub in Los Angeles. Singing "The
Weekend of a Private Secretary" and an operatic number entitled "Il Bacio" in
her own syncopated version, she created a sensation. To her astonishment, people
stood on chairs and tables and shouted bravo. Jack Benny, who was in the
audience, later told her that it was one of the most exciting moments he could
remember. "In 10 minutes," she said, "my life had changed."

Another member of the audience was Lawrence Schwab, a producer who took charge
of her career. In answer to the frequent question, what causes a big break, she
said: "Work. Work and work and work; be ready when the break comes." As she
wrote in her autobiography, "All my life I have felt guilty if I didn't use any
talent I have as fully as I could."

Under Mr. Schwab's aegis, she came to New York and auditioned to fill a suddenly
vacant supporting role in the forthcoming Broadway musical "Leave It to Me." The
unknown actress strode into a suite in the Ritz Towers and announced that she
was going to sing four songs, adding, "If I can't sing all four, I'd rather not
sing." As she recalled in her book, "A man reclining on a couch said, very
mildly, 'Carry on, on all fours.' " She later discovered that the philosophical
man on the couch was Cole Porter, the composer of the show. Bella Spewack,
co-author of the book with her husband, Sam Spewack, asked Miss Martin if she
had ever been on the New York stage. She admitted that she had not, and when
Mrs. Spewack asked her why she thought she could do it, she answered boldly,
"Try me."

In the audition, she was called upon to read her character's dialogue. She
shouted the first line, "I'd like to renew my subscription" (meaning she would
like to continue having a love affair). Her straightforward, self-confident
delivery brought down the house. Should she get the part, Mr. Spewack told her,
she should never change the reading of the line. Throughout her career her art
was founded on such intuition.

A First Casting Much Against Type

 She so captivated Porter and his collaborators that she was signed, despite the
fact -- or rather because of the fact -- that she was cast against type: the
innocent country girl playing a kept woman, and singing a striptease
showstopper, "My Heart Belongs to Daddy." Fifty years later, in 1988, as a
great-grandmother, she was still singing "My Heart Belongs to Daddy," at a
celebration honoring Cole Porter. In May 1990 she was scheduled to sing the song
again at the 75th anniversary celebration of the Shubert Theater in New Haven,
but canceled her appearance because of illness.

Her overnight success on Broadway on Nov. 9, 1938 put her on the cover of Life
magazine and drew the attention of Hollywood. Under contract to Paramount, she
appeared in a series of forgettable roles in forgettable films, including "The
Great Victor Herbert," "Rhythm on the River," "Love Thy Neighbor," "New York
Town," "Birth of the Blues," "Kiss the Boys Goodbye," "Happy Go Lucky" and "True
to Life."

There was one positive result of her Hollywood experience. She met and married
Richard Halliday, a story editor at Paramount. He also became her producer and
closest professional adviser and the father of their daughter, Heller Halliday.
If she had remained in Hollywood, she might have disappeared into the studio
system, but wisdom prevailed and she returned to New York, where she became a
Broadway star and remained one for the next four decades.

Her first starring role was in "One Touch of Venus," written by Kurt Weill,
Ogden Nash and S. J. Perelman. To combat his wife's hesitancy about playing the
title goddess, a role originally conceived for Marlene Dietrich, Mr. Halliday
took her to the Metropolitan Museum of Art and showed her the many
interpretations of Venus in painting and sculpture. As the "Venus of Ozone
Heights," who comes to life and steps down from her pedestal, she had her
customary winsomeness, singing her signature song, "That's Him," simply sitting
in a chair facing the audience.

The Bumpy Road To 'South Pacific'

 After "One Touch of Venus," she starred in the musical "Lute Song" and in
London in Noel Coward's "Pacific 1860" and toured for a year in Irving Berlin's
"Annie Get Your Gun." Though Ethel Merman had played the title character, Annie
Oakley, in the original production, the role -- along with the song, "Doin' What
Comes Naturally" -- seemed made to measure for Miss Martin. As always, she was
undeterred by the fact that she was succeeding another star (which she also did
later when she took Carol Channing's "Hello, Dolly!" on tour of military bases
in Vietnam).

In 1948, Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d offered her the central role
in "South Pacific." She was hesitant for two reasons. Disliking hospitals, she
was not anxious to play the role of a nurse, and she felt insecure because her
leading man would be an opera star, Ezio Pinza. When it was decided that the two
would not be asked to sing a duet, she accepted the offer. Nellie Forbush,
singing "Cockeyed Optimist," "Honey Bun," "I'm Gonna Wash That Man Right Out-a
My Hair" and, especially, "I'm in Love With a Wonderful Guy," became one of her
greatest successes.

"South Pacific" was followed in 1954 by "Peter Pan" (her daughter was also in
the cast) which she performed on Broadway and on television, live and then on
tape, complete with her celebrated aerial ballet. The Broadway production ran
for only 152 performances. It was largely through the taped television version
(which was recently released on videocassette) that she became so identified
with the role.

"Peter Pan" was an exact meeting of actress and character. As Miss Martin said,
"I cannot even remember a day when I didn't want to be Peter." For years she had
dreams of flying, all of which stopped just before the first television
presentation of the show. Trying to explain the end of those dreams, she said,
"Perhaps it was because I had experienced at last the joy of really flying." She
could become almost mystical whenever she spoke about the experience, as in her
statement: "I discovered I was happier in the air than on the ground. I probably
always will be."

Another Character, Another Classic

 In 1959, Rodgers and Hammerstein went to her again to ask her to play Maria von
Trapp in "The Sound of Music." Though her own background could not have been
more dissimilar from that of her real-life model, she -- and the audience --
felt the kinship. As she said, "We both have the same drive, utter
determination." During her two years in the role, she missed only one
performance.

Of her three Broadway triumphs only "Peter Pan" was to be recorded for posterity
-- in the television version.In the case of both "South Pacific" and "The Sound
of Music," other actresses played her role on screen (Mitzi Gaynor was Nellie
and Julie Andrews was Maria von Trapp.) This meant that, except for her
television appearances, especially one dynamic evening teamed with Ethel Merman,
her most noteworthy performances existed only on the stage and on records.

As one sign of her own fallibility she often pointed to the fact that while
accepting "South Pacific," "Peter Pan" and "The Sound of Music," she turned down
the chance to be in "Oklahoma!", "Kiss Me Kate" and "My Fair Lady."

Among her other Broadway shows were the two-character musical "I Do I Do" and
"Jennie." Occasionally she acted in dramas -- in a revival of "The Skin of Our
Teeth," which she and Helen Hayes took on tour, and in "Do You Turn
Somersaults?"

She and her husband owned a ranch in Brazil, Nossa Fazenda (Our Farm), next to a
home owned by her friend Janet Gaynor. The Hallidays used the ranch as a
vacation retreat. After her husband died in 1973, Miss Martin worked less but
never fully retired. In 1981 she was a host on "Over Easy," a public television
series about aging. In 1982 she was in a taxicab accident in San Francisco that
took the life of her close friend Ben Washer and severely injured Miss Martin,
Miss Gaynor and Miss Gaynor's husband, Paul Gregory. In 1986, fully recovered,
she returned to the theater in a dramatic role, co-starring with Carol Channing
in James Kirkwood's "Legends." Each portrayed an aging actress. "Legends" toured
but never came to New York.

In 1989, Miss Martin returned to New York for a tribute to the television work
of Richard Rodgers and to see "Jerome Robbins's Broadway," which reprised "I'm
Flying" from "Peter Pan." Several months later, the 1960 television version of
"Peter Pan" was shown again, with great success. Later, an illness precipitated
her withdrawal from "Grovers Corners," Tom Jones and Harvey Schmidt's musical
version of "Our Town," in which she was scheduled to play the Stage Manager. In
1989 she received a Kennedy Center Award, given annually at the John F. Kennedy
Center for the Performing Arts in Washington.

Famous First Line One More Time

 Some years ago she participated in a birthday tribute to Richard Rodgers at the
Imperial Theater, where, decades before, she had made her Broadway debut in
"Leave It to Me." For days, she worried about what she would say. When the time
came, in characteristic fashion, she improvised. She walked on stage and said as
loudly as she could, "I would like to renew my subscription." When she wrote
about this moment in her autobiography, she commented, "That's what I would like
to say, now and forever, to all audiences everywhere." Mary Martin's lifetime
renewal was gratefully accepted.

Miss Martin is survived by her son, her daughter, Heller Halliday DeMeritt, six
grandchildren and one great-granddaughter. Funeral services will be private. A
memorial service will be held in New York at a later date.

NAME: Mary Martin

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mary Martin in the Broadway production of "South Pacific" in
1949. (Halsman) (pg. A1); Miss Martin with her son, Larry Hagman, in 1980.
(Reuters); Mary Martin battling Captain Hook as the title character in "Peter
Pan." (John Engstead) (pg. B11)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 6, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Accuse Czechs of Racism

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 722 words

DATELINE: PRAGUE


Vietnamese contract workers and students, whom their Government sent to
Czechoslovakia when it was still a "brotherly" Communist country, are protesting
in letters to President Vaclav Havel, appeals sent to Czechoslovak news
organizations and public statements about an increase in racial assaults and
insults.

"By 1995 all Vietnamese are to leave this country," said Le Thang Nhan, editor
of what he and other students here call their "samizdat" newspaper, Dien Dan.
"They want to return with a message of freedom and not with sad memories of
Czechoslovakia."

"Dien Dan" means Forum, an allusion to Mr. Havel's Civic Forum, the movement
that overthrew the Communist Government. In calling their publication
"samizdat," the students are linking themselves to the underground sheets
published by dissidents against the Communist Governments in the Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe.

Such Vietnamese publications have sprung up all over Czechoslovakia since the
revolution last year. They represent the first known attempt by Vietnamese who
are not refugees and expect to return to their country to openly oppose their
hard-line Communist Government. To do so, the protesters have defied pressure
from the Vietnamese Embassy here and endured fears that their actions may
provoke retribution against their families at home.

Soldier in Cambodian War

Mr. Nhan, a medical student who spent six years as a front-line soldier in
Vietnam's war against the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia, gives his name, address and
telephone number in every issue of Dien Dan. Coming from Saigon, which few of
the students call by its new name, Ho Chi Minh City, he is an exception among
his anonymous colleagues in having lived under a non-Communist government. Most
are Northerners, who until the Czechoslovak revolution had never experienced
even relative freedom of speech.

The students, interviewed in Mr. Nhan's room in a student hostel, said they felt
it their duty to publish their newspaper for the sake of the more than 30,000
Vietnamese laborers in this country. "They are completely isolated and kept in
ignorance," said an engineering student from Hanoi. "They speak no Czech, and
nobody talks to them."

The students said they realized that returning to Vietnam after their studies
would expose them to punishment for their activities. But they said that each of
them still had two or three years of schooling ahead.

In an interview, Foreign Minister Jiri Dienstbier indicated that Czechoslovakia
would not deny asylum to any Vietnamese fearful of going home.

The students reported that their relations with their fellow students were good,
but like the workers they faced hostility from Czechs who do not know them on a
daily basis. They feel that salespeople in stores treat them less courteously
than they treat Czechs and ignore them to avoid serving them.

Vaguely Stated Slurs

"We can't even use the city swimming pool anymore," a Bratislava woman said,
speaking to a foreigner of the Vietnamese in her city. Was this because there
are so many Vietnamese, she was asked. "No, because all the illnesses you know
they have," she replied.

"The people here don't seem to know that we are rather modest, hard-working
people with 4,000 years of culture behind us," a science student said softly and
sadly.

Students and workers said the main difficulty was with groups of youths, whom
they described as "skinheads," who pick fights with them on the streets. Usually
they ask for money and assault them if they refuse or if they find the amount
too small.

Pitched battles have been fought at some factories outside Prague, with people
injured on both sides, the students reported. As a result of one, 111 Vietnamese
workers were deported in August.

Crowding and Boredom

A group of three women in a pharmaceuticals plant at the edge of Prague said
they got along with their co-workers but had no contacts with Czechoslovaks off
the job. They spend their off-hours and weekends in the desolate barracks at the
factory, in which they share a room hardly bigger than the space required for
their beds and a table, they said.

The women said they came because they had been told they would be taught a
useful trade but instead they were doing routine labor. "The work is not hard,
but it's very boring," one said.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 6, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The 1990 Campaign; War Clouds, No Thunder;
As Guns Are Silent, So Are the Candidates

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1152 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 5


Two years ago, a Presidential campaign took place at a time of radical change in
the world order, with the Soviet Union rapidly ceasing to pose a threat to the
West, and there was almost no debate about what the United States should do.

This year, a midterm election campaign has taken place with war threatening in
the Persian Gulf, and once again the major foreign policy issue confronting the
nation has generated almost no debate among the candidates about what the United
States should do.

Instead, President Bush has traded insults with President Saddam Hussein of
Iraq, and the Democrats have barely mentioned the subject.

But while these transcendent questions of war and peace have been ducked by
candidates by both sides, there is an undercurrent of public concern that
emerges in interviews with voters and in isolated protests. Experts on both
sides point to the absence of open military conflict as the main reason
candidates have been able to avoid a stand on the overall question of the role
of American troops in Saudi Arabia.

Fingers to the Wind

"A lot of people in Congress have serious doubts about where we're going,
especially Democrats," said Ted Van Dyk, who as an aide to Hubert H. Humphrey
suffered through the national schism over Vietnam. "But until the first big
mistake is made, until the wind is blowing in one direction or another, they're
almost all hiding out, fearful that they'll end up on the wrong side.

"Then, if something goes wrong, they'll all land on Bush's neck."

The President has doubtless made some headway by talking tough -- comparing Mr.
Hussein to Hitler, telling reporters that he has "had it" with mistreatment of
American hostages -- even if the message often seems garbled and contradictory.
Opinion polls suggest that the hemorrhaging of support for Republican candidates
ended or at least slowed once he changed the subject from the budget to the
gulf. Patriotism sells better than taxes every time.

In a picture-taking session that echoed Mr. Bush's visit to a flag factory in
1988, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d was shown on television and in
newspapers this week giving the thumbs-up sign to American troops in the desert.


No National Referendum

In the midterm campaign of 1966, with war already under way, supporters and
opponents of President Lyndon B. Johnson's Vietnam policy debated the issue, and
the hawks won, by and large, strengthening the President's hand. But the voting
tomorrow, no matter who wins, will not constitute a true referendum on the
Administration's policy in the Middle East, because Mr. Bush has not asked the
electorate to demonstrate its backing for it, and few if any Senate or House
candidates have devoted significant attention to the gulf issue.

It is not that the country as a whole overwhelmingly approves what the President
has done so far; the polls show that his overall popularity has dropped by 20
percent in recent weeks, and support for his actions in the gulf has fallen
almost as much, although a majority still backs him. From the start, most
Americans have had doubts about the United States taking offensive action --
nine out of 10, according to a survey in September by Americans Talk Security, a
bipartisan group of polling and consulting firms.

Candidates of both major parties can have little doubt that the potential for
armed conflict with Iraq preys on voters' minds. In Indiana last week, for
example, six of eight questions asked of a Republican House candidate at a
Kiwanis meeting dealt with the President and the gulf, and several were hostile.
The next morning, the Democratic candidate in the same district was braced in a
diner by a voter who said he had "lost several friends in Vietnam" and wanted to
know what could be done to "keep Bush from getting us into another war."

Indeed, Mr. Bush has begun to hear the kind of heckling that became a campaign
staple during the Vietnam War. From Vermont to New Mexico, small but apparently
growing bands of protesters have chanted, "No war for oil," at campaign
appearances by the President. On Sunday, rattled by fatigue or hecklers or both,
he stumbled repeatedly in a campaign speech, commenting at one point that "our
problem is not with the young people there in Iraq, or the man in the street
there, our people is with Saddam Hussein."

Certain Political Suicide

The Gulf of Tonkin resolution authorizing a stepped-up American involvement in
Vietnam was passed by the Senate in 1964 with only two negative votes, those of
Senators Wayne Morse of Oregon and Ernest Gruening of Alaska. A more limited
resolution was passed by the Senate on Oct. 2 this year with only three negative
votes, those of Senators Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and Bob Kerrey of
Nebraska, both Democrats, and Senator Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon, a Republican.

Mr. Hatfield, who was Governor of Oregon at the time, endorsed the Tonkin Gulf
resolution, and has often said he never forgave himself, so he voted "no" this
year even though he faced a tough re-election campaign. But most people on
Capitol Hill appeared to agree with a Democratic House member who remarked, "The
time is not right yet to oppose the President, and there's nothing more
politically suicidal than opposing a war too early."

Among the Democrats, traumatized by years of charges by President Ronald Reagan
that they were afraid to use force, the fear of seeming irresolute by opposing
war remains especially intense.

A Few Calls for Restraint

The vote in the Senate was 96 to 3, and in the House it was 380 to 29. In both
houses, members insisted that the resolution constituted no authorization of
future combat. But the critics, who want the United Nations embargo to be given
a full chance to work and who favor offensive action only under Security Council
auspices, think that the vote could easily be misconstrued.

Mr. Kerrey is not up for re-election until 1994, and as a Congressional Medal of
Honor winner in Vietnam, he is not likely to be accused of lacking patriotism.
So he has felt free to state his doubts more boldly than anyone else in the
Senate. He said recently: "I am not convinced that this Administration will do
everything in its power to avoid war. If ever there was an avoidable war, it is
this one."

A few others have spoken out about their concerns, including a pair of Indianans
-- Senator Richard Lugar, a Republican, and Representative Lee Hamilton, a
Democrat. But most politicians have seemed loath to touch the issue, at least
until after Election Day.

By 1968, two years after that midterm election when Lyndon B. Johnson won a vote
of confidence, the Vietnam War was wildly unpopular and so divisive that the
President decided not to run again. By 1992, the die will have long since been
cast in the Persian Gulf, and the issue of whether or not war was justified may
well be academic.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: An Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

California Says Laos Refugee Group Is a Victim of Leadership's Extortion

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 896 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Nov. 6


For years, some members of the most primitive refugee group in America, the
Hmong, have complained, mostly in whispers, that the anti-Communist leader who
fled here with them from the remote mountains of Laos has been extorting money
from them.

Now the California Department of Social Services has given substance to those
grievances, charging that Gen. Vang Pao's resistance organization has demanded
contributions from Hmong refugees in return for welfare assistance through a
state-financed social services group he controls.

The department, completing an 18-month investigation, recommended last month
that county welfare offices cancel their contracts with the social services
organization, the Lao Family Community.

Kao Thao, a leader of the resistance group, the United Lao National Liberation
Front, has been arrested and has pleaded guilty to two counts of embezzlement
and misappropriation of funds.

Both the Lao Family Community and the United Lao National Liberation Front,
whose headquarters are in Garden Grove, 20 miles south of Los Angeles, deny that
they have engaged in wrongdoing.

A Dream of Liberation

The department's report has caused a stir among Hmong refugees here, an insular,
clan-centered people whose dream of returning to liberate their homeland from
Communist rule remains very much alive.

The Hmong (pronounced MUNG) are members of a primitive, mostly illiterate tribal
group that was enlisted by the Central Intelligence Agency to fight in Laos
during the Vietnam War, which ended with the Communists' victory in 1975.

About 100,000 Hmong now live in the United States, and more than half receive
welfare assistance. The Lao Family Community has been under contract to handle
this assistance through most of California, which is home to the majority of
Hmong refugees. The group also has offices in Minnesota, Wisconsin and North
Carolina. Those offices are not affected by the California decision. It is not
knwn whether any other state is investigating similar charges against Hmong
refugees.

Alicia Martinez, chief of the Civil Rights Bureau of the California Department
of Social Services, said Hmong witnesses told departmental investigators that
newly arrived refugees were asked to contribute to the liberation group as a
condition of receiving welfare assistance.

Refugees have said typical donations amount to an initial $100 payment plus $2 a
month for each family member.

Inquiry Called 'Witch Hunt'

Since the department's report, groups of Hmong refugees have appeared at local
hearings to support General Vang Pao's organizations.

Calling the investigation "some sort of witch hunt," Gayle Morrison, director of
the Lao Family Community, said contributions to the resistance were "not
authorized by the agency in any way, shape or form."

John Gordnier, the California senior assistant attorney general, said Kao Thao,
who was executive officer of the national headquarters of the resistance
organization and who admitted the embezzlement, had also been an officer of the
Lao Family Community.

The department's report was based on investigations in two counties, and the Lao
Family Community offices in other areas quickly disassociated themselves from
what they said might be localized misdeeds.

"They are using one brush to everybody's face," said Tony Vang, who heads the
agency's office in Fresno.

Selling of Phantom Positions

But other Hmong refugees have spoken up, although privately and anonymously, to
confirm the continuing stories of intimidation and corruption among people
associated with General Vang Pao.

They recounted often-told stories of demands for contributions and of the
selling of phantom positions in a future government of Laos. They also expressed
growing concern that the contributions have been used not to finance a guerrilla
army, but to support the life style of resistance leaders in the United States.

"It's sad to see Hmong ripping off Hmong," said one refugee who spoke on the
condition that his name not be used. "I'm concerned about corruption with the
Lao Family Community. It's not run by the people who are appointed to run it.
It's run by corrupt political officers."

Another refugee said: "We realize a lot of this money isn't going to Laos, but
you don't hear a lot of complaints. I think fear is the main thing."

Since the report was made public last month, Ms. Martinez said, some witnesses
in the investigation have received death threats.

Hopes for an Uprising Fade

"It's too bad that this has to happen here," she said. "It seems like nothing
has changed for them. They come here hoping for a better world, and it doesn't
seem like it is for a lot of them."

She acknowledged that many refugees might willingly pay to support the
liberation organization.

But some refugees say they have become less willing to make these payments in
recent years, since a revolutionary uprising in Laos has failed to materialize.

"One question that always pops into my mind is: Are we really going to get Laos
back? That is always the question," said a former soldier, speaking through an
interpreter.

"And even if Laos is neutral again, are they just going to hand it over to Vang
Pao?" he continued. "If you look back at the history of Laos, we never did play
that big a part. We were just a small culture, a C.I.A. headquarters."

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Ousted General Gets a Break

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 396 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 6


Over the objection of the Senate, President Bush has extended the service of the
former Air Force Chief of Staff, Gen. Michael J. Dugan, who was dismissed in
September for publicly discussing contingency plans for waging war against Iraq.

General Dugan, in articles published by The Washington Post and The Los Angeles
Times, said the Joint Chiefs of Staff had decided that the only effective way to
drive Iraq out of Kuwait was heavy bombing of Baghdad to "decapitate" the Iraqi
leadership, making President Hussein, his family and senior commanders primary
targets.

Defense Secretary Dick Cheney ousted the four-star general, the Air Force's
senior-ranking officer, on Sept. 17. But last month, Mr. Bush sent a letter to
the Senate Armed Services Committee recommending that General Dugan be allowed
to remain as a special assistant to Air Force Secretary Donald F. Rice until
Jan. 1, when the salary for four-star generals increases to $101,200 from
$78,200.

Since General Dugan's pension is based on 75 percent of his base salary, his
pension will increase by more than $17,000 a year, to $75,900 from $58,644, if
he retires next year instead of this year.

Before Congress recessed, the Senate approved Mr. Bush's nomination to retire
General Dugan at the four-star level, but opposed extending his active-duty
service "primarily to enhance his level of retired pay."

This week, though, the Pentagon said it would go ahead with its plans to retire
General Dugan on New Year's Day.

The Senate has the power to confirm a top officer's final rank, but not the date
it takes effect.

"It would be a mistake and sets a bad precedent," said Senator Sam Nunn,
Democrat of Georgia and chairman of the Armed Services Committee. Senator John
W. Warner of Virginia, the ranking Republican on the committee. also opposed the
move.

Under Federal law, General Dugan will be required to relinquish his four-star
rank 90 days after his dismissal, and drop down to a two-star general.
Technically, he will serve at the lower rank for the last two weeks of this
year. But because the Senate approved his retirement rank at four stars, that
will be his final rank on Jan. 1.

General Dugan, 53 years old, a Vietnam War combat pilot, is assessing pilot
training requirements for the Air Force Secretary. He has refused all interview
requests since his dismissal.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 7, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 58 words


Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf, commander of American forces facing Iraq, referred incorrectly in
some editions to the regular tour of duty for Americans in Vietnam. The tour for
members of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force and the Coast Guard was 12 months;
for the Marines, it was 13 months.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The 1990 Elections: State By State;
Northeast

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2025 words



CONNECTICUT

Lowell P. Weicker Jr., erstwhile Senate maverick, used his strong local appeal
to capture the anti-incumbent fever that swept through the electorate and win
the election.

Running as an independent, the three-term former Senator defeated the Democratic
nominee, Representative Bruce A. Morrison, and the Republican candidate,
Representative John G. Rowland.

The House seat abandoned by Mr. Morrison was won by Rosa DeLauro, 47, a Democrat
who has never held elective office, in a close contest with State Senator Thomas
Scott, 32, a conservative Republican.

Mr. Rowland's vacated seat was filled by fellow Republican Gary Frank, a
37-year-old alderman from Waterbury who beat Toby Moffett. a former Democratic
Representative, in a close race.

DELAWARE

In the "Small Wonder" state, two well-established, well-financed incumbents
faced political neophytes who were trying to take advantage of voters' feelings
against career politicians.

In the race for the United States Senate, the 47-year-old Democratic incumbent,
Joseph R. Biden, Jr., faced M. Jane Brady, a 39-year-old Republican who is chief
prosecutor for Sussex County. Ms. Brady called for Congress to be transformed
into a citizens' Legislature with a two-term limit; Mr. Biden campaigned on his
record. Delaware has only 297,000 registered voters; Democrats hold a slight
advantage.

Fighting over Delaware's single seat in the House was the three-term Democratic
incumbent, Thomas R. Carper, and Ralph O. Williams, a real estate developer. The
savings and loan crisis was a primary issue in the campaign. Mr. Carper is a
member of the House Banking Committee, and Mr. Williams is a former president of
a savings and loan association.

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

District of Columbia voters put an outsider, Sharon Pratt Dixon, into the
Mayor's seat while turning back Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s bid for electoral
redemption in the wake of his misdemeanor conviction on a drug possession
charge.

With Democrats outnumbering republicans 9 to 1, Ms. Dixon had no trouble
defeating former Police Chief Maurice T. Turner to become the first black woman
chosen to run a major city.

Mr. Barry, sentenced to six months in prison last month, ran a distant third in
his bid to take one of the two at-large seats on the City Council.

Eleanor Holmes Norton, a Democrat plagued by her failure to file local tax
returns, defeated Harry M. Singleton, a Republican, to take the job as the
District's non-voting delegate in the House.

The Rev. Jesse Jackson easily won the job as the city's "shadow senator" post to
lobby in the Senate for statehood for the city.

MAINE

The contest for gover nor was termed a race between two incum bents. And indeed,
the candidates -- Gov. John R. McKernan Jr., the Republican, and Representative
Joseph E. Brennan, the former Governor -- are well known and well financed.

Mr. Brennan excoriated his opponent in 30-second television advertisements for
his handling of the state budget.  Mr. McKernan charged that Mr. Brennan had
flip-flopped on his sup port for Maine Yankee, the state's nuclear power plant.

Senator William S. Cohen, the Republican incumbent, defeated State
Representative Neil Rolde. In the race to replace Mr. Brennan in Maine's First
Congressional District, Thomas H. Andrews, a liberal Democrat who had built one
of the strongest grass-roots organizations in the state, easily defeated David
F. Emery, a conservative Republican, who held the seat from 1975 until he
engaged in a disastrous run for the Senate in 1982 against George J. Mitchell.

Mr. Emery angered anti-abortion advocates by switching from an anti-abortion
stance to one supporting a woman's right to an abortion.

MARYLAND

The incumbent Governor, William Donald Schaefer, a 69-year-old Democrat and
ex-Mayor of Baltimore, defeated his Republican opponent, William S. Shepard, a
retired Foreign Service officer.

In the state's First Congressional District, the five-term incumbent Democrat,
Roy P. Dyson, 41, was defeated by his Republican challenger, Wayne T. Gilchrest,
a 44-year-old high school teacher who also ran against him in 1988.

Mr. Dyson had been renominated by his party despite the dislosure that he had
been a conscientious objector at the time of the Vietnam War.

Mr. Gilchrest won a Purple Heart as a Marine in Vietnam.

Mr. Gilchrest's support for abortion rights was earlier thought to have lost him
some Republican backing.

In addition, Mr. Gilchrest had more liberal positions than Mr. Dyson on some
other issues.

MASSACHUSETTS

After a duel that riveted the state's atten tion, John R. Silber, the Boston
University presi dent, who ran as the tart-tongued Democratic candidate,
conceded vic tory to his Republican opponent, William F.  Weld, the former
United States Attorney, who served in the Justice De partment in the Reagan
Administration.

Mr. Weld was helped by Dr. Silber's blunt personality, which drove many of the
state's Democratic voters to abandon their party.

Both gubernatorial candidates favored approval of Question 3, a tax rollback
referendum that would have slashed state revenue by about $1.1 billion through
cuts in various fees and taxes, but the voters defeated the proposition.

Senator John Kerry, a Democrat, managed to distance himself from Gov. Michael S.
Dukakis, whom he served as Lieutenant Governor from 1982 to 1984, and defeat the
Republican, Jim Rappaport.

Only one House member, Chester G. Atkins, a Democrat from the Fifth District,
had faced a serious threat. His opponent was State Representative John F.
MacGovern.

NEW HAMPSHIRE

Representative Robert C. Smith, widely considered the heir apparent to retiring
Republican Senator Gordon J. Humphrey, defeated former Senator John A. Durkin to
keep the Senate seat for the Republicans. This was one of three Senate seats
around the country that had been left open by retiring Republicans.

The Democrats also were not able to unseat the Republican Governor, Judd Gregg,
who easily outpaced his Democratic challenger, Joseph Grandmaison.

Pounding rain and heavy winds kept some voters away early Tuesday. There was a
close fight for Mr. Smith's First District seat, which was won by the
Republican, William Zeliff, an innkeeper who carried a jar of pennies on the
campaign trail and portrayed himself a penny-pinching tightwad.

NEW JERSEY

Senator Bill Bradley defeated Christine Todd Whitman by an unexpectedly slim
margin even though he had greatly outspent the virtually unknown Republican
candidate.

Throughout the campaign, Mrs. Whitman, a former state official, tried to link
Mr. Bradley to the $2.8 billion tax package pushed through the Legislature by
Gov. James J. Florio, a Democrat, in his first six months in office.

The new taxes triggered a taxpayer revolt that became the focus of every state,
county and local race on Tuesday. Mr. Bradley often found himself ducking
attempts to be aligned with Mr. Florio and the tax changes.

Incumbents in 12 of the 14 Congressional Districts were considered safe, but
there were tough races in the districts once held by Mr. Florio and his opponent
in last year's election for governor, Representative Jim Courter. In Mr.
Florio's former First District seat, the Democrat, Robert E. Andrews, the Camden
County Freeholder Director, won despite being criticized for his connection to
the Governor. In the 12th District, State Senator Richard Zimmer, a Republican,
outdistanced Marguerite Chandler.

New Jersey lost one Congressional seat after the 1980 census and is expected to
lose another this year.

NEW YORK

Without a Senate race this year, considerable attention focused on New York's
campaign for governor. But this was not because Mario M. Cuomo, the Democratic
incumbent, was in any kind of jeopardy of losing his bid for a third term.

Opponents for the 58-year-old Governor and Queens native were Pierre A. Rinfret,
a Republican reluctantly running on the Republican ticket, and Herbert London, a
Republican running on the Conservative Party ticket. Mr. Rinfret was trying to
stave off a third-place finish for the Republicans, which would cost the party
its prized spot on the second row of all ballots in New York for the next four
years as well as joint control with the Democrats of every County Board of
Elections in the state.

PENNSYLVANIA

In an upset, Representative Doug Walgren, a seven-term Democratic Congressman
from Pittsburgh, lost to a political neophyte, Richard Santorum, a 32-year-old
Republican lawyer who ran on an anti-incumbent theme.

Gov. Robert P. Casey, a popular Democrat and Pennsylvania's first Governor in 43
years not to raise taxes, was re-elected to a second term. His Republican
opponent, State Auditor General Barbara Hafer, failed to win much support or
money, even from within her own party in this largely Democratic state.

The race initially appeared to be referendum on abortion, with Mr. Casey
opposing almost all abortions and Mrs. Hafer supporting a woman's right to
abortion. But the issue largely faded behind more immediate concerns like
education and the economy.

Redistricting is expected to cost Pennsylvania 2 of its 23 seats in the House,
and how the political map will be redrawn depended on a handful of close races
for the State Legislature.

Ballot initiatives sought voter approval for selling bonds to build prisons and
buy equipment for firefighters and ambulance services.

RHODE ISLAND

Bruce G. Sundlun, a 70-year-old Democratic broadcasting executive, was elected
Governor, defeating the incumbent, Edward D. DiPrete, a 56-year-old Republican
in a heavily Democratic state.

Mr. Sundlun lost to Mr. DiPrete in the last two races for governor, but only by
a narrow margin in 1988.

Mr. DiPrete's popularity began a free fall that year, after his family made $2
million in a single day on a real estate transaction in Cranston, where Mr.
DiPrete had served as Mayor.

Claiborne Pell, a Democrat who has spent 39 of his 71 years in the Senate, won
another term. He defeated Claudine Schneider, a 43-year-old Republican, who gave
up her seat in the House.

The state has only two seats in the House. Ronald K. Machtley, the Republican
incumbent, defeated Scott Wolf, a Democratic political consultant. In the
contest over the seat vacated by Ms. Schneider, State Representative Jack Reed,
a Democrat, defeated Trudy Coxe, a Republican who has been involved in
environmental issues.

VERMONT

Bernard Sanders, a socialist who ran as an independent, won Vermont's only
Congressional seat, upsetting the incumbent, Peter Smith, a Republican. Mr.
Sanders, who was Mayor of Burlington from 1981 to 1989, toned down his Marxist
slogans and ran on a populist platform attacking Washington politicians.

Richard A. Snelling, the popular four-term Republican Governor from 1976 to
1984, was elected to another term. He defeated Peter F. Welch, the first
Democratic President pro tempore of the Republican-controlled State Senate.

Mr. Snelling, who is 63 years old and owns an investment business, tried to
project an image as a fiscal conservative and prudent manager. Mr. Welch, 43,
sought to undermine Mr. Snelling's campaign with negative advertising that
portrayed Mr. Snelling as a wealthy businessman out of touch with the concerns
of most Vermonters.

Governor Madeleine M. Kunin, a Democrat, did not seek re-election.

WEST VIRGINIA

Senator John D. Rockefeller 4th coasted into his second term, handily defeating
John Yoder, a lawyer from Harper's Ferry.

Mr. Rockefeller, who spent most of his first term working on unglamorous health,
transportaion and economic issues affecting the state, defused Mr. Yoder's
campaign charges that he was a "captive of special interests."

Voters in the mountains of the Second Congressional District rejected Oliver
Luck's attempt to capitalize on his fame as a quarterback at the University of
West Virginia.

He was defeated by Representative Harley O. Staggers Jr., who will return to
Washington for a fifth term in the House.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 8, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Oil Output

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section D; Page 8; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 71 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Nov. 7


Vietnam expects to produce 3.5 million metric tons of crude oil in 1991 in a
joint venture with the Soviet Union, the official Communist newspaper Nhan Dan
reported today. It said the venture, Vietsovpetro, was producing 10,000 tons of
crude a day off Vietnam's southern coast, the highest level since it began in
1986 and up from 8,500 tons earlier this year. Vietsovpetro has produced 2.2
million tons so far this year.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 8, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1990 ELECTIONS: STATE BY STATE;
Northeast

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2206 words



CONNECTICUT

 Several candidates in the state ran tight races, jockeying for position until
the final votes were counted.

Lowell P. Weicker Jr., erstwhile Senate Republican maverick, used his strong
local appeal to capture the anti-incumbent fever that swept through the
electorate and win the governorship as an independent with 40 percent of the
vote. He beat Representative John G. Rowland, the Republican nominee, and
Representative Bruce A. Morrison, the Democrat. [Page B15.]

Mr. Weicker and Walter Hickel of Alaska were the first independents elected
governor of a state since 1974.

The candidates vying to replace Mr. Morrison and Mr. Rowland also ran close
races.

Rosa DeLauro, 47 years old, a Democrat who has never held elective office, won
Mr. Morrison's seat in the Third District, defeating State Senator Thomas Scott.

Mr. Rowland's vacated seat in the Fifth District was filled by a fellow
Republican, Gary Frank, who became the first black Republican elected to a
voting position in the House of Representatives since 1935. Mr. Frank defeated
former Representative Toby Moffett, a liberal Democrat.

Democrats held on to the Legislature.

DELAWARE

 Incumbents in two major races won by 2-to-1 ratios, sweeping aside challenges
from underfinanced political newcomers who tried to exploit voters' frustration
with Washington politicians.

Joseph R. Biden Jr., who was himself a political neophyte when he first won
election to the Senate in 1972, pushed back a challenge from M. Jane Brady, a
Republican. Ms. Brady, who is chief prosecutor for Sussex County, ran on an
anti-incumbent platform, calling for a citizens' Legislature with a two-term
limit.

Delaware has only one at-large seat in the House, and the Democratic incumbent,
Thomas R. Carper, won a fourth term. He defeated Ralph O. Williams, a real
estate developer. The savings and loan crisis was a primary issue in the
campaign. Mr. Carper is a member of the House Banking Committee, and Mr.
Williams is a former president of a savings and loan association.

Republicans retained control of the State House while Democrats kept the upper
hand in the Senate.

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

 District of Columbia voters sent Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. an unambiguous
message, electing one of his leading detractors, Sharon Pratt Dixon, to replace
him as Mayor and denying him an at-large seat on the City Council. Ms. Dixon, a
utility company executive, had promised to clean out the scandal-plagued City
Hall "with a shovel, not a broom."

In the race for the city's non-voting delegate to the House, Eleanor Holmes
Norton, the former chairwoman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission,
won easily in a city where Democrats outnumber Republicans 9 to 1.

Meanwhile, the Rev. Jesse Jackson must determine what his new job of "shadow
senator" will mean in practice. The non-voting post is a lobby for the city in
the Senate.

MAINE

 It was a night of nail-biting for Gov. John R. McKernan Jr. and his wife,
Representative Olympia J. Snowe, both Republicans. Governor McKernan barely beat
Representative Joseph E. Brennan, a former Democratic Governor who sought his
old job. Representative Snowe withstood a surprisingly strong challenge by
Patrick McGowan, a Democratic state lawmaker.

Senator William S. Cohen, the Republican incumbent, defeated State
Representative Neil Rolde. In the race to replace Mr. Brennan in Maine's First
Congressional District, Thomas H. Andrews, a liberal Democrat who had built one
of the strongest grass-roots organizations in the state, crushed David F. Emery,
a conservative Republican who held the seat from 1975 until 1983.

Democrats maintained their hold on the State Legislature, and voters approved a
referendum allowing businesses to remain open on Sundays.

MARYLAND

 The incumbent Governor, William Donald Schaefer, a 69-year-old Democrat and
ex-Mayor of Baltimore, soundly defated his Republican opponent, William S.
Shepard, a retired Foreign Service officer. Mr. Schaefer got half again as many
votes as Mr. Shepard.

In the state's First Congressional District, the five-term incumbent Democrat,
Roy P. Dyson, 41, was defeated almost as solidly by his Republican challenger,
Wayne T. Gilchrest, a 44-year-old high school teacher who also ran against him
in 1988.

Mr. Dyson had been renominated by his party despite the dislosure that he had
been a conscientious objector at the time of the Vietnam War. Mr. Gilchrest won
a Purple Heart as a marine in Vietnam.

Mr. Gilchrest had more liberal positions than Mr. Dyson on some issues,
including support for abortion rights.

The Democrats retained control of the State Legislature.

MASSACHUSETTS

 After a duel that riveted the state's attention, John R. Silber, the Boston
University president who ran as the tart-tongued Democratic candidate, conceded
victory to his Republican opponent, William F. Weld, the former United States
Attorney who served in the Justice Department during the Reagan Administration.
[Page B2.]

Mr. Weld was helped by Dr. Silber's blunt personality, which drove many of the
state's overwhelmingly Democratic voters to abandon their party loyalties.

Both candidates favored approval of Question 3, a referendum that would have
slashed state budget revenues by about $1.1 billion through cuts in various fees
and taxes, but the voters defeated the proposition.

Senator John Kerry, a Democrat, struggled to distance himself from Gov. Michael
S. Dukakis, whom he served as Lieutenant Governor from 1982 to 1984. His
Republican opponent, Jim Rappaport, a millionaire real estate developer and
lawyer, emphasized Mr. Kerry's ties to the retiring Governor.

Representative Chester G. Atkins, a Democrat, won a tight re-election race in
the Fifth District against State Representative John F. MacGovern. Democrats
retained control of the Legislature, though they lost ground in both houses.

NEW HAMPSHIRE

 The Republican National Committee's strategy to recruit House members to run
for open Senate seats worked well in New Hampshire as Representative Robert C.
Smith defeated former Senator John A. Durkin. The seat was vacated by retirement
of Senator Gordon J. Humphrey, a Republican.

The race to fill Mr. Smith's First District seat was a tight one, but William
Zeliff, an Republican innkeeper who portrayed himself as a tightwad, withstood
the challenge of Joseph F. Keefe. a Democrat.

The freshman Republican Representative in the Second District, Chuck Douglas,
was upset by a 33-year-old architect, Dick Swett, who is the son-in-law of
Representative Tom Lantos of California.

The Democrats could not unseat the Republican Governor, Judd Gregg. Control of
the Legislature remains with the Republicans, as well.

NEW JERSEY

 It looked like an upset in the making but in the end Senator Bill Bradley
narrowly defeated Christine Todd Whitman, a virtually unknown Republican
candidate whom he had outspent 12 to 1. [Page B16.]

Mr. Bradley's slim victory contrasted with his 1984 race, when he won 64 percent
of the vote. The closeness of Tuesday's vote is expected to cloud Mr. Bradley's
position as a potential Presidential candidate in 1992.

Incumbents in 12 of the 14 Congressional districts were re-elected, but there
were tough races in the districts once held by Gov. James J. Florio and his
opponent in last year's election for governor, Representative Jim Courter. In
Mr. Florio's former First District seat, the Democrat, Robert E. Andrews, the
Camden County Freeholder Director, won despite being criticized for his
connection to the Governor. In the 12th District, State Senator Richard A.
Zimmer, a Republican, outdistanced Marguerite Chandler, a businesswoman.

New Jersey lost one Congressional seat after the 1980 census and is expected to
lose another this year. Democrats control the Legislature and are likely to try
to eliminate a Republican district.

NEW YORK

 Against two opponents, Gov. Mario M. Cuomo, 58 years old, easily won his bid
for a third term, though not nearly by the margin many had expected. Mr. Cuomo
mustered barely 53 percent of the nearly 3.8 million votes cast in the three-way
contest, compared with the 65 percent he won four years ago. His opponents this
time were Pierre A. Rinfret, a Republican, and Herbert London on the
Conservative Party ticket.

Mr. Rinfret garnered 22 percent of the vote, just enough ahead of Mr. London's
21 percent to keep the Republicans as the state's No. 2 party on future ballots.
[Page B13.]

Mr. Cuomo's coattails also failed to help his party gain control of the State
Senate, important for legislative and Congressional redistricting. The
Republicans maintained control of the Senate while the Democrats kept a majority
in the State Assembly. [Page B12.]

Mr. Cuomo's frequent appeals also failed to attract sufficient support to pass a
proposed $1.9 billion environment bond issue.

PENNSYLVANIA

 Representative Doug Walgren, a seven-term Democratic Congressman from
Pittsburgh, earned the distinction of being one of only a handful of incumbents
to lose this year. He lost to Richard Santorum, who was making his first run at
elective office. Mr. Santorum, a 32-year-old Republican lawyer, ran his campaign
as a grass-roots effort to unseat an incumbent who spent more time in Washington
than in Pittsburgh.

Gov. Robert P. Casey, a popular Democrat whom no seasoned Republican dared to
oppose this year, won by a landslide. He defeated State Auditor General Barbara
Hafer, a Republican with little statewide experience. Mrs. Hafer never got her
campaign rolling and never recovered from gaffes, like calling Mr. Casey a
"red-necked Irishman" in a state with a large Irish population.

Redistricting is expected to cost Pennsylvania 2 of its 23 seats in the House,
and Democrats will largely control the remapping since they increased their
control of the State House and came within a seat of splitting control of the
State Senate.

Voters approved ballot initiatives for selling bonds to build prisons and buy
equipment for firefighters and ambulance services.

RHODE ISLAND

 By a 74-to-26 percent majority, Bruce G. Sundlun, a 70-year-old Democratic
broadcasting executive, defeated the incumbent Governor, Edward D. DiPrete, a
56-year-old Republican in a heavily Democratic state.

Mr. Sundlun lost to Mr. DiPrete in 1986 and 1988.

Mr. DiPrete's approval ratings, reaching as high as 88 percent in early 1988,
plummeted amid negative publicity that year concerning his family's $2 million
profit in a single day on a real estate transaction in Cranston, where he had
served as Mayor.

Claiborne Pell, a Democrat who was first elected to the Senate in 1961, defeated
Claudine Schneider. Ms. Schneider, a 43-year-old Republican, gave up her seat in
the House to challenge Mr. Pell.

State Representative Jack Reed, a Democrat, defeated Trudy Coxe, a Republican
involved in environmental issues, to win Ms. Schneider's former seat in the
House.

VERMONT

 Bernard Sanders is the first socialist to win a seat in Congress since an East
Harlem man, Vito Marcantonio, served in the 1940's. Mr. Sanders, who ran as an
independent, beat the Republican incumbent, Peter Smith.

Mr. Sanders, who was born in Brooklyn and was Mayor of Burlington from 1981 to
1989, played down his Marxist views and led the public chorus of dissatisfaction
with incumbents, Washington and negative advertising.

Mr. Smith, who got a late start on his campaign because Federal budget delays
kept him in Washington, ran a negative advertisement late in the campaign that
political analysts say cost him more votes than it gained.

Richard A. Snelling, the popular four-term Republican Governor from 1976 to
1984, defeated Peter F. Welch, the Democratic President pro tempore of the State
Senate, in the governor's race. Mr. Snelling, who is 63 years old and owns an
investment business, projected an image as a fiscal conservative and prudent
manager. Mr. Welch, 43, sought to undermine Mr. Snelling's campaign with
negative advertising that portrayed Mr. Snelling as a wealthy businessman out of
touch with Vermonters.

Democrats lost two seats in the State House to progressive independents, which
gave Republicans a two-seat advantage; the Democrats also lost one seat in the
State Senate, splitting control of that body.

WEST VIRGINIA

 The 1990 election left West Virginia much as it found it: a land of
wall-to-wall Democrats. The predominant party held on to everything from the
Legislature to the Senate seat of John D. Rockefeller 4th.

Senator Rockefeller had no trouble defeating John Yoder, a Harper's Ferry lawyer
who had no success in portraying Mr. Rockefeller as a "captive of special
interests."

Oliver Luck, a Republican lawyer, hoped to provide a little electoral variety,
figuring that perhaps his fame as a quarterback at West Virginia University
would help him defeat Representative Harley O. Staggers Jr., a four-term
Congressman, in the mountainous Second District. But the seat that has been
either Mr. Staggers's or his father's for all but two years in the past
half-century will stay in the Staggers family.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphic: "Poll of Voters in Massachusetts" - total percent of 1990 poll
voters in Massachusetts for Silber and Weld.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 9, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
BUSH SENDS NEW UNITS TO GULF TO PROVIDE 'OFFENSIVE OPTION'; U.S. FORCE COULD
REACH 380,000

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1764 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 8


President Bush today ordered more than 150,000 additional American ground, sea
and air forces to the Persian Gulf area, saying they were needed to provide "an
adequate offensive military option" to drive Iraqi troops from Kuwait.

The move would nearly double the size of the American land and naval combat
units in the area and give the United States a numerical advantage over Iraq in
the most up-to-date tanks.

In making his announcement, Mr. Bush said the reinforcements were intended to
increase pressure on President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to withdraw his troops
from Kuwait, and to lay the foundation for an American attack should he continue
to refuse.

The Military Option

"I have today directed the Secretary of Defense to increase the size of U.S.
forces committed to Desert Shield to insure that the coalition has an adequate
offensive military option, should that be necessary to achieve our common
goals," Mr. Bush said at a White House news conference. [Excerpts, page A12.]

"I think Saddam Hussein should fully without condition comply to the U.N.
resolutions. And if this movement of force is what convinces him, so much the
better," he said.

Before President Bush spoke, Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the
Soviet Union delivered Moscow's most explicit warning yet to Iraq, saying today
in Moscow that the use of force to end the Persian Gulf crisis ould not be ruled
out if diplomatic means fail. [Page A13.]

380,000 by Early Next Year

The Pentagon declined to say exactly how many additional troops were being sent,
but one Administration official estimated that the additional reinforcements
would number more than 150,000. That would bring the total American force in the
gulf region to about 380,000 by early next year.

Mr. Bush said he did not need United Nations approval to launch a military
action against Iraq, but he indicated the Administration would seek out that
support.

"Yes, we have the authority but we've been great believers in going to the
United Nations," Mr. Bush said in a question-and-answer session after his
announcement. Virtually all of Washington's partners in the anti-Iraqi coalition
have said that any military action should be undertaken under the umbrella of a
Security Council resolution.

The Security Council has adopted 10 resolutions against Iraq since Mr. Hussein's
forces invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2. One of the earliest measures, now three months
old, provided for a comprehensive trade embargo and the blocking of all Iraqi
assets abroad.

Mr. Bush refused to say when force might be used, but he indicated agreement
with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, who said on Wednesday in an interview
that two to three months more should be given to allow the sanctions against
Iraq to work. If the sanctions fail, Mr. Mubarak said, war would be inevitable.

The new reinforcements mark the largest military deployment since the Vietnam
War, in which American troops stationed in Vietnam reached a peak of 543,000,
excluding naval forces offshore. The deployment is also large by NATO standards,
roughly equivalent in number to the American forces stationed in Western Europe
during the cold war.

3 Aircraft Carriers

The additional forces -- which include three and one-third Army divisions, three
aircraft carriers, another battleship, a large Marine expeditionary force of
more than 30,000 men and more Air Force units -- would join more than 230,000
American soldiers, Marines, sailors and airmen in the region.

Although Administration officials previously outlined plans to send additional
forces to the gulf area, saying two weeks ago that as many as 100,000 more
troops might be sent, the decision today involves more troops and more armored
units than expected. It is also the first time that Mr. Bush has explicitly
threatened to to take offensive action against Iraq.

The decision appears to have the dual purpose of escalating the pressure on Mr.
Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait and increasing military forces in the region to
a level at which an attack against Iraqi troops would be more feasible.

1,200 More M-1 Tanks

The Army divisions being sent will add more than 1,200 modern M-1 tanks to about
800 American tanks already deployed in Saudi Arabia. The new tank deployments
would give the United States an advantage in the number of top-of-the-line
battle tanks, although Iraq, which has thousands of old tanks, would still have
an overall advantage in tanks.

The three aircraft carriers that are being sent will bring the total number of
carriers in the region to six. The Navy has a total of 14 aircraft carriers.

Mr. Bush has also ordered that an additional battleship, the Missouri, join the
Wisconsin in the Persian Gulf. With their 16-inch guns and land-attack cruise
missiles, the battleships will figure significantly in the impressive American
firepower in the region.

"There will probably be additional Air Force units also," said Mr. Cheney,
adding that the precise units to be sent have not been determined. The United
States has already stationed about 500 Air Force and Marine bombers, antitank
aircraft and fighters in Saudi Arabia and other gulf nations, including a
squadron of F-117 Stealth fighters, several dozen F-111F bombers in Saudi Arabia
and about 20 B-52 bombers on the Indian Ocean island of Diego Garcia.

Rivaling Cold War Numbers

With the dispatch of the additional divisions, the United States will have about
as many troops in the Persian Gulf as it maintained in Europe for about 40 years
to oppose the Soviet military. Even with the warming in American and Soviet
relations the United States kept some 305,000 Army and Air Force troops in
Europe.

General Colin L. Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said at the news
conference that two and a third of the Army's four and a third divisions in
Western Europe were being sent to Saudi Arabia.

The decision to send large reinforcements to the region suggests that the Bush
Administration wants to leave a credible threat that it will force a resolution
of the crisis, either by coercing President Hussein to withdraw his troops from
Kuwait or by launching an attack with its allies to do so.

President Bush asserted that the United States is receiving strong support from
Western European, Arab and other members of the anti-Iraqi coaltion. Iraq has
sought to divide the coalition, by releasing French and German hostages, for
example, and some specialists question how long the alliance can hold.

Waiting for Cool Weather

Some military specialists say that if President Bush wants to use military force
it would be preferable to begin in the cooler winter months, before the Muslim
holy visits to Mecca in the spring. Defense Secretary Dick Cheney declined to
say what role weather or political considerations played in the decision to send
large reinforcements now instead of waiting to see if the economic sanctions
work.

No Upper Limit Yet

Mr. Cheney declined to rule out sending still more troops, saying that no upper
limit had been set on American deployment in the gulf. He said Congressional
leaders had been notified of the additional reinforcements today before the
announcement. Congress has insisted that it be consulted before force is used in
the gulf, but the Administration did not seek to explain the scope of its
planned reinforcement before lawmakers adjourned late last month.

While military officials say that a buildup would be needed to win a decisive
victory and to limit American casualties in the event of war, some specialists
said the new deployment would increase the risk of war.

"It is too big a force to sit on," said Thomas McNaugher, a military specialist
at the Brookings Institution, suggesting that the United States would be
unlikely to tie down such a force for a lengthy period.

The Administration's decision to continue the American buildup follows Iraq's
move to expand its force in southern Iraq and Kuwait to some 430,000 and build
elaborate fortications along the coast of Kuwait and the Saudi border.

In addition to more than 230,000 American forces deployed in the region, allies
of the United States have stationed well over 100,000 troops in the area, and
more forces, including an Egyptian armored division and a Syrian armored
division are being sent.

The deployment of the three and a third Army divisions -- two and a third
divisions from Germany and one from Fort Riley, Kansas -- is a major addition to
United States armored capabilities in Saudi Arabia. Army figures show that the
new units collectively have about 1,240 M-1 tanks, 750 of them new M1-A1 tanks,
which have better guns and protection against chemical and biological attack.

The American expeditionary force currently has about 800 tanks. This includes
about 700 Army M-1 tanks, some 150 of which are M1-A1 models, and 120 Marine
M-60 tanks.

Mr. Cheney said the decision to add more forces was based in part on the
assessment by the commander of American forces in the gulf region, Gen. H.
Norman Schwarzkopf, of what would be needed to launch an offensive against Iraqi
troops.

"The additional military capability that's now being added clearly will give us
the ability to conduct offensive military operations, should that be required in
the months ahead," Mr. Cheney said. He said it would be early next year before
all of the forces activated today were sent to the Persian Gulf and were
combat-ready.

The Pentagon is considering a plan to rotate fresh troops into the gulf region
every six to eight months, but Mr. Cheney said a final decision had not yet been
made on the policy. The 82d Airborne, which was deployed early in the conflict
to get troops on the ground in a hurry, is expected to return to the United
States so that the Army will have a quick reaction force for other possible
crises and so the unit can continue its training. No announcement was made about
the future of the 82d Airborne today.

In addition to adding more active-duty forces, Mr. Cheney also called up the
first Army combat reserve units, about 15,000 men. The Marine Corps has
mobilized about 700 reservists this week for combat roles. Three Army National
Guard brigades from Georgia, Mississippi and Louisiana were called up and will
be sent to train for several weeks at the Army Training Center in Fort Irwin,
Calif.

Once the units have completed their training, Mr. Cheney said, the Pentagon will
decide if they are ready enough to be sent to join front-line troops in Saudi
Arabia.

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphic: "The Buildup: U.S. Strength in the Gulf" - shows the number of
troops in the Army, Marines, Navy, Air Force, and Army National Guard. (source:
Defense Department) (pg. A1); Photo: President Bush responding yesterday to a
question at his news conference at the White House. With him was Defense
Secretary Dick Cheney. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times) (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 9, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Prior Restraints and Right to Counsel Entangle Noriega Legal Case

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 689 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 8


If criminal charges against Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega are ultimately
dismissed, as his lawyers say they will demand in light of today's developments,
that determination will almost certainly be based not on the Cable News
Network's broadcasting excerpts from jailhouse tape recordings, but the tapes'
existence in the first place.

Arguments by the general's lawyers that the broadcasting of the tapes threatened
his right to a fair trial are fairly weak, in light of abundant legal precedents
holding that it is possible to find an impartial jury to try almost anyone, no
matter how notorious the defendant or highly publicized the case.

But courts take very seriously a criminal defendant's ability to consult with
his lawyer without interference by the Government, a right grounded in the Sixth
Amendment, which provides that the accused shall have the assistance of counsel
for his defense.

Central facts about what actually occurred at the Metropolitan Correctional
Center outside Miami are a matter of sharp dispute.

The Justice Department denied today that it had engaged in any improper taping
of or eavesdropping on telephone conversations between Mr. Noriega and his
lawyers.

Frank A. Rubino, a lawyer for Mr. Noriega, said he was "shocked and horrified"
by the existence of the tapes, which CNN asserted it had obtained from a person
whom it did not identified.

In Miami, Federal District Judge William M. Hoeveler, who has been handling the
Noriega case, has called for a Federal investigation into the matter and barred
the network from further broadcasts of the tapes. The network has appealed the
order as an unconstitutional prior restraint in violation of its rights under
the First Amendment.

Pentagon Papers Case Cited

Prior restraints of this type have rarely been imposed in the American judicial
system and are almost always overturned on appeal, even when assertions of
national security interests are made by the Government, as in the Pentagon
papers case in 1971. In that case the Supreme Court ruled that the Government
had not met the "heavy burden of showing justification" for blocking publication
of a documentary history of the United States' involvement in the Vietnam War.

Last month a state appeals court in New York overturned a restraining order that
a state trial judge had issued at the request of the Israeli Government to block
distribution of a book about the Israeli intelligence service, the Mossad. The
appeals court cited the "heavy presumption" against restraints on publication.

The case for prior restraint is perhaps at its weakest when the asserted
interest at stake is not that of national security, but of a criminal
defendant's right to a fair trial. The leading Supreme Court precedent on prior
restraints in the fair-trial context is a 1976 opinion by former Chief Justice
Warren E. Burger in Nebraska Press Association v. Stuart.

In that case, the Court overturned an order that had been issued by a Nebraska
trial judge barring the press from reporting on a preliminary hearing in a mass
murder case until the jury was chosen. The purpose of the trial judge's order
was to insure that an impartial jury could be found.

Other Means of Protection

Former Chief Justice Burger said "prior restraints on speech and publication are
the most serious and the least tolerable infringement on First Amendment
rights." He suggested that judges find other means to protect defendants'
rights.

Courts use careful questioning of prospective jurors or, less often, changes in
the location of the trial in an effort to screen out the effect of pretrial
publicity.

But courts have not seen equivalent ways to compensate for damage to a
defendant's case that can come from violations of the attorney-client privilege.

Until questions are answered about what is on the tapes that CNN says it has,
and how the tapes were made and obtained, there is no way to assess whether Mr.
Noriega's right to consult privately with his lawyers might have been
compromised to such a degree that the case against him cannot proceed without
violating the Constitution.

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Veterans of Both Sides Gather to Mark Holiday

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Veterans of Soviet and American wars gathered yesterday to share
their common experiences and mark the beginning of Veterans Day weekend at a
Brooklyn veterans' hospital. Such exchanges blossomed as the Cold War slipped
away. Sergei Litvinov, who served in Afghanistan, showed photographs of his wife
and children to Angel Rojas, center, and George Lorenzo, who served in Vietnam.
(Nancy Siesel for The New York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Murree Journal;
Hill Station Thrives, a Piece of Time Gone By

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 900 words

DATELINE: MURREE, Pakistan


In the days of the British raj, when the white-hot sun of the subcontinent's
summer drained colonial administrators of energy and patience, and stifling
nights under mosquito nets robbed them of sleep, the empire was saved by the
hill stations.

From the Hindu Kush to the South China Sea, the hills of Asia were dotted with
them: small European-style country towns with chalets, lodges, churches,
boarding schools, libraries, tea rooms, shops and the obligatory promenade for
taking in the bracing mountain air, scented with pine.

The concept was not limited to the British. The French in Vietnam had Dalat, and
the Dutch in Indonesia cooled themselves in Bogor. There was also Baguio in the
Philippines. In the days before air conditioning, vaccines and wonder drugs, the
hill stations were considered necessary havens of health and restoration.

Fell Into Disuse

With the nd of colonialism in Asia, the hill stations almost everywhere went
into decline. Buildings became dilapidated and wooded hillsides were stripped
and eroded. Though still valued for their mountain scenery and refreshing air,
most hill stations were no longer the fashionable resorts of the past.

Murree (pronounced MUH-ree) is proving to be the exception. It is riding a
tourist boom that can only get better. A luxury mountain lodge is under
construction by Pakistan's Pearl Continental chain in nearby Bhurban, the only
new hotel of its class to be built in any subcontinent hill station in more than
half a century.

The large lodge, designed to nestle into a mountainside, will overlook the snowy
peaks of Kashmir and the Karakorams. Local tourism officials hope it will
further enhance the town as a year-round resort.

In a tourist information center along the Mall Road, a young man wrapped in
woolens was doing a modest business in maps of Murree's labyrinth of hillside
hiking trails.

"There is no single tourist season anymore like in the old days," he said.
"People come here all year, even in the snow. And with the new hotels coming up,
we think there will be thousands more."

Hotel Makes a Comeback

Murree's once-grand Cecil Hotel, which had sunk into bleak austerity, is
beginning to spruce up -- to judge from an imposing new front door and polished
brass in the front parlor.

The government of Punjab province, in which Murree is situated, has contributed
to the boom by building chairlifts and first-class roads into the hills, the
latter with guardrails -- tourist attactions in themselves in a part of the
world where buses, trucks and cars regularly plunge into ravines or tumble into
valleys.

In colonial days, come about April, the administrations of entire provinces
decamped to the hill stations.

When the most famous one of them all was built at Simla, in the foothills of the
Himalayas in what is now the Indian state of Himachal Pradesh, the whole
entourage of the Viceroy of British India plodded upward, first on elephants and
in later years by train or car. The ball gowns, porcelain and silver went along.
Judging by diaries of the time, only inhibitions were left on the plains.

Murree, at an altitude of 7,400 feet, began to develop in 1851 on an expanse of
mountain pastureland to serve the administrators of the Punjab, then a unified
territory the British annexed in 1849. Murree was Punjab's summer capital until
1876, when offices moved to Simla. Punjab is now two states of the same name,
one on each side of the Indian-Pakistani border.

Proximity to Duller Places

Part of Murree's attraction then and now is its proximity to Rawalpindi, a
commercial center and military headquarters for first the British and then
Pakistan. In the mid-19th century, the trip to Murree from Rawalpindi could be
made in less than a day in a horse-drawn carriage. It takes little more than an
hour and a half now, with the distant promise of a helicopter service one day
that will reduce travel time to minutes.

Another catalyst in Murree's resurgence was the siting of Islamabad, Pakistan's
new capital, about 30 miles to the southeast. Islamabad is having a boom of its
own, as rich Pakistanis from the troubled and increasingly violent city of
Karachi, and similarly wealthy Afghan refugees, buy houses and open businesses.

A planned city that took a long time to begin to develop a personality,
Islamabad is now pleasantly green with spacious avenues, some fashionable shops
and, lately, a new crop of restaurants. But there isn't much entertainment in
this Islamic capital.

That's where a weekend in Murree comes in. The hill lures expensively dressed
Pakistanis and diplomats' families, who also visit other nearby resorts known as
the Galis.

Boutiques and a Brewery

On the Mall Road, which runs through Murree from Kashmir Point to Pindi Point,
young people in Western-style clothes idle away hours in coffee houses and
restaurants, or browse in boutiques offering woolens from Kashmir and consumer
gadgets from China.

In its heyday, Murree was known across the subcontinent for its beer and whisky.
The ruins of the Murree Brewery's original stone buildings cling to a hillside,
a victim of the havoc that surrounded the birth of Islamic Pakistan.

Incredibly, the brewery survived, and now bottles its product, officially for
non-Muslims, in Rawalpindi. Old-fashioned Murree beer, like old-fashioned
Murree, is still part of the landscape.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A peddler selling shawls in the garden of the Cecil Hotel in
Murree, Pakistan, which, unlike most hill stations in Asia, is riding a tourist
boom. The once-grand hotel is beginning to be spruced up. (arbara Crossette/The
New York Times); Map of Pakistan showing location of Murree.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Denouncing the China Hands

BYLINE: By Marilyn B. Young; Marilyn B. Young, who teaches Asian history at New
York University, is the author of the forthcoming book "The Vietnam Wars:
1945-1990."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 63; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1122 words



CHINA MISPERCEIVED
American Illusions and Chinese Reality.
By Steven W. Mosher.
260 pp. New York:
A New Republic Book/Basic Books. $19.95.

THIS is an account of endless error by China scholars, occasionally relieved by
the insight of a handful of commentators who have never lost track of Communist
China's totalitarian essence. Steven W. Mosher's distaste for both the Chinese
Government and the field of Chinese studies in the United States may derive from
his own direct experience with both. In 1979 he was among the first American
scholars to receive permission to do field research in rural China, and
according to the Chinese Government his behavior there endangered future
scholarly exchanges. In 1983 he was expelled from the Stanford University
department of anthropology after a lengthy investigation charged him with
"illegal and seriously unethical conduct" while he was in China. The full
charges have never been made public. In his previous books, "Broken Earth" and
"Journey to the Forbidden China," Mr. Mosher offered a detailed indictment of
the Chinese revolution; in "China Misperceived" he directs his attention to the
field of China studies.

In this polemical survey of several generations of China watchers, the heroes
understand that from 1949 to the present China has been in the grip of a
tyrannical, unchanging Communist regime. The villains, one deduces, imagine that
there have been changes in China over the past 41 years and that more complex
analysis is required than the concept of totalitarianism will allow.

"How come these same Chinese could be such bad guys in the 1950's," John King
Fairbank wrote in a 1972 New York Review of Books essay, "and such good guys
today?" The question is at the heart of Mr. Mosher's book. Mr. Fairbank's answer
was that at "any given time the 'truth' about China is in our heads, a
notoriously unsafe repository for so valuable a commodity." Mr. Mosher's is that
the public has been badly served by generations of American journalists,
scholars and politicians "whose past portraits [of China] often have been
misleading, self-serving, even false."

The difference in perspective between Mr. Fairbank and Mr. Mosher reflects the
difference in their understandings of the historical process and the process of
writing history. For Mr. Fairbank both the observer and the observed change over
time, and -- as he wryly notes in his memoir, "Chinabound" -- the "only way to
be a friend of China for keeps is to die at the right moment." For Mr. Mosher,
there are fundamental truths about China that Mr. Fairbank and others strive to
hide from view.

I focus on Mr. Fairbank because, as the founder of the field of modern Chinese
studies in the United States, he is not only a prominent target in this book but
also the friend or teacher of a substantial number of the scholars and
journalists Mr. Mosher discusses. He was, as well, my thesis adviser some 30
years ago, and having attacked him for being soft on American imperialism, I was
surprised to learn from Mr. Mosher's book that Mr. Fairbank was a "Maoist" all
along. Mr. Mosher's crude rendering of Mr. Fairbank's agnostic and ironic
appreciation of Chinese complexities tells us more about the author's
antipathies than about either Chinese realities or American illusions.

Oddly for the work of an anthropologist, "China Misperceived" is quite innocent
of ethnographic insight or even curiosity. Indeed, the impression Mr. Mosher
gives is that field experience in a country does not count for much. He suggests
that Whittaker Chambers, sitting in New York rewriting dispatches from China for
Time magazine, knew more about the country than staff reporters who were there
because he knew more about Communism. A brief chapter called "Past Images of
China: From Marco Polo to Mao Zedong" offers a simple typology ("admiration,"
"contempt," "benevolence") rather than an analysis. Mr. Mosher seems unaware of
recent scholarship on the history of Chinese-American relations, such as Michael
Hunt's demystifying study, "The Making of a Special Relationship." In the hands
of a more disinterested scholar, the romance of young American China scholars in
the 1960's with China's revolutionary politics (like that of young Chinese
scholars with the American free market) might have told us much about both
societies. Instead, Mr. Mosher's energy is focused entirely on denunciation.

He insists in his introduction that "an informed account of American perceptions
and misperceptions of postrevolutionary China is essential to an understanding .
. . of China." But logically, such an account can get us closer only to an
understanding of American perceptions and misperceptions. China is something
else again. In any event, Mr. Mosher seems as disturbed by an insufficiently
robust use of adjectives as by outright error. Theodore H. White's description
of Chinese academics after the Cultural Revolution as "lobotomized" is dismissed
as "lame ambivalence."

MR. MOSHER, moreover, fails altogether to discuss White's 1968 script for the
film documentary "The Roots of Madness," an unambivalent criticism of Mao's
China. Nor does Carl Riskin's judicious and meticulously researched "China's
Political Economy," published in 1987, merit even a footnote. Instead, Mr.
Mosher quotes from a Riskin essay written in 1971. A comparison of essay and
book would have been an interesting way to chart the evolution of one scholar's
thinking on Maoist economic strategies, but Mr. Mosher does not appear to be
aware of the book.

Mr. Mosher wants his China hands not to criticize but to repudiate their
subject. However, his rejection of any model for understanding China other than
Communist totalitarianism has some advantages: he is as suspicious of Deng
Xiaoping's reforms as any nostalgic Maoist, and he has as little patience for
United States officials who woo China's leaders (from Richard Nixon and Henry
Kissinger through George Bush) as he does for the scholars and journalists whose
advice they sometimes seek. For his part, Mr. Mosher seems to believe in the
possibility of a direct link to the Chinese people, over the heads of the
American Government and American scholars. We understand China "better today,"
he writes, because the Chinese people "have begun speaking to us directly about
their aspirations for democracy, economic freedom, and human rights."

Yet the notion that a direct, unmediated understanding of so complicated a
subject is possible does not inspire confidence. All our perceptions of China
are perforce limited, partial, biased by our cultural and political
perspectives. Mr. Mosher's embrace of a single "truth" about China is just
another American illusion.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CHILDREN'S BOOKS;
Why Were We in Vietnam, Daddy?

BYLINE: By Walter Dean Myers; Walter Dean Myers is the author of 30 books for
young people, including "Fallen Angels," a novel of Vietnam.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 48; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1152 words



VIETNAM
A War on Two Fronts.
By Sidney Lens.
Illustrated. 115 pp. New York:
Lodestar Books. $15.95.
(Ages 12 and up)

VIETNAM
Why We Fought: An Illustrated History.
By Dorothy Hoobler and Thomas Hoobler.
196 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $17.95.
(Ages 12 and up)

PORTRAIT OF A TRAGEDY
America and the Vietnam War.
By James A. Warren.
Foreword by Harry G. Summers Jr.
Illustrated. 206 pp. New York:
Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Books. $17.95.
(Ages 10 and up)

THE WALL
By Eve Bunting.
Illustrated by Ronald Himler.
Unpaged. New York:
Clarion. $13.95. (Ages 4 to 8)

WHEN wars are won, the victors celebrate their bravery, the cleverness of their
strategy and the rightness of their cause or causes. Losers are reduced to
explaining why they lost. We often romanticize our wars, ignoring greater
tragedies for illusory victories.

Americans are not very good at teaching about war. These books for young people
about the involvement of the United States in Vietnam, offering to tell us why
we were involved and why we lost, promise much. Their purpose is good, because
if there is such a thing as a lasting peace it will begin as an irresistible
idea in the minds of children. Unfortunately, promises are not always kept, and
explaining about Vietnam poses a particularly difficult task.

In "Vietnam: A War on Two Fronts," Sidney Lens has written a book that one would
expect from a former co-chairman of the New Mobilization Committees to End the
War in Vietnam. Lens, who died in 1986, was an activist against the war, and
here he offers a new generation a justification of his position back then. He
dutifully outlines what he sees as the narrowness of the Americans and the
nobility of the North Vietnamese. In at least three instances he compares the
Vietnamese to the rebel colonists of 1776. His book is more an apologia for the
antiwar movement in the United States than a study of the Vietnam War.

In "Vietnam: Why We Fought," Dorothy and Thomas Hoobler, who have written many
nonfiction books for children and young adults, begin with a history of Vietnam.
They explore the country's struggles against domination, first by the Chinese,
then by the Japanese and the French. According to the Hooblers, the United
States' involvement was motivated primarily by the unreasoned fear of Communism
ignited by the witch hunts of Senator Joseph McCarthy. There was no clear answer
to the question of why we were in the war because, they say, "there was no real
debate over the wisdom of fighting in Vietnam." The war itself is depicted as a
bungling United States Army fighting against a determined, clever and noble
Vietcong force. Pictures of wounded Vietnamese children are interspersed with
pictures of heavily armed American soldiers. The pictures of the Vietcong are
all heroic.

The message in both of these books is that the United States was evil, the
Vietnamese were good and therefore the Vietnamese won the war despite our
massive power. But are we really to believe that the millions of Americans and
South Vietnamese who fought in Vietnam, and the millions who supported them for
so many years, were as completely lacking in good intentions as these books
indicate? And what critical thinking skills are needed for young people today to
determine that they and their country should not pursue evil policies? Are the
reasons for war ever so simple? Over 58,000 young Americans died in combat in
Vietnam. The Vietnamese losses, among soldiers and civilians, may have have
reached the millions. All of the participants, Americans and Vietnamese, deserve
more than the easy answers offered by Lens and the Hooblers.

"Portrait of a Tragedy: America and the Vietnam War" by James A. Warren, an
editor who has worked on books for children and adults, introduces other
elements. The foreword by Harry G. Summers Jr., a retired Infantry colonel,
raises the issue of the true length of the war. Any single definition of the
character of a war that lasted 24 years has to be a distortion. The first
military advisers went to Vietnam in 1950. The United States, and indeed the
world, were very different in 1950 from what they were in 1968, the year of the
Tet offensive, and certainly from what they were in April 1975, when the last
American helicopter left Saigon.

Uncertain of our role as defender of the free world, Mr. Warren argues, we
engaged in the problems of the Far East reluctantly. In the early 50's the
United States gave monetary support to the French. When their colonial regime
ended we began to send advisers and technical support. By 1964 the cold war had
peaked and a confrontation with the Soviet Union was a real possibility. In
large part, he argues, the United States' decision to send troops to Vietnam was
seen as the least risky response to the Soviet probing of American political
resolve. It was a position that most Americans agreed with at the time. The
costs of that decision, and our right to make it, are rightfully the subject of
debate.

Mr. Warren briefly discusses the Rules of Engagement, the self-imposed
limitations that the United States adopted in conducting the war. These
strategic constraints on "how allied forces could fight the enemy" were designed
to prevent the war from escalating into a confrontation with China or Russia.
But, according to Mr. Warren, they limited the effectiveness of the allied South
Vietnamese and American forces, although they also avoided war on a much larger
scale. Another major reason that the American effort to support the South
Vietnamese failed was that the North Vietnamese, backed by the Soviet Union and
China, were willing to sacrifice hundreds of thousands of their soldiers to oust
the Americans.

By 1967, as Mr. Warren points out, quoting from the eminent historian Henry
Steele Commager, Americans did "not have the resources -- material,
intellectual, or moral -- to be at once an American power, a European power, and
an Asian power."

Thus, Mr. Warren raises the serious issues of the war. What was the place of
national loyalty among the protesters? What was America's changing role in the
world? What should be the balance between national interests and national
morality? He is clearly more sympathetic to the American military cause than
either the Hooblers or Sidney Lens, but he engages the questions with concerned
intelligence and with a fair-mindedness that the other books don't have.

"The Wall," by Eve Bunting, with its softly colored illustrations by Ronald
Himler, does not explain the war; it discusses our loss. It is a gentle book,
filled with feeling and sympathy for those who served in Vietnam and for those
who still feel their pain. A storybook about a visit to the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial in Washington for very young children, it reminds adults of how
necessary it is to understand what happened, so that it will not happen again.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Days and Nights in Baghdad.

BYLINE: By John F. Burns; John F. Burns, the Toronto bureau chief for The New
York Times, is on assignment in the Middle East.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 54; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4670 words


Sept. 27. My first appointment in Baghdad is at the Ministry of Information and
Culture, a blocklike building in the steel and concrete heart of the Iraqi
capital. While I wait in a deserted lobby under heavy-lidded portraits of Saddam
Hussein, groups of uniformed officials hurry by. Some carry AK-47 rifles, others
.45-caliber pistols. They are volunteers for the Popular Army, the militia
assigned to bolster front-line forces in Kuwait.

For now, the men remain at civilian jobs, bureaucrats at what some Western
reporters have sardonically nicknamed the Ministry of Truth. Here, reporters'
visas are approved and extended, arrangements are made for interviews and
visits, and our official "minders" are designated. A year ago, Farzad Bazoft, a
reporter for The Observer of London, started his assignment here. Soon
afterward, he was arrested for spying. On March 15, he was hanged.

The Information Minister, Latif Nassif al-Jassem, is a close associate of
President Hussein's, and they share a menacing way with words. A few days
earlier, news agencies quoted the minister as saying that if war broke out,
American airmen shot down over Iraq would be eaten. Later, this account was
clarified. What al-Jassem intended to say, officials explained, was that the
Americans would be eaten by dogs, not by humans.

Heavy-handed officials refer frequently to the executed reporter, asking
newcomers who are judged too assertive if they are grooming themselves to be
"the new Mr. Bazoft." The simplest initiatives can suddenly turn bizarre, as I
learn when I am summoned upstairs to present my "program."

A British-educated official, Sadoun al-Janabi, reviews my list of nine
proposals, starting with a request for an interview with Hussein.

"Impossible!" al-Janabi bellows, seizing a red ballpoint and striking the
proposal with a large X.

Swiftly, seven other items have been eliminated, each with a schoolmaster's X. A
visit to Kuwait? "Ridiculous!" So is a discussion with front-line troops. The
only item left is a request for "visits to other places of interest outside
Baghdad."

"Like Falluja?" al-Janabi asks, citing a town some 35 miles west of Baghdad. A
week earlier, a Reuters correspondent visited Falluja and wrote about a
strategic bridge.

"Falluja would be interesting," I say.

"Why?" he asks.

"Well, for the bazaar," I reply.

"And the bridge, do you want to see the bridge?" he asks.

"Well, yes," I say, "the bridge would be fine."

"Ah, ha!" he says. "Is this what you call journalism? This is not journalism!
This is something else!"

Laughing hard, he strikes the final item from my list.


Sept. 28. In the morning, things are looking up. Along with other reporters, I
have been invited on a trip to Basra, Iraq's second-largest city, and to the
battlefield at Fao, where Hussein's army lost 53,000 men in the fiercest
fighting of the Iran-Iraq war. We are eager for a chance, no matter how
fleeting, to talk to ordinary Iraqis and find out how they feel about the
prospect of a new war, over Kuwait. But once in Fao, and in Basra's central
bazaar, our guides discourage such contacts, pushing us along whenever
conversations start.

Our minders appear to feel most at ease when the landscape is devoid of people.
For this, their choice in Basra is the promenade along the Shatt al Arab
waterway, where 94 nearly identical statues stand, right arms pointing
accusingly toward Iran.

Our bus halts for a long interval. The statues, of artillery captains, tank
commanders and fighter pilots "martyred" in the war, are less inspirational than
sad. By any measure, except apparently Hussein's, these men died in vain. When
the Iraqi leader started the war against Iran in 1980, his goal was to take
total control of the Shatt, Iraq's only waterway to the Persian Gulf. When the
conflict ended in 1988, after as many as 500,000 Iraqi deaths, Iranian troops
were still dug in on the waterway's eastern shore. And the marginal gains Iraq
made elsewhere were surrendered at the beginning of the Kuwait crisis when
Hussein announced his acceptance of Iran's terms for peace.


Sept. 29. My minder, Mazin Sahib, is a 30-year-old "journalist" who was a
machine gunner in the Iran-Iraq war, a bitter experience that has done nothing
to erode his uncompromising loyalty to Saddam Hussein. Today, moving slowly down
Al-Rashid Street in Baghdad's oldest section, we pass a statue of a young man
holding a gun under a blanket on his arm. On Oct. 7, 1959, Abu al-Wahab
al-Karary, Saddam Hussein and five others jumped from motorcycles on this spot
and emptied their submachine guns into the Cadillac carrying President Abdul
Karim Kassem.

Kassem survived, only to die in a coup in 1963. Al-Karary was killed at the
scene, but Hussein and the other conspirators escaped. Several years ago,
Hussein erected the statue. According to the inscription on its base, President
Kassem had become "a snake's head," executing Iraqis in large numbers, for no
purpose other than to sustain his own rule.

On this Saturday afternoon, nobody pays much attention to the statue. Business
is brisk at the hairdresser's shop and haberdashery across the street. Elderly
Kurds in baggy trousers push hand carts loaded with goods for the souk. I
wonder, how many young Iraqis who pass the memorial harbor grievances against
Hussein's repressions, or ambitions of their own?

If the memorial seems to me like an incitement to assassination, I keep my
thoughts from Sahib. For him, it seems, there is nothing but reverence in this
place, nothing to suggest that history has its punishments for rulers who abuse
their power.


Sept. 30. An American diplomat drives me through Karada, one of Baghdad's
diplomatic districts, to a heavily guarded house. Here, behind a high wall with
cascading blossoms, 23 of Saddam Hussein's 1,000 American hostages have found a
safe haven for the moment. For them, being "guests" of the Iraqi ruler has its
less threatening aspects, since they pass their enforced idleness lazing by a
swimming pool, watching American movies on videotape and preparing generous
meals. Although some Americans have been seized on Baghdad streets to serve as
"special guests," and deployed as human shields at military bases and other
strategic sites, the residents of the Karada house continue to make forays into
the city to shop for food, to jog, even to attend parties held by other hostage
groups.

In a dining room doing double duty as a bunkhouse, I chat for two hours with Tom
Graham, one of the few of the men still willing to talk with reporters. Like the
others here, he is an employee of the Bechtel Corporation, the California-based
engineering conglomerate. Many of the men are angry about previous Western press
reports, which they feel have attracted unwanted attention to them. Some look
crossly at Graham as we begin our talk.

Graham is 40 years old and a Vietnam-era veteran of the Army Medical Corps. He
is vague about what he was doing in Baghdad for Bechtel, whose business here
involves contracts with the Ministry of Industry and Military Manufacture, which
has close ties to the army and secret police. But he claims that his "unease"
with the company's activities in Iraq had led him to seek reassignment even
before Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.

Self-reproach for having worked in Iraq is common among American and European
hostages I talked to in Baghdad. Many now say they were lured to Iraq by
handsome salaries, and paid scant attention to the Government's disregard for
human rights. "There is a propensity in this situation to blame anybody but
yourself," Graham says. "But we are jointly liable."

Now Graham writes poetry, plays solitaire and, when he can find a quiet room and
close the door, practices his guitar. He also daydreams about getting out of
Iraq, conjuring up escape schemes that feature Hovercraft zooming up the Tigris
River, which runs close by the house. He also thinks about the book he will
write when he is free. "Wonderful that," he says, smiling. "The endless rewrite
in my mind of the best seller I will probably never start."


Oct. 1. Today, not for the first or last time, I am abruptly reminded of what
happened to Farzad Bazoft, the reporter executed earlier in the year at the Abu
Khareb prison 20 miles east of Baghdad. Iranian-born, with a British passport,
the 31-year-old reporter was investigating an explosion at a secret chemical
plant outside Baghdad. He was arrested in September 1989, after collecting soil
samples near the plant.

Under duress, perhaps even under torture, Bazoft confessed to spying for Israel.
For all the distance most reporters feel between their own circumstances and
Bazoft's, his fate reflected the narrow line between journalism and espionage in
Iraq. Iraqi officials emphasize the point, in case any of us should forget.

For me, the occasion is an escorted visit with Sahib to the Qadissiyah monument,
the vast Japanese-built war memorial outside Baghdad. The site, more than any
other place I've visited here, symbolizes the culture of blood and violence of
Hussein's Iraq. In the cavernous interior is the reconstructed bridal suite of a
17-year-old girl purportedly killed on her wedding day in 1985 by an Iranian
missile. In a glass case are the bloodied and torn bridal gloves, stuffed to
make more convincing, removed from her severed arms.

I suggest that Sahib must have grown weary of such tours. Not a bit, he replies;
the last time he saw the memorial was a year ago -- with Bazoft.

"Is that so?" I ask, affecting nonchalance. "Tell me, what was he like?"

"It is interesting that you ask," he replies. "In fact, he was just like you. He
was showing very kindly, he was asking many questions, he was writing everything
in his book.

"At first, we said, 'Maybe this is the way of a journalist. Maybe he is not a
spy. Maybe what he is doing is not so bad.' Later, we found out. Now we do not
trust so easily. Now we watch. Only later, we decide."


Oct. 2. Today we make the requisite visit to yet another war memorial, the
Monument to the Unknown Soldier. It is a huge concrete mushroom, with a big
stainless- steel cap popped open at the top. Inside are four unmarked wooden
caskets of victims of the war with Iran. But the point here, as at the
Qadissiyah monument, has less to do with honoring the martyrs than with
glorifying Saddam Hussein.

Apart from the caskets, memorials to Iraqis killed in the war are absent: no
names, no heroic legends, no photographs. Instead, there are dozens of pictures
of Hussein: in a Bedouin's flowing robes, in a field marshal's uniform, in the
baggy trousers and headdress of a Kurd.  Another shot shows the smiling Iraqi
leader passing a crowd of peasants. Between him and the crowd, 13 security
guards brandish automatic weapons.

Saddam Hussein is often portrayed as a man of the people, helping the poor,
cutting red tape, consoling the elderly and the sick. At the unknown soldiers'
tomb, there is a photograph of him answering the "citizen's telephone,"
installed, Sahib says, so Hussein can deal directly with Iraqis' complaints.

Sahib recalls the number as 888-4500, or 888-4900.

Back at the hotel, I try both. One rings and rings. The other number is answered
by a man who speaks English. "Can I speak with the President?" I ask.

"Wait a minute," the man says.

After a pause, someone abruptly hangs up the phone.


Oct. 3. This morning, I get an extension on my visa at the Residency
Directorate, a heavily protected building on a dusty side street. At a wooden
counter on the third floor, American hostages also come to renew their permits,
though not by choice. At least three American men who came to the office with
their wives, to help them obtain exit permits, were arrested and taken away to
serve as human shields outside Baghdad.

As I leave the building, I meet a hostage who is living at my hotel. Alfredo
Santi, a partner in an Italian construction company, was helping to finish the
interior of Hussein's newest palace when Iraqi troops invaded Kuwait. He, too,
is renewing his permit, but with a heavy heart. "I want to go, you want to
stay," he says, laughing. "Why don't we swap?"

Back at the hotel, I have dinner with a Dutch hostage of late middle age, who
identifies himself only as Frank. Across the room, Alfredo and his Italian
friends are dining on Iraqi pasta washed down with the last of the hotel's
imported wine. For Frank, there is no relief.

"I sit here, and I watch you and your colleagues come and go, rushing about,
greeting each other as though it is just another day," he says. "For you,
perhaps, it is. But for me, this can be a tomb. I have no promise that I will
ever get out of Iraq. Seeing you, knowing that you have your exit visas and your
air tickets in your pockets, that is the hardest thing of all."


Oct. 4. The United States Embassy is an island of deceptive calm. All but six
American diplomats have left the country, but they do not want for company: 54
other people are refugees from the American Embassy in Kuwait, stranded in
Baghdad because Iraq refused them exit visas. American reporters rely on the
telephones in the United States Information Service here to send out their
articles.

The infectious irreverence of Joseph C. Wilson 4th, the 41-year-old charge
d'affaires, relieves the dark mood. He is helped by Stephen J. Thibeault, a
38-year-old Bostonian who is the assistant public affairs officer. Almost daily,
Thibeault is on the street outside the embassy, debating in fractured Arabic
with the crowds bused in to chant anti-American slogans. Almost always, the
demonstrators seem strangely lackluster in this sport.

This morning, Thibeault spent several frustrating hours at the Mansour Melia
Hotel, taking messages from Americans about to be shipped out as "special
guests." Some are ill, but almost all are stoic, penciling last-minute notes of
encouragement to their families. But for Thibeault, dealing with Iraqi officials
who managed the hostage-taking, the experience has been a window on the most
chilling aspects of Hussein's rule. "This," he explodes, "is the Ted Bundy of
countries!"


Oct. 5. Carl Bernstein, in Baghdad for Time magazine, has been telling me about
some furtive discussions he has had with Iraqis. As I've learned, such
conversations come in startling bursts, at moments that offer at least some
protection for their disclosures: an elevator ride, the noise of a jet engine, a
chance encounter in the street.

Today, I meet my own "deep throat," a Government official who has signaled a
need to talk. The occasion comes unexpectedly. The place is noisy and dark.
Although nervous, the man tells me many Iraqis would like to speak freely about
Hussein's terror, the Kuwait invasion and the chances the Iraqi leader might be
killed or overthrown.

"When you walk down the street in Baghdad, people look at you, they see the
notebook, and they think, 'Oh, how I would love to pour out my heart,' " he
says. "But they cannot, because if they do they will never talk again." He
pauses. "When I talk with you now, I put my life in your hands. My family's
lives, too. You must make no notes, write nothing to show where we met."

The official quickly checks left and right, to see that nobody has approached.
"It's worse than you can imagine," he says. "You have read '1984'? It is worse
than that, much, much worse. The man is terrible. What he doesn't like, what he
fears he cannot control, he kills."

If a Government official feels like this, and ordinary Iraqis, too, I ask, might
Hussein be overthrown? The official gives a dry chuckle. He says that the men
around the Iraqi leader are "chicken hawks, every one of them cowards, worse
even than him." While others may disagree, he clings to the hope that Hussein
will surrender Kuwait if it is his only way of avoiding war. "You'll see," he
says, "as soon as he's convinced that Bush is going to attack, our great leader
will get out of his precious Kuwait."


Oct. 6. My hotel, the Al-Rashid, is a favorite spot for extravagant wedding
receptions, which seem to be the principal entertainments of Baghdad society. On
Saturday nights, wealthy guests in designer clothes and ostentatious jewelry
arrive in chauffeured BMW's and Mercedes-Benzes. Some are senior officials,
their status signaled by the deference shown by other guests. Some men wear the
paramilitary uniforms of the ruling elite, but for these occasions, at least,
guns and webbing belts are checked.

On the dance floor, couples move sinuously to a mixture of Iraqi ballads and
Western pop. Alcohol flows. Women cluster at long tables, laughing loudly among
themselves. Several hostages watch from the doors as young Iraqi boys in silk
tuxedos scamper through the corridors, playing chase until the early hours.

Tomorrow, many partygoers will be at the Sunday races at the Baghdad
Horsemanship Club. Afterward, some may move on to the nearby Ali Baba nightclub.
There, and at a dozen other thriving evening spots, revelers watch dancers in
skimpy outfits, and listen to whisky-voiced singers belting out Western
standards through a smoky haze.

If anybody is alarmed by the prospect of war or food shortages, it is well
disguised.


Oct. 7. My Sunday morning begins with a drive past a vista of magnificent
Ottoman-era mansions on the western bank of the Tigris. With their filigreed
balconies, elegant verandas and porticoed entranceways, the houses provide a
striking contrast with the ugly new hotels nearby. I ask Sahib about the area.
"That is Salhia," he says. "In the old days, this is where you found many Jews."

Most Jews are gone, victims of persecution down the ages. Some houses have been
smashed, others boarded up. On verandas, where families once felt the river
breezes, only the bougainvillea and jasmine still thrive. Sahib says that plans
for a new opera house in Salhia have been delayed, perhaps because of the
invasion of Kuwait. He finds little to regret in the Government's order that the
neighborhood be razed.  "When we take away the old places," he says, "we make
things much better."

All across Iraq, the dictatorship has created its own architectural style, one
reminiscent of the Stalinist penchant for buildings of a bulk and style that
obliterate humanity. In Baghdad, whole neighborhoods have been bulldozed to make
room for new Government buildings, hotels, galleries, conference centers and
palaces, most of them vast, airless and depressing.


Oct. 8. Saddam Hussein is obsessively secretive about his whereabouts,
reportedly sleeping in a different bunker or safe house every night. But early
this morning, at least one person thinks he knows where the Iraqi leader is or
at least where he would like him to be.

Emerging from the American Embassy after working through the night, I walk
around the corner and hail a taxi, a battered Soviet-model car common in
Baghdad. Our route carries us over the July 14th Bridge across the Tigris, with
a view to the east of a vast compound where the American Embassy used to be.
Now, sealed off behind antiaircraft guns and sandbagged redoubts, the area is
reserved for Al Qasr Al Jamhoury, the presidential palace.

We drive off the bridge, past the monumental archway straddling the main
entrance to the compound. As we pass under the gaze of the troops of the
presidential security force, the driver points in the direction of the palace,
its vaulted dome just now catching the day's first sunshine. "Tell Bush, bomb,
bomb, bomb!" the driver says. As the words sink in, he bursts into a deep,
rolling laugh.

Safely past the palace, I start to take notes. Suddenly, the driver's face is a
pallid mask. He shakes a forefinger at my notebook, then clutches his hand
around his neck.


Oct. 9. At breakfast, reporters are rounded up for a journey across town to a
ramshackle house that serves as the headquarters of the Palestine Liberation
Front, a splinter group of the Palestine Liberation Organization. There, in a
crowded upper room, we meet with Mohammed Abul Abbas, who masterminded the 1985
hijacking of the Achille Lauro cruise ship. The United States nearly captured
Abbas at the time, when Navy fighters forced his plane to land in Sicily, but
Italian authorities released him for lack of evidence.

Until the invasion of Kuwait, it had been an indifferent year for the
41-year-old terrorist. In May, his commandos tried to stage an attack in Tel
Aviv, but they were spotted by Israeli troops and shot down on the beach. Moving
his headquarters to Iraq, Abbas took advantage of the Kuwait crisis by giving
dozens of interviews to the reporters arriving in Baghdad, presenting his group
as a major force.

His aides hand out posters and postcards showing the ill-fated commandos setting
out from Lebanon in rubber boats. When asked, Abbas signs the mementos with a
flourish. Not a word is said of the men in the photographs, now five months
dead. The only sign of remorse comes when Abbas discusses Leon Klinghoffer, the
American killed when terrorists aboard the Achille Lauro pushed his wheelchair
into the Mediterranean. After years of derisive comments, Abbas has shifted, in
his Baghdad interviews, toward acknowledging that "perhaps" the killing was a
mistake.

Today's news conference is about the bloodshed a day earlier at Temple Mount in
Jerusalem, where Israeli troops killed some 20 Palestinians. Abbas, 6 foot 4
inches and nervous, issues a succession of veiled threats against Israeli and
American targets, then announces that he will leave the next day for a P.L.O.
meeting in Tunisia, "if I am not intercepted by American planes." To nobody's
surprise, he never makes the journey. He stays in Baghdad, giving still another
interview and handing out more postcards.


Oct. 10. At the Baghdad airport, where I'm seeing off a plane full of freed
Americans, I notice the elaborate preparations against an air attack.

In bunkers atop vast mounds of bulldozed earth, Soviet-made antiaircraft guns
point southward, twin barrels raised in the direction of American aircraft
carriers and air bases in Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf. The same is true at
the presidential palace and at big industrial plants. Petrochemical refineries
along the road south to Basra are virtually circled by antiaircraft guns and
missiles.

To Sahib, the preparations are evidence that any American attack will lead to
victory for Iraq. "What sort of air force is this?" Sahib says, referring to an
announcement that American aircraft in Saudi Arabia have been grounded after a
series of crashes. "We have fought eight years in these conditions," he adds,
"and never, never did we ground our planes! And what about your soldiers? All
crying that they want to go home!"


Oct. 11. Before dawn, I'm on a bus to Kurdistan, a 17-hour round trip through
bleak desert terrain that for long stretches seems to have been turned into a
military camp. The purpose of the trip is to demonstrate that Iraq's 2.8 million
Kurds support Hussein's seizure of Kuwait, but it seems an unpromising venture
for the authorities. Kurdistan has been a caldron of rebellion for decades, all
the more so since 5,000 villagers were gassed to death in a 1988
chemical-weapons attack by Iraqi planes.

For our minders, things go badly from the start. They seem keen to impress us
with the peaceful nature of the region, but in the first official building we
enter, in Erbil, a British reporter pauses to note the weapons stacked in a gun
rack. His attention focuses on a pearl-handled revolver of the type favored
among Baghdad leaders. One guide finds the attention unnerving. "What is so
important about a gun?" he says.

A powerful official assures us that the population is solidly behind Hussein,
then climbs into an armored Mercedes, protected in front and in back by station
wagons carrying bodyguards armed with submachine guns.

Later, as we're heading for a Kurdish resettlement village, the bus comes across
a broken water main blocking the road, and is forced to turn down a side road.
Almost immediately, we are looking at a whole neighborhood bulldozed into rubble
in retaliation for a recent rebel attack.

At the village, we drive past clusters of sullen-faced Kurds before stopping at
a primary school, where hundreds of boys surround us, waving Hussein's portait.
In a freshly whitewashed classroom, with row after row of students in smart
uniforms, I ask a 12-year-old girl what President Bush has done to incur the
anger of Iraq.

As she freezes into silence, the principal becomes visibly nervous. "America has
massed troops against us," she says, "and sent them to the country of the Muslim
holy places." It is the officially sanctioned view, and brings a broad smile to
the principal's face. "Now you know what our children think," he says.


Oct. 12. With one day left, I head off for a quick tour of Baghdad's shopping
districts, hoping to find a Saddam Hussein wristwatch. These come in numerous
varieties: faces ringed with ersatz jewels, green camouflage, fake gold. What
they have in common is the leader's portrait on the face.

A merchant on Sadoun Street says he sold his entire supply in 10 minutes to an
American television crew. Until then, it had been a slow seller. He seems
perplexed. Wouldn't I prefer something simpler, without Hussein's face?

I walk on, enjoying the warm autumn sunshine and wending my way through crowds
of Iraqis browsing among open-air stores selling Western clothing, cassettes of
American pop music and Japanese boom boxes.

Finding no Hussein watch, I head for the artists' colony on Karada Street. In a
third-floor walk-up, I find my souvenir: A 5-by-4-foot oil painting of Hussein
in field marshal's regalia. The artist, too, is puzzled, urging me to take a
painting of a 19th-century galleon instead.

Here and there, long lines have formed outside bakeries for the three small
loaves each person is permitted under the rationing imposed to make grain stocks
last. But along Sadoun Street, canned and processed foods bearing Kuwait's
trading stamp spill through grocery doorways, and diplomats say this booty is
only the smallest part of what has been ferried north. Their list of items taken
from Kuwait includes American-made police cars and Japanese buses, traffic
lights and plate-glass windows, cranes and front-end loaders, incubators, at
least 20,000 cars seized from warehouses and showrooms, even a United Nations
jeep.


Oct. 13. As I hurry out to catch the Iraqi Airways flight to Jordan, British,
Irish and Italian hostages cluster by the hotel doorway, hoping to catch
departing Westerners with messages for their families.

"Just say I'm O.K.," a man says, tears rimming his eyes, as he hands me a card
with his wife's London telephone number. An Italian businessman asks if he can
buy my shortwave radio. And an Irishman gives me a letter for his son. The
envelope is unsealed, and he invites me to read it.

"I reckon Bush and Thatcher won't let Saddam Hussein go on with this for much
longer," the man has written. "But don't worry about me! Come what may, I'll
survive!"

My fellow passengers on the flight to Amman include 20 Indian construction
workers, who complain bitterly that the Iraqi Government has not paid them
nearly half the money they were owed. On their way to Baghdad from the new
military base they were constructing, the men say, they were stopped at police
checkpoints and robbed of their suitcases, wallets and stereos.

As the aircraft descends, a prosperous-looking Iraqi is listening to the
Indians' stories, his expression troubled. When the flight attendants move away,
I ask him how he feels, seeing defenseless people ruined in this way. The man
stares for a long time at the floor. Looking up, he purses his lips, then
flashes a nervous smile. "Please understand," he says, at last. "I have a wife
and children in Baghdad. Excuse me if I say so, but it is truly safer if I don't
reply."

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A Baghdad shopkeeper, his store filled with Saddam Hussein
portraits, appears suspicious of a photographer. (Greig Reekie/Canada
Wide/Sygma). Iraqis wait outside a Baghdad bakery, where each person is
permitted three loaves of bread. (David Turnley/Detroit Free Press/Black Star)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 26; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 412 words


Here are some notable releases of the last few months.

BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY -- Ron Kovic returns from Vietnam a bitter
paraplegic. Oliver Stone's film has "enormous visceral power." (Vincent Canby)
1989. MCA/Universal. $91.95. Laser disk, $39.98. 2 hours, 25 ninutes. Closed
captioned. R.


THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HER LOVER -- Peter Greenway's elegant, brutal
film is "so esthetically brilliant that it expands the boundaries of film
itself." (Caryn James) 1990. Vidmark. $89.95. LD, $39.95. 2:03, NC-17; 1:35, R.

CRY-BABY -- John Waters's story of 50's high-school America is a new Presley
movie made "in the manner of a teen-crazed Cecil B. DeMille." (Canby) 1990.
MCA/Universal. $91.95. LD, $34.98. 1:26. CC. PG-13.

GLORY -- Edward Zwick's film about a black regiment in the Civil War "celebrates
in a manner that insists on acknowledging the sorrow." (Canby) 1989.
RCA/Columbia. $91.95. LD, $39.95. 2:02. CC. R.

THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER -- Sean Connery gives a "convincing portrayal" as a
Soviet submarine captain making off with his country's prize vessel. (Lawrence
Van Gelder) 1990. Paramount. $99.95. LD, $29.95. 2:15. CC. PG.

MIAMI BLUES -- Alec Baldwin is a sociopath and Jennifer Jason Leigh a
cooking-obsessed hooker in a thriller "best appreciated for the performances of
its stars and scene-stealing peripheral touches." (Maslin) 1990. Orion. $89.98.
LD, $39.95. 1:37. CC. R.

PETER PAN -- The inventions in the animated version of the J. M. Barrie classic
are as "skillful as they have ever been in Disney films." 1953. Disney. $24.99.
LD, $29.99. 1:16. CC. G.

PRETTY WOMAN -- In the company of Edward (Richard Gere), Vivian (Julia Roberts)
is transformed from streetwalker to lady in a film that is "giddily,
lighthearted escapism most of the time." (Janet Maslin) 1990. Touchstone.
$19.99. LD, $29.99. 1:38. CC. R.

Q & A -- Nick Nolte is the grand, bigoted center in Sidney Lumet's film, which
"explores corners of the city that no director has ever set foot in before."
(Canby) 1990. HBO. $92.99. LD, $44.95. 2:12. CC. R.

STANLEY AND IRIS -- Martin Ritt's love story about two seemingly commonplace
people (played by Jane Fonda and Robert De Niro) is "honest and direct and
entertaining." (Canby) 1990. MGM/UA. $89.98. LD, $34.98. 1:47. CC. PG-13.

TOTAL RECALL -- Arnold Schwarzenegger traces his Martian roots in a "vigorous
interplanetary thriller." (Maslin) 1990. Carolco/Live. $24.99. LD, $39.95. 1:53.
CC. R.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
Hollywood Goes In Quest of Spiritual Reward

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section 2; Page 15; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1342 words


GOING TO THE MOVIES, NOT always necessarily a character-building experience, has
been taking a dangerously instructive turn. Those seeking innocent escapism
currently risk being alerted to the unjust treatment of American Indians, the
power of miracles, the inevitability of death and the very scary possibility
that a Messiah arriving among us could look, sound and act like Prince.

Possibly this comes in response to the wave of violence that swept across movie
screens earlier this season. Possibly it is pure coincidence. Possibly it cannot
be understood without the help of healing crystals anyhow. But whatever the
reasons for this newly spiritual atmosphere, those seeking to avoid unwanted
self-improvement had better beware.

The message has arrived, if not from on high then certainly from the box offices
that made "Ghost" a $170 million phenomenon, that the afterlife is quite
literally hot. That takes on added meaning in the face of "Jacob's Ladder,"
which has the trappings of a horror film but is, in fact, an attempt to depict
the inferno in contemporary, everyday terms. Indeed, Bruce Joel Rubin, who wrote
the screenplays for both films, writes of having originally envisioned hooves
and horns for "Jacob's Ladder" -- not to mention a "vast Spielbergian staircase"
leading up to heaven and a climactic scene in which Jacob and the Angel of Death
do battle and "the room crumbles beneath them and disappears into the void."

Mr. Rubin, another of whose screenplays is called "Secrets of the Astral Plane,"
also originally planned a scene in which Jacob, the film's hero, goes up in
flames. Looking at his own charred remains, Jacob finally comes to realize what
the story has been hinting at throughout: that he is right on the threshold of
death and that his spirit is preparing to leave his body. In Eastern religions,
Mr. Rubin writes in his introduction to the "Jacob's Ladder" screenplay, "death
is an experience of ego loss," and he has tried to depict it as a process
whereby Jacob takes stock of his life even as it slips away.

On the astral plane, this might indeed be fine. But "Jacob's Ladder" was made to
suit Hollywood standards, where the charred corpse of a film's hero simply will
not do. "Film is probably not the best medium for people with deep convictions
and personal visions," Mr. Rubin writes with some understatement, by way of
explaining why his "classical Bosch-like creatures, part toad, part fish, part
bird, part man" never made it past the screenplay stage. When Adrian Lyne, a
director of cleverly commercial tastes, took on this project, he blue-penciled
the demons and added a sweet-looking, deceased child of Jacob's who, in the end,
would help lead his father home. One of Mr. Lyne's most inspired touches was the
idea of making Jacob's idea of heaven the apartment he once shared with his wife
and children.

In "Jacob's Ladder" as in "Ghost," the prospect of death has a distinctly
positive side. It provides both Jacob (Tim Robbins), a soldier mortally wounded
in Vietnam, and Sam Wheat (Patrick Swayze), a successful young executive, with
welcome opportunities to take stock of their lives and make amends for past
mistakes. This ability to depict mortality at its most generous and glowing has
done wonders for Mr. Rubin. And it undoubtedly strikes an appreciative chord in
audiences willing to approach a formerly unpleasant subject with great interest,
if not exactly head-on.

The search for spiritual enlightenment, Hollywood-style, need not even be quite
this morbid. "Waiting for the Light," a blithely neo-mystical comedy written and
directed by Christopher Monger, shows how a crusty former magician (Shirley
MacLaine) and her two rascally grandchildren can counter the gloom of the atomic
age by virtue of a happy accident. Using explosive powder left over from the
magician's stage show, they simulate a ghostly effect to scare a mean-spirited
neighbor.

But the man (Vincent Schiavelli, who wrestled with Mr. Swayze in "Ghost" and has
a great face for playing New Age heavies) somehow decides he has seen an angel.
Converted to religious fervor by this bogus miracle, he generates headlines, a
cult of fellow acolytes and a spirit of rekindled faith possibly powerful enough
to keep the threat of nuclear disaster at bay. The film's idea of a secular
event with spiritual repercussions is fortunately lighthearted, and helps to
play down its preachy side. Yet there is a strong suspicion that "Waiting for
the Light" expects its viewers to emerge from this experience as better people.

Certainly Kevin Costner, who directs himself as a Civil War soldier in "Dances
With Wolves," has some sort of ennobling experience in mind. Mr. Costner's
epic-length frontier saga presents him as a hero disaffected from white society
and seeking some higher truth, although at first he does not realize as much.
Still intending to fulfill his military mission when he is stationed to a
totally deserted outpost, he gradually finds himself drawn to the Indians living
nearby.

In contrast to earlier, less enlightened screen depictions of Indians, "Dances
With Wolves" presents them as loyal, generous, and given to friendly banter; at
one point during one of the film's all-Sioux sequences, the mood becomes so
jolly it even suggests a laugh track. These Indian characters regard white
interlopers with skepticism that, by Hollywood standards, is equally novel.

"They don't ride well; they don't shoot well; they're dirty," one Indian says of
the new settlers.

"And these people are said to flourish?" another asks. "I think they all will be
dead soon."

The regrettable irony of this is not lost on Mr. Costner, whose earnestness is
unleashed here to its very fullest. As an Army officer still keeping his
journal, he writes of the Indians, "They are not beggars and thieves. They are
not the bogeymen they have been made out to be." Later on, as the Indian
character who adopts the name "Dances With Wolves" -- even though he has been
shown dancing only one time, with one solitary wolf -- he symbolically eats the
heart of a slain buffalo to prove his mettle by Indian standards. "The only word
that came to mind was harmony," he says, reflecting on his Indian experiences.
As he puts it later, "I knew for the first time who I really was."

"Dances With Wolves" is a strange hybrid, part boys' adventure story and part
midlife crisis in action. The process whereby its hero rejects his regimented,
shallow, unexamined past life to find new fulfillment is a lot more compelling
than its view of the Indians' world. Under these circumstances, and in light of
the fact that Mr. Costner is his own director, it's not surprising to find him
declaring himself "a celebrity" within the Indians' culture. When he marries the
widow of a warrior, the dead man's best friend even tells him solemnly: "I think
he went away because you were coming." That kind of mystical insight comes only
with the help of star power.

Even Prince, who also directs himself in his new film, "Graffiti Bridge," shows
an interest in providing his audience with an eye-opening experience. With
Prince, needless to say, this can occur simultaneously on many levels. Along
with its wild costumes, galvanizing musical numbers and female characters
dressed almost as exploitatively as Prince dresses himself, the film would
seemingly need no higher purpose to keep it aloft. In keeping with the times, it
has one anyway.

Graffiti Bridge, the place of the title, is a scrawled-on movie set that the
film equates with heaven. And Prince, as he himself might write, wants U 2 take
it seriously. He waits for the return of a lost father; he writes poems about
heaven; he even strikes explicitly Christlike poses while dressed in outfits
that would make an altar boy blush.

This film's spiritual ideas aren't even minimized by the fact that a lot of them
are things you can dance to. Prince clearly believes that heaven is where you
find it. And at the moment, in movies, he's not alone.


LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tim Robbins in "Jacob's Ladder"--the inferno in everyday terms
(Tri-Star Pictures) (pg. 15); Demi Moore and Patrick Swayze in the box-office
hit "Ghost" (Peter Sorel/Paramount Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION;
Reliving the War Not Fought in the Living Room

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SHAPIRO; Michael Shapiro's latest book is "The Shadow in the
Sun: A Korean Year of Love and Sorrow," a portrait of present-day Korea
(Atlantic Monthly Press).

SECTION: Section 2; Page 35; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1333 words


OF ALL THE SORRY STORIES OF the Korean War, one of the saddest is its legacy --
that of a war whose cease-fire is remembered in America perhaps less for the end
of the carnage than as the inspiration for the final episode of "M*A*S*H."

Korea was a war without a winner, a three-year conflict that ended with millions
of Koreans and tens of thousands of United Nations and American troops dead. It
was a war that introduced to the vocabulary of the cold war era such terms as
"police action," "limited war" and "brainwashing," a war of carpet bombing and
napalm whose victims were mostly civilians.

And it is a conflict whose place in the American consciousness is so tenuous
that a new series on its history is subtitled "The Unknown War." The six-part
documentary, which traces the war from its roots just following the end of World
War II, through the outbreak of hostilities in 1950, to the cease-fire in 1953
and to its legacy today, will be broadcast on WNET and other PBS stations over
three consecutive nights, beginning tomorrow at 9.

The timing is propitious. If Korea was the first cold-war struggle, then the
possibility of war with Iraq looms as the first crisis of the post-cold war era.
As it did in the Korean conflict, America has enlisted and won the support of
the United Nations -- if not with troops, then with money and materiel.

There are unsettling parallels as well. In the Persian Gulf -- as in Korea --
America has staked out a place on the front lines of a confrontation whose
objectives are becoming increasingly fuzzy, a confrontation whose outcome is far
from certain and, moreover, a confrontation in a distant place where the rules
of engagement are not America's rules.

Even today, more than a generation after the war's end, Korea remains a muddle,
a story lodged between the triumph of World War II and the pain in Vietnam. The
war ended where it began, at the 38th parallel that still divides the peninsula
into North Korea and South Korea.

"Korea: The Unknown War" was originally produced by Thames Television and
broadcast in England on the eve of the 1988 Seoul Olympics. WGBH, the Boston
public-TV station, has adapted the series for an American audience, focusing
more on America's involvement in a war over a land in which this country had
shown little, if any, interest, but which came close in 1950 to becoming the
trigger for all-out war between America and China.

Each Korea still accuses the other of having started the fighting. Indeed, the
question of the war's beginnings -- which Western historians still debate -- is
a metaphor for the conflict where the only middle ground in the technically
ongoing war between the Koreas remains the border at the 38th parallel. An
armistice is still to be signed.

To watch the history of the Korean War is to watch a story in which there are no
good guys. Each side depicted the other as nothing short of barbaric. And, as
the series painfully shows, both sides make strong cases. The mass executions
after North Korea captured Seoul were followed by the killings that came in the
wake of South Korea's capture of the northern capital, Pyongyang. For its part,
America not only flattened most of North Korea -- this a precursor to the futile
effort in Vietnam to block supply lines -- it effectively dehumanized its enemy,
rendering men into "gooks."

The parallels with Vietnam abound, so much so that it seems hard to understand
how America could have drawn so few lessons from Korea when it once again drew a
line against Communism's spread in Asia. North Korea -- like China and North
Vietnam -- was an enemy America underestimated and hardly understood. The
America portrayed in "The Unknown War" also underestimated its ally in the
south: It assumed that President Syngman Rhee of South Korea was a democrat,
when in reality he was a cruel and corrupt autocrat. In Korea, America also
assumed that an Asian army would retreat in the face of superior American
firepower, only to discover that that army could subsist on a diet of rice and
ideology.

But unlike the confrontation in Vietnam, America did not have the chance to
watch itself fight a war in Korea. Television was not the centerpiece of
American family life in 1950 that it was by the late 1960's. America did not
have images of the war brought into its living rooms every evening on the news.

Instead, as "The Unknown War" underscores, Korea was a war in which all the
major battles were fought within the first year, while the last two years of the
conflict were reduced to the useless slaughter of trench warfare. More troops
were killed in the final two years of the war -- while the two sides argued
interminably about a cease-fire line and the exchange of prisoners -- than
during the ultimate conquest of the North and South. By the war's end, the
American landing at Inchon -- which turned the war to the United Nations' and
South Korea's advantage -- had become a distant memory, as had the retreat from
the Chosun Reservoir, which followed China's entry into the war, and President
Truman's sacking of Gen. Douglas MacArthur. All that was left was a country
destroyed and still split.

In South Korea today the young denounce America for having divided the Korean
nation and sustaining that division with the presence of 43,000 troops. Their
impatient elders suggest that all they need do is visit the Orwellian state
north of the 38th parallel to be reminded of how fortunate they are that America
came to their defense.

But that is a trip they cannot make. A generation after the end of the Korean
War, the border between the Koreas remains sealed. No letters can be exchanged,
no telephone calls made. Five million families on each side of the 38th parallel
remain hopelessly divided.

While Eastern Europe celebrates the evaporation of the Iron Curtain, North and
South Korean troops still guard their respective sides of the border. Recent
talks between the two states offer only the slightest hope of incremental steps
toward reconciliation.

The students are right when they say that their country was a pawn in the battle
between the superpowers. Yet even now that that battle is over, the war between
the Koreas endures.


'WHAT OX CARTS?'



It was in the course of filming a seemingly innocuous scene that Max Whitby
recognized that North Korea is not so much another country as, in his words,
"another planet."

Mr. Whitby, a producer and director of Thames Television's "Korea: The Unknown
War" (the series co-produced with WGBH), was riding through the countryside when
he spotted farmers with ox carts. He asked his government interpreter if they
might stop to film. The interpreter, apparently concerned that footage showing
North Korean farmers using ox carts would make his country seem poor and
backward, told Mr. Whitby it was out of the question.

Although Mr. Whitby learned to adjust to what he characterized as the occasional
"bizarre concerns" of his North Korean handlers, he couldn't help but be taken
aback by a phrase book that he had been provided with upon his arrival in North
Korea. Among the "useful phrases," he said, was: "Let's work together to
disembowel the American imperialist."

But as he looked out the car window at the sun-drenched fields, Mr. Whitby urged
his interpreter to let them stop. Finally, the interpreter relented, though only
after the ox carts were gone. Yet no sooner had they begun filming the empty
fields, Mr. Whitby said, than "a great flotilla" of ox carts appeared on the
crest of a nearby hill.

"The interpreter hurled himself in front of the camera and ordered us to stop
filming," he said. The crew complied. Later that day, Mr. Whitby asked the
interpreter why he hadn't been allowed to film the ox carts. "What ox carts?"
the interpreter asked. "The ox carts that came over the hill," Mr. Whitby
replied.

"Those weren't ox carts," said the interpreter. "Those were the tractors that
hadn't quite arrived yet."

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: American involvement is explored in "The Unknown War," beginning
tomorrow. (U.S. Marine Corps )

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

China Gains in Mideast Crisis But Loses Cold War Benefits

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1278 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Nov. 10


Less than a year and a half after China's leaders sent tanks and machine guns to
crush the Tiananmen democracy movement, Western sanctions are being dismantled
and China is regaining status in the international community.

Japan is resuming subsidized loans to China. The European Community last month
lifted economic sanctions against China. A group of American Congressmen is
expected in Beijing this month for the first time since the crackdown. Countries
like Saudi Arabia and Singapore have in the last few months established
diplomatic relations with Beijing.

"China has withstood the international anti-socialist environment and
safeguarded the socialist system," crowed the official New China News Agency.

While most of the world has suffered from the gulf crisis, China has been a
beneficiary. Scholars, diplomats and Chinese themselves say China benefited in
two ways: Saddam Hussein's behavior gave the West a new enemy and China won
gratitude for its cooperation in imposing sanctions against Iraq.

'Best of All Worlds'

"The gulf crisis accelerated a process that was already under way, of them
waiting us out," said a Western diplomat in Beijing. "It's the best of all
worlds for them, because they'be been able to reintegrate themselves with the
West without sacrificing any third world credentials to do it."

Yet there are signs that over all China is a loser in the geopolitical
reordering that has accompanied the end of the cold war. China has lost the
leverage it had in playing the Soviet Union and the United States against each
other, and its leaders may also be at a disadvantage in an environment in which
nuclear weapons matter less than economic strength.

"People don't pay much attention to China any more," a European ambassador said
the other day. Most experts agree that China matters less than it used to -- a
proposition that drives some Government officials here to alternate between
despair and fury. Visiting Americans these days are sometimes greeted with
almost obsessive explanations of why China is still of fundamental importance to
American interests.

Never Much of a Threat

The West's sanctions were never threatening to China in any fundamental sense.
The sanctions included delays in new World Bank loans, a freeze on most military
cooperation, and a halt to most high-level exchanges. Ordinary imports from
China were never curbed, and in fact they have risen sharply: China's trade
surplus with the United States could exceed $10 billion this year, up from $3.5
billion in 1988, before the crackdown.

Military cooperation remains on ice, but World Bank loans are gradually being
resumed, and high-level exchanges are increasing. Zhu Rongji, Shanghai's mayor,
visited the United States this summer; Wan Li, the head of China's legislature,
will tour Great Britain this month; and Wu Xueqian, a politburo member, is
leaving in a few days for Tokyo.

"The pace is very slow, but I can see that the direction is toward improvement
in relations" with the West, said Yuan Ming, an international relations expert
at Beijing University.

In any case, sanctions affected China's relations with only a relatively small
number of countries. Most of China's neighbors were uncritical of its behavior
and continued to do business with China as before.

In some respects, China now has broader international support than ever: Saudi
Arabia and Singapore have newly established diplomatic relations with China,
while Indonesia has resumed ties. South Korea will open an office in Beijing
very soon, and would like to establish diplomatic relations.

"We were never so upset about the crackdown," said a diplomat from an Asian
country that has its own human rights problems. "It's their business."

Communist Legitimacy Eroded

This is not to say that the crackdown on the democracy movement was painless,
for the killings of peaceful protesters deeply eroded the Communist Party's
legitimacy at home and among Chinese overseas as well as in the West. But some
Chinese officials say the hard-liners probably regard the foreign sanctions as
an acceptable price to pay, given that their alternative may have been loss of
power. The price may be acceptable even if, as many believe, the Government's
relations with the West will never again be as warm as before.

"Things will return to business as usual, but that emotional enthusiasm for
China won't come back any time soon," a Western diplomat said.

One reason is that while the Bush Administration is gratified by China's
cooperation in the Security Council, China's critics are less impressed. Their
quarrel with Beijing was not about diplomacy, but about human rights, and they
see no fundamental easing of the domestic repression.

While the Bush Administration is expected to favor further dismantling of
sanctions, Congress may have other ideas. John T. Kamm, president of the
American Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong, expects Congress to make a new
attempt next year to end China's Most Favored Nation status. He also is bracing
for an effort to establish a code of conduct for American corporations dealing
with China.

"We may well find ourselves in a position where Japan and the European Community
are lifting sanctions, and we're adding sanctions," Mr. Kamm said.

Mutual Resentment and Suspicion

China wants a resumption of cooperation with the West, but it is wary that too
much interaction might again lead to unrest. The resentments and suspicions are
mutual and may slow the reconciliation on both sides.

A classified Communist Party document, obtained from a well-connected Chinese in
Beijing, conveys these apprehensions. The document, an analysis of international
affairs published at the end of last year by the Central Committee Propoganda
Department, warns that "the struggle between the two systems" will be prolonged
and intense.

"Since the appearance of the first socialist state in 1917, this kind of
struggle has never ceased," the analysis reads. "It only varies in its form,
intensity and the tactics employed. Now the struggle has entered a new stage,
and the struggle will be sharper, more complex and more intense than before. We
must be highly vigilant."

While most nations are celebrating the end of the cold war, China has been
saying, even before the invasion of Kuwait, that the new environment is not so
wonderful after all.

Emerging Regional Powers

One difficulty for China is that a multipolar world is likely to see the
emergence of new regional powers including Japan, South Korea, Vietnam, India
and Indonesia. China has had wars or bitter disputes with each of these
countries in recent decades.

"They've always hailed, in theory, the emergence of a more multipolar world,"
said Harry Harding, a China scholar at the Brookings Institution in Washington.
"But now that it's finally happening, the problem for China is that its
relations with many of these emerging poles are rather strained."

Chinese leaders are most anxious about the rise of Japan, which they remember
fighting in the 1930's and 1940's, and they often regard Americans as naive in
playing down Japan as a military and strategic threat. Some Chinese are even
warning that the Soviet Union and Japan could form a threatening alliance in the
Pacific, creating a reason for cooperation between the United States and China.

China has clearly lost leverage in that it can no longer play the United States
and the Soviet Union against each other. But Mr. Harding says that in a larger
sense China has fewer cards to play in a world in which money increasingly seems
to matter more than guns.


LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
A Marine General Speaks To Troops of an Offensive

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 842 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Nov. 10


A senior American military commander here told his troops today that it is now
possible that they will launch an offensive against Iraq in the months ahead.

The statement, by Maj. Gen. Robert M. Johnston of the Marines, a leading member
of the American command in Saudi Arabia, was repeated by other senior officers
today as they reacted to President Bush's decision to send at least 150,000
reinforcements to Saudi Arabia "to provide an adequate offensive military
option" if economic sanctions against Iraq are deemed insufficient.

Speaking on the 215th anniversary of the founding of the Marine Corps, General
Johnston said the President's decision to send additional units, and not to
permit any rotation of the 230,000 American military personnel already here.
meant that now "we may indeed have to concern ourselves with an offensive
option" against Iraq.

It appeared to be the first explicit acknowledgment by an American officer that
the former limited goal of defending Saudi Arabia was giving way to a new
imperative to prepare a possible attack. Since they first arrived here in
August, American commanders have denied making any offensive preparations.

Comparison With Vietnam

Addressing the assembled ranks of the First Marine Division headquarters
battalion, General Johnston warned his troops that they faced "a whole new ball
game" and that a war in this region could be more difficult than the war in
Vietnam.

"The prospect of offensive combat is going to be the greatest challenge that
Marines have seen in many decades," he said. "We are going to need everything we
have if we go to war against the Iraqis."

Under military rules, the precise numbers and locations of American units cannot
be reported. But the Marine forces visited today are among the most
forward-deployed combat units in the Saudi desert.

General Johnston and other senior officers said they had not yet fully informed
American troops here of the decision not to permit any units to rotate home as
reinforcements come in.

"We just got the message last night," said another Marine commander, Brig. Gen.
Mike Myatt. "I think it's going to have a sobering impact."

Stiffened Resolve?

When asked their reaction to the decision to send reinforcements without
rotating soldiers home, several marines seemed surprised but also relieved at
what they interpreted as a stiffening of resolve.

"That tells us one thing," said Cpl. James M. Capps of the Third Marine Regiment
at a base far out in the desert. "If they say it's an offensive, we're ready to
go."

It was an acceptance of battle echoed by several marines who said they would
rather fight than sit in the sands indefinitely.

"We know a war is a war," said Sgt. Frank Huerta, 28 years old. "Some of us
won't make it back. But we say, 'Let's do it so the rest of us can get home.' "

As he spoke, a combined British and American military band was playing "The
Marine Hymn" while officers used a combat knife to cut a birthday cake
emblazoned in red letters spelling out former Marine battlefields: "Wake,
Tarawa, Iwo Jima, Vietnam." Each marine ate a piece of a similar cake in a
ceremony repeated across the desert today among more than 40,000 men sent here
with the First Marine Expeditionary Force.

An Important Ingredient

General Johnston, a 30-year veteran, told the marines that the First
Expeditionary Force would be "the pointed end" of any offensive against Iraq.

When asked what he thought their reaction would be to the policy of not rotating
them home, he said: "I'm sure it's not going to thrill a lot of people, but
we're mature enough to carry out the mission."

Mood matters in war, where the battle in men's minds and hearts is as important
as the weapons they wield. By that measure, there appears to be a marked change
from two months ago in the marines met today at several bases across the desert.

They complained very little. Some admitted fear and many said they wished they
were home with those they loved. But they had a quietness about them and a
tautness.

"We think we're ready," said Pvt. Lionel Tetreault, 20. "We all want to do well,
but you can't tell how you're going to do until you're in it. That's just how it
is."

Desert Turns Cooler

Several marines said they are grateful to have had three months to grow used to
the desert, which has become agreeably cool with the approach of winter.

At another ceremony, Brig. Gen. Thomas B. Draude told the men of the First
Battalion of the Third Marine Regiment that they must now prepare "to go in
harm's way."

"Things are a little different than they were a week ago," General Draude said,
elaborating on the sober tone of his statements.

After the general spoke, a Marine chaplain led a brief prayer.

"Father, we have come to this desolate and forbidding place from comfortable
homes," the chaplain said, his head bowed toward troops who listened with rifles
slung over their shoulders. "We stand on the brink of war," the chaplain said.
"We pray for peace."


LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Staff Sgt. Nazareno Sestoso of New York City, left, and Second
Lieut. David Woods of Brownsville, Penn., preparing for a simulated attack by a
column of tanks during an exercise in the Saudi desert yesterday. They are
members of the Army's 82d Airborne Division. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Widow Says Writer Didn't Care That King Copied

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 523 words


The widow of a professor of religion whose doctoral dissertation was partly
copied by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. said yesterday that her husband
knew of the plagiarism but dismissed it as unimportant.

It was disclosed last week that Dr. King had taken many passages from the
doctoral dissertation by Jack Boozer and used them in his own work, but rarely
credited Dr. Boozer. Both men wrote their theses in the early 1950's on the
German-born theologian Paul Tillich and had the same graduate adviser at Boston
University.

Dr. Boozer, who went on to become a professor of religion at Emory University in
Atlanta, learned of the plagiarism almost two years ago, shortly after scholars
who are studying Dr. King's papers discovered it. But until he died in July, he
chose never to discuss it with anyone outside his immediate family and hoped
that the incident would never become public, said Ruth T. Boozer, his wife of 47
years.

'Pattern of Appropriation'

But in recent days word of Dr. King's plagiarism has been on the network
television news and on the front pages of The Wall Street Journal, The New York
Times and other newspapers. For the past four years, historians studying Dr.
King's papers have been disturbed by numerous incidents of copying without
attribution in the civil rights leader's works. But they had generally kept
quiet about the discovery, not wishing to discredit the reputation of Dr. King.

On Friday, after The Wall Street Journal published an article on the copying,
Clayborne Carson, a history professor at Stanford University and the chief
editor of the King Papers Project, announced at a news conference that there is
a "pattern of appropriation" in the papers that included "instances of
plagiarism." Ms. Boozer said her husband had hoped to avoid that type of
publicity. And although she did not criticize the coverage, she said she was
"upset."

She said that she remembered vividly the day her husband learned of the
plagiarism. "He wouldn't discuss it for two days," she said. "He was a very
careful scholar himself, and he respected scholarship, but he believed that this
would be misinterpreted and used."

Families Were Friends

"He and I were hoping it would just go away," she said. "He was honored that he
could have been of some help to Martin Luther."

The Emory professor, a native Alabamian and a supporter of the civil rights
movement, had been inspired by Dr. King's career and had quoted the civil rights
leader in his book,"The Edge of the Ministry," as well as in other papers.

The Boozers and Kings were friends socially, and shortly after Dr. King's
funeral, two of his children stayed at the Boozers' home for a few nights, Ms.
Boozer said.

Ms. Boozer said that in the last few months when she saw Mrs. King, she chose
not to bring up the plagiarism and had hoped that she would never have to.

"Martin Luther King's story is one that's more than footnotes," she said. "He
had a prophetic voice, one of the first to speak out against the Vietnam War.
Today, we're again on the brink of war. Instead, we're focusing on details and
footnotes."

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Too Far Too Fast in the Gulf

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 551 words


President Bush has supplanted a defensive strategy in the Persian Gulf with what
sounds like a unilateral declaration of offense. Pleading a need to provide an
"adequate offensive military option" against Iraq, Mr. Bush has ordered 150,000
additional U.S. troops to Saudi Arabia. And now the Pentagon has decided not to
rotate the troops already there until the crisis ends.

All told, the buildup would double the combat units already deployed -- and
increase the risks of a war the President insists he does not seek. So
fundamental a change in U.S. strategy cries out for something more than a
cursory announcement to startled reporters.

At home and abroad, President Bush has won impressive support for a collective
policy of threatening the economic strangulation of Iraq. Now, patience frayed,
he has suddenly doubled the military stakes. Why the abrupt shift? Why move so
fast before existing measures have had time to work?  And why move so far
without first winning Congressional support -- and the moral and legal heft of a
United Nations resolution authorizing the use of force?

Mr. Bush's best argument is that the alliance needs to convince Saddam Hussein
that he has no choice but to submit to U.N. demands for an unconditional pullout
from Kuwait. It makes tactical sense to persuade Iraq that the allies aren't
bluffing. But Saddam Hussein can read the world press. Mr. Bush's announcement
seems meant to sound tough abroad, but at home his aides are quick to assure
Americans that there's little chance U.S. forces will go to war.

Mr. Bush's new threat would be more credible if it grew out of open debate in
America and formal U.N. support that seems within diplomatic reach.  Secretary
of State Baker seems to have succeeded in his present mission to persuade the
coalition partners to press harder on Baghdad. He has been notably less
successful in persuading them to send more forces to serve in Saudi Arabia.

The gravest danger is that the buildup will create irresistible pressure for
war. The new forces will be in place by January. They will require the
mobilization of yet more reserves. Once these vast forces are deployed, it will
be hard for Mr. Bush to remove any troops before achieving his objectives
without appearing weak-kneed. The disruption of American lives and the economy
can only add to the pressure to get things over with.

War with Iraq would be costly, with Americans bearing the heaviest casualties.
The political risk of an Americanized war is that the Arab world would not soon
forgive or forget destruction inflicted on fellow Arabs. Even in defeat, Saddam
Hussein could enjoy a victory, as Arabs in the streets proclaim him a martyred
Saladin.

As Americans learned in Vietnam and the Russians learned in Afghanistan, the
consequences of a foreign war are only conjectural until the shooting starts. It
should be the goal of diplomacy to use the threat of war to prevent war, not
hasten it.

If this is Mr. Bush's purpose, he needs the understanding and support of the
American public. His purpose is surely justifiable; Saddam Hussein's aggression
cannot be allowed to stand. But when Mr. Bush dictates a new offensive policy
with barely a nod to Congress or the public, he shows more imperial impatience
than unified strength.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Crystal Unclear;
Will Tuesday's Disaffection Become Rejection At the 1992 Polls?

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 2283 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


IT is a mistake to try too hard to project the results of midterm elections
forward two years to the next Presidential election. Inevitably, the context
changes. The issues come and go.

Between now and 1992, for example, the economy will either emerge from its
difficulties or it will not. The perilous situation in the Persian Gulf will
either be resolved or will become much worse. In any event, issues like those,
plus some others that cannot be foreseen now, are likely to dominate the
headlines and shape the results in the next White House race, not the budget
tangle or President Bush's flip-flops.

Four Presidents since World War II have won an election, then seen their party
lose seats in the House of Representatives two years later, then run again --
Dwight D. Eisenhower, Richard M. Nixon, Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan. Two of
them, Eisenhower and Carter, lost ground in the Senate as well.

But there was no correlation at all between what happened to them in the midterm
balloting and what happened when they sought re-election.  In fact, the two
biggest losers -- Eisenhower, with a deficit of 18 House seats, and Reagan, with
a loss of 26 -- were two of the biggest second-term victors of the era.

Still, there was remarkable agreement among political professionals last week,
after an election in which the President's Republicans lost a senator and eight
seats in the House, that something new was afoot, even though for the fourth
straight election more than 95 per cent of House members who sought re-election
were successful. That something was real, deep dissatisfaction with Washington.

Among others, Edward J. Rollins Jr., the co-chairman of the National Republican
Congressional Committee, said that he expected the disaffection "to grow
rapidly, not to go away, over the next two years."

Roger Ailes, who made Mr. Bush's 1988 television commercials and is often
credited with electing him, said that "a sleeping giant has awakened." The
voters, he said, are "trying to tell the politicians that there are things they
don't like, and they may be on the verge of seizing control of the political
process for the first time in many years, by voting with their heads instead of
just their hearts."

The message was muffled this time. Most incumbents won, but their margins of
victory were smaller, and even some of the big names were shaken. "Because of
the disparity in financial resources and all the structural advantages of
incumbency," said Peter Hart, a leading poll taker for Democrats, "the message
arrived by second class mail, not by fax or Federal Express. But in 1992, in a
Presidential year, rebellion could explode.  The problems are there -- the
economy, war and peace, the political system."

Interviews by The New York Times and CBS News with voters leaving the polls all
across the country last Tuesday certainly suggest that the electorate is more
than superficially miffed with politics as it is now practiced. Fully 76 per
cent said they were dissatisfied with the way Congress was doing its job, 71 per
cent said they thought there should be a limit on how many terms members of
Congress could serve, and 65 per cent said they trusted the government in
Washington "to do what is right" only some of the time or never.

Mr. Bush did better, getting a 59 per cent approval rating, but that didn't help
the Republicans much, the survey showed, because 64 per cent said the President
was not a factor in the way they voted for House candidates. He campaigned for
Republican gubernatorial nominees in Florida and Texas, two of the three key
states in this campaign, and worked hard for Senator Rudy Boschwitz of
Minnesota; all three lost.  Only the victory of Republican candidates for
governor in the Midwest and Senator Pete Wilson's triumph in California, the
single most important battleground of 1990, eased the pain.

The 1992 contest is getting under way later than any in two decades. But begun
it has, with the creation of an exploratory committee last week by friends of
Gov. Douglas Wilder of Virginia, which raised the possibility that the Democrats
might have two black hopefuls. The other possibility would be Jesse Jackson, who
gained his first elective office last week as an unpaid District of Columbia
"shadow Senator."

Real action, however, will probably not start until early next spring, less than
a year before the caucuses in Iowa and the primary in New Hampshire.

Among the Democrats who regularly crop up on lists of potential Democratic
candidates, a pair of northeasterners, Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York and
Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey, stubbed their toes with less than impressive
victories. Mr. Bradley's best-known expertise is in the politically perilous
field of taxation, so he may have some trouble clawing his way back, and Mr.
Cuomo faces the prospect of a fiscal crunch in Albany that may force him to do
things, like raising taxes or cutting services or both, that would make it hard
for him to sell himself to the nation, if he decides to try.

Governors are on the line every day in this time of unpalatable choices, and
they have fewer resources at hand, partly because the Reagan Administration
curtailed the flow of Federal money to state capitals, partly because the
economy is shrinking. This year, 14 governorships shifted from one party to
another; two years from now looks like an inopportune moment for governors to be
seeking the Presidency, although Gov. Bob Casey of Pennsylvania impressed a lot
of people with his million-vote victory margin.

For all that, and despite his failure to break the Republicans' hold on the
state Senate, Mr. Cuomo is counted the favorite by most Democratic
professionals, not least because of his ability to make at least some liberal
ideas palatable to the middle class. He sounded every inch the candidate in an
interview with The Associated Press on Friday, criticizing Mr. Bush for not
"sending the same kind of energy into the economic struggle as he's sending over
to the sands of Arabia."

A pair of Southern Democrats, Senators Al Gore Jr. of Tennessee and Sam Nunn of
Georgia, won easily, and kept their positions near the top of the list. Senator
Charles S. Robb of Virginia is another possibility from that part of the
country, which seems certain to produce at least one active candidate.

Senator Robert Kerrey of Nebraska, a nascent dove on Iraq who won the
Congressional Medal of Honor in Vietnam, might be propelled by events into the
race, and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri is another Midwestern
possibility if Congressional leadership does not prove to be a stigma. Lloyd
Bentsen, the 1988 Vice Presidential nominee, will be 71 years old in 1992, but
he is lean and fit, and if the recession proves severe, his expertise as
chairman of the Senate Finance Committee could help.

Mr. Bush will almost certainly draw opposition in the primaries. Richard A.
Viguerie, the conservative money-raising expert, announced the day after the
election that "the inquest begins now" in the Republican party. But Jack Kemp,
the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, says he isn't interested, so the
challenge is likely to be more irksome than truly threatening, more like that of
John Ashbrook against Richard Nixon in 1972 than that of Ronald Reagan against
Gerald Ford in 1976.

One lesson drawn by many conservatives from the election results was that the
President should never have abandoned his "no-new-taxes" pledge. So he went
right back to it at a news conference on Thursday, as a first step in what he
termed the "remedial work" facing himself and the Republican party. "He's lost
some of his credibility in the last month or so," said John Sears, who managed
Mr. Reagan's 1976 effort.  "He has to be sure in the next couple of years that
when he takes a position, he stays with it.  Otherwise he'll end 1992 in a bad
way."

To put the same point in other words, the campaign just ended proved Mr. Bush
vulnerable. It suggested strongly that the issues are there for the Democrats to
exploit, if they can find an effective standard-bearer and unite behind him.
More than that about the 1992 race it is difficult to say, except perhaps to
recall that at this stage in 1970 Edmund S. Muskie looked like a sure thing and
at this stage in 1974 few people knew Jimmy Carter's name.

SOME WINNERS AND LOSERS

There's a reason that the national parties poured millions of dollars into
state-level races this year: where seats in the House of Representatives are to
be gained or lost after the census, the party in charge of the state is in
charge of the new Congressional map. Following are the projected gains and
losses in seats from the nation's 13 largest states, based on preliminary Census
Bureau figures, and results from last week's voting.

California: +7

Pete Wilson's victory keeps governorship in Republican hands, insuring
opposition to the Democratic-controlled Legislature. State Republicans are still
mindful of losses after the 1980 Census, when Democrats had the governor's seat,
too. Partisan clashes this year were muted, however, as the moderate Mr. Wilson
faced the moderate Dianne Feinstein.

New York: -3

The only question was whether Pierre A. Rinfret, the reluctant Republican
candidate, would finish ahead of the Conservative Party's Herbert London, thus
keeping the Republicans on the second row of state ballots. He did. Gov. Mario
M. Cuomo won with a disappointing 53 percent and will once again face a
Republican Senate. The Assembly remains Democratic.

Texas; +3

Ann Richards, the Democratic half of one of 1990's nastiest campaigns, took the
Governor's seat away from the Republicans in her narrow, come-from-behind defeat
of Clayton Williams, a businessman and political newcomer. The Democrats control
the Legislature, too, so they should have an easy time drawing new Congressional
districts to their liking.

Florida; +4

In a race that the Republican Party fought hard, Democratic former Senator
Lawton Chiles unseated Gov. Bob Martinez, who had switched parties several years
ago. Democrats control both houses of the Legislature as well and will control
redistricting, although the electorate is increasingly Republican, particularly
in the fast-growing coastal areas of the state.

Pennsylvania; -2

Gov. Bob Casey, a Democrat, defeated State Auditor General Barbara Hafer with 68
percent of the vote, the largest margin in half a century. The vote bolstered
Democrats but failed to wrest the Senate from the Republicans. The Democrats'
stronghold, Philadelphia, is shrinking, and an ugly fight over new districts in
the area is anticipated.

Illinois; -2

The governorship remains in Republican hands, after an odd race in which an
anti-tax Democrat from Chicago, Neil Hartigan, lost narrowly to a pro-choice,
downstate Republican, James Edgar, who pledged more money for schools. But
Democrats continue to dominate both houses of the General Assembly, insuring a
rough reapportionment battle.

Ohio; -2

The Republicans took over the Governor's seat as former Cleveland Mayor George
V. Voinovich defeated State Attorney General Anthony J. Celebrezze. Republicans
control the Senate and the Democrats the House. The 1982 redistricting was
bipartisan, but with a Republican Governor now, the process figures to be more
contentious.

Michigan; -2

As in Ohio, Republicans gained leverage. The Democratic Governor, Jim Blanchard,
unexpectedly lost to John Engler, a conservative state legislator. The
Legislature remains split, portending a tough reapportionment fight. The Detroit
metropolitan area, where Republican suburbs surround a Democratic city, is
expected to lose at least one seat.

New Jersey; -1

Gov. Jim Florio, who sailed into office last January and promptly pushed tax
increases through, was the focus of nearly every race. The Democrats paid for
the voters' anger at the Governor -- Senator Bill Bradley barely won, and
Republicans gained in local offices -- but they still control the Legislature
and can probably minimize their losses in reapportionment.

North Carolina; +1

This year, all attention was on the Senate race as Harvey Gantt, former Mayor of
Charlotte, lost a heated contest to the incumbent, Jesse A. Helms. Republican
Gov. Jim Martin was not up for re-election. Democrats control the Legislature,
but Republicans have a strong presence, especially in counties where growth
would logically place a new Congressional seat.

Georgia; +1

Democratic Lieut. Gov. Zell Miller comfortably defeated Johnny Isakson in the
Governor's race, although Mr. Isakson's 45 percent was the strongest
gubernatorial showing in years for a Republican. The Democratic Legislature
should dominate redistricting, but the fastest growth is in Atlanta's Republican
suburbs and a new seat there may be unavoidable.

Virginia; +1

Democrats are firmly in charge. The Governor, L. Douglas Wilder, took office in
January and has been widely popular. The party also controls the Legislature. On
Tuesday, one of the state's 10 Congressional seats changed hands; Stan Parris, a
conservative Republican from the Washington suburbs, lost to James P. Moran Jr.,
the Mayor of Alexandria.

Massachusetts; -1

Registered Democrats outnumber Republicans by four to one, but in the Governor's
race many defected from John Silber to the milder-mannered Republican, William
F. Weld. Mr. Weld will be at odds with the Democratic Legislature on many
counts, including his promise to roll back taxes; the voters turned down a
tax-cut proposition on Tuesday.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Among War's Problems: It Would Be A Hard Sell

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1025 words

DATELINE: TAIF , Saudi Arabia


IF Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d's visit to the Saudi desert last week
demonstrated anything about America's ability to go to war against Iraq, it is
that the Bush Administration could still face a tough time justifying the costs
to the American people.

If war breaks out, the Administration's political Achilles heel could well lie
in the stark contrast Mr. Baker was exposed to: The American troops he visited
Sunday are dug in on the harsh Saudi desert floor, while the Kuwaiti ruling
family he visited Monday is ensconced in the Presidential Suite of the Taif
Sheraton Hotel. In wartime, it could be difficult to explain the contrast
between American troops in camouflage garb fighting in the desert and
white-robed Kuwaitis sitting around hotel lobbies in Taif, Paris, London,
Geneva, Monaco and Bahrain, sipping coffee and applauding the liberation of
their homeland by others. American officials say only 3,000 of the 700,000
exiled Kuwaitis are among the troops on the front lines in the desert.

"I know, I know," said a senior Administration official traveling with Mr.
Baker. "That's why if the war starts it has to go well for us from the very
start, and by well I mean it has to be over fast. We will have to show
discernible progress every day. Otherwise . . ."

Secretary Baker, when asked about the contrast, began by saying how moved he was
by the four Kuwaitis he met in Taif who had been tortured by Iraqis. Then,
however, he quickly added: "It's important to realize that our forces are there
for a number of reasons. We've talked about the importance to Americans -- the
average, everyday American -- in terms of what will happen to his pocketbook, to
his standard of living, to his life style, if a dictator succeeds in putting
himself astride the economic lifeline of the industrial world."

Too Many Reasons to Fight?

Mr. Baker's answer only seemed to underscore a problem that has bedeviled the
Administration's gulf policy from the start -- the difficulty of explaining
quickly and simply what Americans are being asked to fight for. While Mr.
Baker's answer suggested that a main reason was economic, he touched a different
theme in addressing the troops earlier last week. Then, all he said was that
they were fighting for "American values," particularly the principle that
aggression should not be allowed to pay. And President Bush himself, at
different times, has advanced a number of reasons for the American commitment:
to defend Saudi Arabia, to defeat a dangerous dictator, to preserve economic
stability and to preserve "our way of life." While on the campaign trail the
President ruled out oil as a reason, but at the news conference on Thursday at
which he announced an expanded buildup with an ability for attack, he
acknowledged that "oil is part of it, but it is not a main reason -- a main
reason we are there is to see that aggression is unrewarded."

These explanations have several fundamental weaknesses that some officials
acknowledge are a source of worry. To begin with, many of these explanations are
disconnected from the immediate concerns and lives of Americans; much as the
troops in the desert seem out of their element, many of these explanations seem
somehow artificial and out of context. A visitor to the troops is struck by how
utterly alone the troops appear. When Mr. Baker went by helicopter to visit the
First Cavalry Division, he flew for an hour over nothing but empty sand, and at
the base camp all that could be seen in any direction was sand, sand and more
sand. When reporters asked a handful of First Cavalry soldiers what their
mission was, each gave a different answer -- protect oil, protect Saudi Arabia,
defeat Saddam Hussein, smash Iraq, free Kuwait. There was no single gut reason
-- no "Remember Pearl Harbor" -- that all intuitively grasped, identified with
and could rearticulate. When they said, "We have a job to do," it seemed that
they were motivated more by a sense of professional duty than a heartfelt
commitment.

In fact, the United States has not made it a practice to go to war --
particularly on this scale -- just to uphold the principle that aggression never
pays. When Vietnam invaded Cambodia and when Turkey invaded Cyprus, the United
States did not commit troops, because no larger interests were at stake. Even in
World War II, America did not become engaged until people who shared democratic
values -- the French and British in particular -- had fallen or were in mortal
danger.

In the gulf, President Bush cannot argue that the United States is protecting
other democracies, because Kuwait and Saudi Arabia are feudal societies. The
other larger interest -- oil -- is one the President is reluctant to articulate,
officials say, because many people would find the use of American troops to
fight over resources mercenary. Thus, the Bush Administration falls back on the
admired, but somewhat abstract, principle that aggression must never be allowed
to pay.

When Mr. Baker used the argument about aggression, the troops all seemed to nod
in agreement and applaud. But when he was done, the soldiers still had a variety
of explanations to offer, rather than a simple and compelling message that they
had clearly taken to heart.

The second difficulty with the Administrationi's arguments is that Mr. Bush has
made the restoration of the Kuwaiti ruling family an important goal -- not
because he is enamored of them, but because their return would be the proof that
aggression brought Mr. Hussein nothing. If the al-Sabahs go home, Mr. Bush wins;
if not, Mr. Hussein wins, at least something.

That means, though, American officials acknowledge in private, that the symbol
for the triumph of American principles is the restoration of feudal rulers who
don't share democratic values.

As long as there is no shooting, and American troops are just defending Saudi
Arabia and suffering sunburns, these questions and contradictions can be
expected to remain largely in the back of people's minds. But if Americans shed
their blood to evict Iraqis from Kuwait, and if the fighting is protracted, that
could quickly change.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush has made it clear that one of the missions of
American troops, gathered in parade formation last week in the Saudi Arabian
desert for a visit by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, is to insure the
restoration of the monarchy in Kuwait, (Associated Press), whose leaders are
seen at the Taif Sheraton in Saudi Arabia. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Headliners;
Just Say 'Bye'

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7; Column 4; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 158 words


Sounding a bit like politicians of another era boasting of "peace with honor" in
Vietnam, Bush Administration officials last week praised Mr. Bush's drug czar,
William J. Bennett, for orchestrating "a turnaround" in the nation's attitude
toward drugs and putting America "on the road to victory" in the drug war. The
occasion was Mr. Bennett's resignation as Director of National Drug Control
Policy, a post in which his policies were frequently criticized by Congressional
Democrats. Mr. Bennett denied reports that he was leaving because he was "bored,
moping about lack of media attention, sulking about not being in the Cabinet, in
a snit with John Sununu and being stampeded out of town." And to the end, he
swapped jabs with his detractors. Representative Charles B. Rangel, the
Manhattan Democrat who heads a panel on drug abuse, said Administration drug
policy had been "a colossal failure." Mr. Bennett called Mr. Rangel "a gasbag."

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: William J. Bennett (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Business and the Law;
New Adversaries In Asbestos Battle

BYLINE: Stephen Labaton

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 905 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


FOUR months ago, Federal District Judge Jack B. Weinstein stepped into the
quagmire of costly litigation surrounding asbestos, promising from his Brooklyn
courtroom to take bold steps to consolidate thousands of cases from around the
nation and achieve strong results for countless victims and their survivors
whose compensation has been delayed for decades.

The judge has told lawyers and friends that the legal system's handling of
asbestos cases -- particularly the workers in the Navy shipyards where it was
widely used -- is the last great battle of World War II.

By all accounts the battle has now become one between Judge Weinstein and the
plaintiffs' lawyers. In his moves to slash legal fees and temporarily freeze
payments by asbestos defendants to lawyers and their clients, the judge has
achieved something that had been considered impossible. He has unified what was
a highly divided plaintiffs' bar, which is now together in its enmity for him.

So enraged were they last week about his rulings in one big asbestos case -- the
proposed class action of Eagle-Picher Industries -- that they threatened to
break off negotiations in a different case, which involves the restructuring of
the ailing trust set up two years ago by the Manville Corporation to compensate
victims of its asbestos products.

Now, Judge Weinstein is preparing to pull back from his ruling in Eagle-Picher.
He is expected at a hearing today to effectively rescind an order that had
blocked the company from making payments on the asbestos cases.

From the start, the judge's goal has been the creation of one huge fund from
contributions by asbestos makers and their insurers that would be used to give
something to all victims. His vehicle has been the supervision of the Manville
Personal Injury Settlement Trust and asbestos companiesthat want to see an end
to their virtually unlimited legal liabilities. But plaintiffs' lawyers complain
that in his rush to attract companies to file class-action requests in his
court, Judge Weinstein is becoming pro-industry.

The Eagle-Picher order was issued Nov. 3 after all-night discussions between the
company and representatives for plaintiffs. It was made public at about the same
time as an unusual statement by the company that it was nearing a $250 million
settlement in the asbestos case. The plaintiffs' representatives in the proposed
class action, Peter Angelos of Baltimore, had been asserting that settlement
remained far off.

"The most serious impact of Judge Weinstein's order halting payments was to
allow certain plaintiffs' lawyers to make claims that they didn't have faith in
what the court would do," said Mr. Angelos, who also serves on the plaintiffs'
committee in the Manville trust case. Mr. Angelos said on Friday that the two
sides were far from a settlement.

Judge Weinstein's decision to reconsider the Eagle-Picher order came after
desperate pleas from Leon Silverman, the court-appointed negotiator in the case
of the Manville trust, who even went to Judge Weinstein's home on Long Island
recently to apprise him of the stalled talks.

The new compensation scheme, which is expected to be announced within a few
weeks, would separate asbestos victims into two categories. All Level 1 victims,
those with more serious diseases that include mesothelioma and other fatal
cancers, would be exclusively entitled to some compensation for the first two
years of operations. In the third year, the more serious of the Level 2 victims,
those with less severe illnesses, would begin to get some compensation -- but
less than half of the amount that comparable victims had received before the
Manville Trust ran out of cash.

In the Eagle-Picher action, the unresolved issues include the size of the
settlement and whether it will include an ownership interest in the company, as
happened in the bankruptcy proceeding of Manville. The settlement is being
closely watched by other companies who could follow and file for class action
recognition if they are able to receive blanket guarantees that their legal
bills will cease and that they will be protected from further Federal and state
court actions. Company executives and defense lawyers have been wary about the
probability of such guarantees, especially since the Federal Anti-Injunction Act
makes it difficult for a Federal judge to block a state court proceeding.

In the meantime, lawyers in the asbestos cases say the lawsuits are continuing
to resemble the Agent Orange cases, also supervised by Judge Weinstein, in which
the judge raised hackles by keeping legal fees down and pressuring all the
parties into a settlement on the eve of a trial. More resemblances will become
apparent this week, when the judge formally announces his decision to hire Sol
Schreiber, the third lawyer retained by the court who had also appeared in the
Agent Orange class action, the complex dispute between Vietnam veterans and the
manufacturers and insurers of a defoliant used by the military during the
conflict in Southeast Asia.

Mr. Schreiber, a former Federal magistrate and an authority on the management of
civil litigation, will supervise a committee of experts that will sift among the
scores of studies and determine the depth of asbestos illnesses expected to
become apparent in the next few years. The assessment is critical for
formulating Judge Weinstein's plan of a large fund and compensation scheme.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1217 words


INTERNATIONAL A3-15

Is America ready for war with Iraq? Politicians avoided discussing U.S. policy
in the Persian Gulf during the election, but now that nearly 400,000 troops are
to be in the region, the wisdom of combat there is being debated with new vigor.
Page A1

The decision not to rotate U.S. troops puts the country on too fast a track
toward war in the Persian Gulf, said Senator Sam Nunn, a defense expert,
criticizing President Bush's recent military order. A15

Egypt offers an Iraqi conspiracy, planned a year ahead with the knowledge and
aid of Jordan and Yemen, when asked to explain the circumstances of Iraq's
seizing of Kuwait.  A14

Troops in Persian Gulf create support group at home A14

Moroccan king asks for Arab talks to avert war A15

Israel might accept a U.N. envoy, a Government official said, but not one sent
specifically to investigate the police killings at a mosque in Jerusalem last
month. The envoy should study Arab-Israeli relations in general, he said. A3

Nationalist feuds in Eastern Europe, which Communism helped subdue, are
returning with a vengeance. Czechs and Slovaks, Romanians and Hungarians, and
Serbs and Croats have all resumed their age-old territorial disputes. A1

An ethnic group dispersed by Stalin is returning to its native land near the
Soviet city, Yalta. In the last three years, 100,000 Crimean Tatars have

resettled -- some from as far away as Siberia. A13

Hungary's Germans reasserting identity A12

Japan's powerful small shopkeepers are fighting back as the Government makes it
easier for large retail stores to do business. The U.S. has asked for this
change to give American goods a new outlet in Japan. A1

The installation of Japan's Emperor will be marked by ancient rituals and
customs, but for the first time in history the ceremony will recognize the
Japanese people as sovereign over the Emperor.  A10

From Chinese province officials, the rare voice of dissent A5

40 killed in rebel offensive in Colombia A3

Guatemala holds election, but voters seem disenchanted by it A7

U.N. chief's choice for refugee commissioner opposed by U.S.  A9

Chad reports it has turned back Libya-supported invaders A8

Shongweni Journal: Into the Valley of Death A4

NATIONAL A16, A20, B8-9

Pentagon contractors guilty of fraud continue to work for the Government,
leading some to ask: Can you really deter fraud without cutting all ties to the
offending companies? A1

Several low-budget candidates won, in part because they were able to make their
opponents' wealth a liability on Election Day. B9

An incumbent's loss at the polls usually is explained by scandal, but in the
case of Representative Robert Kastenmeier, who served for 32 years, observers
say the people of Madison, Wis. simply wanted a change.  B9

Vermont's new Congressman, Bernard Sanders, has gone from being little more than
a political hippie to the first truly independent candidate elected to the House
of Representatives since 1952. B9

President Bush's judicial nominees are overwhelmingly white, male and wealthy,
according to a report by a liberal lobbying group. His last nominee, just
approved by the Senate, is aCongressional aide with little courtroom experience.
A16

A private health insurer has agreed to help pay for a clinical study of an
experimental treatment for breast cancer, marking the first time an insurer has
supported tests of a new medical procedure. A1

An incident at a fraternity party has disrupted the Unversity of Rhode Island. A
woman student says she was raped at the party and another student killed himself
shortly before being questioned about what he saw at the party. A16

CNN may further appeal a court ban on broadcasting taped conversations between
Gen. Manuel Noriega, who is in Federal prison, and his legal team, a spokesman
for the television network said. A20

Help for those who still feel Vietnam's pain A20

Girl who received new heart and liver dies A16

REGIONAL B1-7

New York City's economic health is threatened by the national downturn. Some
industries, like banking and retailing, may be permanently slimmed down,
although several segments of the city's economy are showing surprising
strengths. A1

The Daily News's circulation woes have revived the newspaper hawker, an
itinerant street seller more representative of a bygone era in newspaper
publishing. B1

Tribune Company: A giant that takes no giant steps D1

All-sports format, popular in New York, arrives in the West D1

An insolvent Harlem savings bank, which was closed by Federal agents on Friday,
will be missed by the community it served, say customers of what had been the
country's fourth-largest black-owned bank.  B1

A success story of the SUNY system, the campus at Geneseo, illustrates that a
public college can attract excellent students with low tuition, although some
say the low tuition makes it difficult to run a top-quality school.  B1 New York
and New Jersey's sludge may begin to pile up if New York State is successful in
shutting down a company that tows the sewage waste offshore, some officials say.
B3

A little lizard that eats roaches is becoming a popular pet in New York City. In
many apartments the gecko, a nocturnal lizard, can get by off the fat of the
land.  B1

The world's best chess players may soon begin a tour of American cities,
according to the man who recently promoted the first stage of the world chess
championship in New York City.  B3

8 years later, 2 G.O.P. losers win their case B2

A "tit for tat" Cathedral gift to Jewish Museum B2

School Board president uncertain about call for layoffs B3

Historic status planned for 500 sites in Queens B3

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

SportsMonday

 Basketball: Vandeweghe happy C3

Suns set scoring marks C3

Column: Anderson on Dolphins C5

Features: Question Box C8

On Your Own C10

Football: Giants beat Rams C1

Giants put pressure on Everett C4

Jets lose to Dolphins C1

Bears defeat Falcons C4

49ers top Cowboys C4

Sack mark for Chiefs' Thomas C5

Packers upset Raiders C5

Notre Dame-Colorado for Orange Bowl C7

Hofstra-Cortlandt State matchup C7

Golf: Daniel embraces expectations C7

Hockey: Rangers and Flames in tie C3

Outdoors: Challenge of waterfowling C10

Soccer: Soccer figure tells of situation in Kuwait C2

Tennis: Forgettable year for Graf C1

 Obituaries D9

Harold Caccia, former British envoy to U.S.

Arts/Entertainment

Hard times for the Royal Shakespeare Company C11

Sculptor picked for women's Vietnam memorial C18

Theater: "Shadowlands" C11

Music: Ravel double bill at City Opera C11

Josie Esteban's merengue C14

Murray Perahia in recital C18

Dance: The Juilliard Ensemble C14

Word and Image:Computer-age legends C14

"Korea: The Unknown War" C18

Layoffs at CBS News C18

 Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A18

A little courage on trade

Once and future veterans

"Lean" in name only

Topics: Out-cumbents

Letters A18

William Safire: Giving Iraq time A19

Anthony Lewis: The logic of war A19

Jagdish Bhagwati, Padma Desai: From Uruguay to Moscow A19

Robert Tine: Artist outwits Inquisition A19

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
A DEBATE UNFOLDS OVER GOING TO WAR AGAINST THE IRAQIS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1595 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11


After 14 weeks of proceeding virtually unchallenged at home, the United States
policy in the Persian Gulf has become the focus of a national debate. Political
and government leaders and prominent academics are examining the question of
whether the country's interests in the region are worth defending in a war with
Iraq.

Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, the Democratic Party's leading spokesman on
military matters, joined the other voices today in suggesting that President
Bush was moving too quickly down the road to war and should be more patient to
see if the United Nations-imposed sanctions would work.

Questions Halt to Rotation

Mr. Nunn said the Administration had made a mistake in canceling a plan to
rotate home some of the troops now in the gulf. It marked the first time a
leading Democratic Party figure had directly criticized Mr. Bush's handling of
the gulf situation. [Page A15.]

And in the last few days, voices as disparate as those of the conservative Roman
Catholic Archbishop of Los Angeles, Roger Mahony, and the liberal historian
Arthur Schlesinger Jr. have questioned the Bush Administration's means or its
ends in the gulf crisis. The Cato Institute, a libertarian public policy
research group in Washington, issued a report saying that America has no vital
interest in the gulf worth going to war for, certainly not oil.

Democrats Are Cautious

The Democratic leaders on Capitol Hill are proceeding cautiously. They want
neither to give Mr. Bush a blank check for military action nor to appear to be
undermining him in a foreign confrontation. In a joint statement, the House
Speaker, Representative Thomas S. Foley, Democrat of Washington, and the
majority leader, Representative Richard A. Gephardt, Democrat of Missouri, said,
"We urge the President to explain fully to the American people the strategy and
aims that underlie his decision to dispatch additional forces to the region."

Democratic leaders say they recognize that if American military action is to be
debated before it is taken, that debate must begin soon, and certainly no later
than the return of Congress in January. But at the same time, they worry that
such a debate would send a message of division to Baghdad, making it appear that
Democrats had undercut the essential purpose of the military buildup: to
persuade the Iraqi leadership that America is united and unwavering and that the
only choices are withdrawal or war.

The issue was largely avoided in the recent session of Congress and in the
political campaign that ended last week. But the issue came into sharper focus
as Mr. Bush embarked on a new phase of his gulf policy after the election,
announcing reinforcements of the American troops in the Saudi desert to a level
that will reach nearly 400,000 with the purpose of convincing President Saddam
Hussein of Iraq that the United States is ready for war.

Whether he will succeed in convincing Americans as well is another matter,
political and government leaders say. In and outside Washington, there are
expressions of concern that Americans have not fully explored whether the human
and financial costs of war in the gulf, not to mention the potential political
consequences in the Middle East, are worth the hoped-for gains.

New Critics Emerge

Through most of the gulf buildup, criticism of the military intervention was
confined largely to what Vice President Dan Quayle referred to last week as the
"isolationists" of the Republican Party.

In explaining the motives for American action, President Bush has stopped
emphasizing the need to protect oil supplies, an issue he once cited along with
the need to resist aggression. He now concentrates on opposing aggression,
comparing Mr. Hussein to Hitler. There are critics of both rationales, and a
fear of repeating the Vietnam experience -- suffering great loss of life for
little purpose.

Already, political leaders in both parties have warned the White House that
while Mr. Bush has a national consensus for the steps he has taken so far to
defend Saudi Arabia and isolate Iraq, that may not hold for a costly offensive
to drive the Iraqis from Kuwait. There is criticism from his own party on
Capitol Hill that the President has done a better job of consulting with the
United Nations than with the Congress and the American people.

"I think all of us who have just been out on the campaign trail are impressed
that the support for the President is broad, but also very thin," said
Representative Lee H. Hamilton of Indiana, a senior Democrat on the Foreign
Affairs Committee. "And there's a great deal of uneasiness about all of this.
They do not want American casualties. They feel that very, very strongly. No one
wants American casualties."

In a letter to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, Archbishop Mahony, chairman
of the international policy committee of the United States Catholic Conference,
wrote, "Our country needs an informed and substantive discussion of the human
and ethical dimensions of the policy choices under consideration."

Beginnings of Partisan Division

One-third of voters surveyed on Election Day opposed American military action
that would produce heavy casualties, a level of opposition reached during the
Vietnam War only after several years of fighting. The survey also found the
clear beginnings of the sort of partisan division that tore the country during
Vietnam: two-thirds of those opposing American action in the gulf, and in
particular, black Americans, voted Democratic. But more than half of those who
say the nation should persevere even in the face of many casualties voted
Republican.

In writing that war was simply the continuation of politics by other means,
Clausewitz, the Prussian military strategist, expanded on the crucial link
between the two: "Since war is not an act of senseless passion but is controlled
by its political object, the value of this object must determine the sacrifices
to be made for it in magnitude and also in duration. Once the expenditure of
effort exceeds the value of the political object, the object must be renounced
and peace must follow."

What then is the nation's political object in the gulf, and what level of
sacrifice is it worth?

The Administration has given different answers to this question. Soon after the
Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, Mr. Bush said: "Our jobs, our way of life, our own
freedom and the freedom of friendly countries around the world will suffer if
control of the world's great oil reserves falls into the hands of Saddam
Hussein."

'Fight Isn't About Oil'

But more recently the Adminstration has abandoned -- indeed rejected -- this
suggestion that the gulf confrontation is a modern day spice war, a defense of
crucial economic interests. Mr. Bush returned to the image of America as the
defender of freedom, the central argument in support of every other war America
has fought in this century.

"The fight isn't about oil," Mr. Bush said during a pre-election campaign swing.
"The fight is about naked aggression that will not stand."

"We can only presume that this line has been taken because some pollster had
told the President that the public would not support sacrifice of American lives
to secure Mideast oil and that he'd better start talking on a moral basis if he
wanted to make hay with voters," said Ted Van Dyk, a Democratic analyst of
economic and political events.

Mr. Van Dyk suggested that Mr. Bush's current rationale was inconsistent with
past American policy toward Iraq.

"Fact is," he said, "Saddam Hussein has been acting like a mini-Hitler for many
years. We, in fact, supported his invasion of, and war with, Iran."

"We are engaged only because of oil, as we should be," Mr. Van Dyk continued.
"But to deny that self-evident fact was to further shake our partners'
confidence in the President and to disturb thinking people here. You can be sure
we wouldn't have a platoon on the Kuwaiti frontier if the resource in the region
was guano."

How Much Oil, and How Vital?

But there are conflicting views over whether Middle Eastern oil is a vital
American interest. Statements that Saddam Hussein could end up controlling 40
percent of the world's oil reserves are true, but largely irrelevant, The Cato
Institute argues in its report, written by Christopher Layne, a Los Angeles
attorney, and Ted Galen Carpenter, the institute's director of foreign policy.

Oil reserves, they argue, are a geologist's concept, a measure of how much oil
lies beneath a piece of land. "The pertinent question is how much control Iraq
could gain over current world oil production," they wrote. "Even a worst-case
scenario does not support the Bush Administration's panic-mongering. Iraq's
conquest of Kuwait gave Baghdad control over 7 percent of global production. If
Saddam were to take over Saudi Arabia, that figure would increase to only 15.7
percent."

Michael Mandelbaum, director of East-West studies at the Council on Foreign
Relations and a professor at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International
Studies, argues that this is still a substantial fraction of world production.
"Oil is power," he said, and it matters who holds that power, since Mr. Hussein
would use it to expand his military strength and thus his influence in the
region.

Mr. Schlesinger argued that the sanctions addressed this problem by cutting off
Iraq's oil revenues. He and others also challenged the notion that the United
States could, or should, be the deterrent to aggression throughout the third
world.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: An Army mechanized infantry unit training in the Saudi desert. A
debate has begun to emerge over whether the protection of American interests is
worth the cost of combat with Iraq. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg. A14)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
'The Unknown War,' On the Korean Conflict

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 839 words


The cold war may be over in Europe, but the political frost is still on Korea.
How that nation came to be divided, why it remains so and its prospects for
reunification after almost a half century are among the matters addressed in
"Korea: The Unknown War." Most of its six hours, however, are given to an
eventful account of the war itself.

The series, which begins tonight from 9 to 11 on Channels 13 and 49 and
continues into tomorrow and Wednesday, has already been criticized for a
revisionist tone that is unduly kind to North Korea and gives insufficient
credit to American forces in the field. The writers have complained in turn that
the original script has been changed under pressure from such critics. I must
leave that quarrel to the specialists. To this congenitally suspicious reviewer,
however, the documentary, produced by Thames Television of Britain in
association with WGBH, Boston's public station, is filled with sharp and
memory-jogging details and does not seem to be pushing any extreme line at the
expense of the record.

The opener, "Many Roads to War," concentrates on the few years between Korea's
liberation from Japan, its traditional enemy, after World War II and the
outbreak of hostilities in 1950. It is presented as a case history of how
conflicts within a small country can influence relations among great powers.

The series is rich in newsreel clips from both North Korea, which came under
Soviet occupation in 1945, and from South Korea, which was occupied by the
United States, and in the recollections of players on both sides. The division
at the 38th parallel, recalls Dean Rusk, who was then Assistant Secretary of
State for the Far East, was arbitrary and assumed to be temporary.

In both sectors indigenous leaders congenial to the occupying powers took over:
The Communist Kim Il Sung in the North, the conservative nationalist Syngman
Rhee in the South. Neither proved to be a model democrat -- though the series
takes care to distinguish between the totalitarian North and the authoritarian
South; both made claims to the entire country and used postwar tensions between
East and West to advance their ambitions.

Military feints came regularly from both sides of the 38th parallel. The
withdrawal of American military forces from the South in June 1949, followed by
a speech by Secretary of State Dean Acheson that was interpreted as placing
Korea out of America's "defense perimeter" in the Pacific may have been taken as
an invitation to invasion by the heavily armed North. The comments of former
American and Soviet officers and diplomats suggest that the superpowers, whose
concerns were mainly centered on Europe, would have been content to leave their
bellicose Asian clients to their own devices, but were too deeply entangled to
walk away.

Both sides said they were taken by surprise. Whoever started it, this became the
first war to be fought by the United Nations, then pro-West, under the
leadership of the United States. In a revealing interview, a Soviet official
tells of his surprise that his country's U.N. delegation, which had been
boycotting the Security Council over its refusal to admit China, did not return
to block the U.N. action. He calls it a "stupid error."

The series relies, on camera and off, on Bruce Cumings, a professor of history
at the University of Chicago, as its major consultant. Tonight's two-part
program ends with the Communist victories, including the fall of Seoul, in the
early weeks of the war, preparing the way for Gen. Douglas MacArthur's
spectacular landing at Inchon in September 1950.

Veterans from both sides are heard tomorrow and Wednesday in an account of the
crossing of the 38th parallel by the U.N. forces, which prompted a powerful
counterattack by Chinese "volunteers." Also covered are President Harry S.
Truman's dismissal of MacArthur for going public with his proposal to attack
mainland China; the brainwashing of American prisoners of war, and the charges,
orchestrated by the world political left, that the United States was using germ
warfare. (No definitive conclusion is offered on the accuracy of those charges.)
The final program deals largely with the truce of 1953. By this account the
deadlock at the prolonged negotiations was broken by President Dwight D.
Eisenhower's leaked threat to use the atomic bomb.

The end of the war left Korea as divided as it was at the start. In the years
since, of course, South Korea has become an economic wonder, whose relations
with the North are still far from warm. Viewers with a memory of television's
treatment of the Vietnam War may find themselves wondering how matters might
have turned out if Americans at home had been a nightly audience to scenes from
the bitter battlefield of Korea.

Korea
The Unknown War
A six-part documentary series produced by Thames Television in association with
WGBH-TV, Boston; Austin Hoyt of WGBH and Phillip Whitehead of Thames Television,
executive producers. At 9 tonight on Channels 13 and 49.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Douglas MacArthur with President Syngman Rhee after victory
at Inchon in September 1950. A six-hour documentary, "Korea: The Unknown War,"
begins tonight on Channels 13 and 49. (United States Army, 1950)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Sculptor Picked for Vietnam Memorial to Women

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 679 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11


Eileen Barry, a sculptor from East Islip, L.I., was selected today to design a
statue honoring the women who served in the military during the Vietnam War.

In addition, the sponsor of the design competition, the Vietnam Women's Memorial
Project, a organization of women who are Vietnam veterans, selected a
co-finalist with Mrs. Barry, Robert Lee Desmond, a landscape design consultant
from Arlington, Mass., to design the setting for the sculpture.

Diane Carlson Evans, the director of the project, said that Mrs. Barry and Mr.
Desmond would be asked to refine their proposals and that the final design would
be a collaboration.

Split of Top 2 Prizes

The winners were chosen by a 9-person jury from 317 entries. Mrs. Evans said the
$20,000 first prize and $10,000 second prize would be combined and divided
equally between Mrs. Barry and Mr. Desmond.

The awards panel was made up of Vietnam veterans, artists and designers. Raquel
Ramati, a New York City architect and urban designer who was a member of the
panel, said it was split on what concept to adopt. The veterans favored a
representational sculpture while the artists and designers leaned toward an
abstract design. In effect, they got both by selecting both Mrs. Barry's
realistic female figure and Mr. Desmond's abstract setting.

Mrs. Barry's statue is to be built near the existing Vietnam Veterans Memorial
as the first monument honoring military women to be built on the Mall. A
statement by the sponsoring organization said the sculpture would be a
representation of "a single Vietnam-era woman of extraordinary dignity."

Consulting With the Experts

Mrs. Barry said tonight that she had not served in Vietnam but that to get the
ideas for her entry she had interviewed many who had.

"I spent a year and a half talking to women who served in Vietnam, to listen, to
find out what their thoughts were," she said. "The recurring theme was a mixture
of sorrow, pride and anguish. They were very young -- just 19 years old -- but
when they came home they felt very old. They were very strong and courageous
women."

Mrs. Barry's bronze female figure will look toward the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial, designed by Maya Ying Lin as an abstract V-shaped wall inscribed with
the names of the American dead in Vietnam. Mrs. Barry's design also includes a
bronze relief of excerpts from a poem by a servicewoman known only as Dusty that
Mrs. Barry found in a book on the war. This is among the excerpts:

I went to Vietnam to heal
and came back silently wounded.
I went to Vietnam to heal
and discovered that I was not God.
To all of those whose names are on the wall
I am sorry that I could not be God.

 At the ceremony announcing Mrs. Barry's winning entry, a woman approached the
sculptor and identified herself as Dusty. "I was shocked to meet her," Mrs.
Barry said.

Mr. Desmond's design calls for "a white square on the ground that sends forth a
water mist evoking a contemplative mood," placed in a grove of trees, the
statement said. The mist would come from 240 water jets.

It is estimated that 11,000 women served in the armed forces in Vietnam, and
despite the use of the word "memorial," the monument is to honor all of them and
the quarter of a million who served in the military outside Vietnam during the
war, not solely the eight women killed there.

Total Cost of $3.5 Million

After the expected approval from Federal arts authorities (the National Capital
Planning Commission, the Commission of Fine Arts and the National Capital
Memorial Commission), the sponsor hopes to begin construction in 1992. Mrs.
Evans said it would cost $3.5 million, of which $1.5 million has been raised.

Last year Mrs. Barry was commissioned by the American Legion Post 272 in Queens
to create a statue honoring military women from all American wars, but the New
York City Art Commission rejected it as "not strong enough artistically." That
statue, which depicts a military woman in fatigues, has been allowed to be
installed temporarily in a city park in Rockaway Beach.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Eileen Barry of East Islip, L.I., with her design for the
Vietnam Women's Memorial Project. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Help for Those Who Still Feel Vietnam's Pain

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 614 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11


Bob Evans remembers Christmas Day 1969, when he met Joe Hearn Rufty on a hill
near the A Shau Valley in South Vietnam. He remembers the bottle of whisky they
shared and the battery-powered laughing box Mr. Rufty carried to lighten the
grim times.

He also remembers the night Mr. Rufty was shot in the chest and killed while on
patrol.

Twenty years later, he called Mr. Rufty's parents to share his memories of their
son, and Mr. Evans said the call relieved him of a weight he had felt for two
decades. Moreover, he said, it helped Mr. Rufty's parents find others who had
known their son in the war.

That experience prompted Mr. Evans, of McLean, Va., to organize a service that
unites other Vietnam veterans with relatives and friends of the 58,175 people
killed or missing in action. The free service, In Touch, is operated by the
nonprofit group Friends of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.

People can call a toll-free number, 1-800-424-1337, and ask to contact family or
friends of people killed in the war. Since it began in June, the project has
compiled 1,000 names and has made 20 matches. In Touch relies on money from
private donations.

Veterans Day will be observed on Monday.

"It's now been 25 years since the war," said Dr. Arthur Blank Jr., national
director of the Vietnam Veterans Counseling Centers for the Department of
Veterans Affairs, "and I think some parents and children and brothers and
sisters of people killed have been able to work through the loss. But I think
there are some others that have some psychological difficulties to work
through."

Of the matches made by the organization, he said, "You don't have to be a
psychiatrist, you only have to be human, to know that finding that kind of
historical connnection is profoundly helpful to most people, and, in fact, can
help them to have a much more meaningful life."

Among the names in In Touch's file is John Calvin Crawford. He was a Navy
lieutenant killed in March 1967, two days after the third birthday of his
daughter Patty.

"My family was just told he was killed in a plane wreck," Patty Crawford said.
"What I want to do is find some people who served with him and find out some of
the details of his death."

Vicki Ohanesian a 34-year-old office manager from Fairfax, Va., said that
growing up in the aftermath of the war was especially hard for her as the
daughter of a Marine colonel, Victor Ohanesian, killed in Vietnam.

"People were very antiwar," she said. "We received a lot of conflicting
messages. I remember one teacher I had one day started saying we shouldn't have
been in Vietnam, that it was a senseless war. I got really upset."

Jennifer Amos is also searching for people who knew her father, Albert Rodolphus
Amos Jr., a former captain in Army intelligence, whom she regards as a casualty
of the war even though he died three years after the last American soldier left
South Vietnam.

After his homecoming, Ms. Amos said, her father began drinking heavily and
taking prescription drugs. He beat her mother, who divorced him. And in 1978 he
died of an overdose of alcohol and drugs.

"Do I blame the war?" asked Ms. Amos, a 20-year-old student at George Washington
University. "Yes, I do. I think if it hadn't been for the war my father would
still be alive."

Ann Cunningham, from Sacramento, Calif., who served as a nurse in South Vietnam,
said she was hoping that In Touch could help her find the parents of her friend
Alfred Gaidis, who flew a medical helicopter before being killed in action.

"I was trying to find his parents," she said. "I have some pictures of him that
I'd like to give them. And I just want to let them know that I knew their son."

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Thomas of Chiefs Gets 7 Sacks

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 5; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 347 words

DATELINE: KANSAS CITY, Mo., Nov. 11


Derrick Thomas set a National Football League record today with seven
quarterback sacks, but could only agonize over the one that got away.

As time expired, Seattle's Dave Krieg wriggled free of Thomas and heaved a
desperation 25-yard touchdown pass to Paul Skansi in the end zone. Norm Johnson
booted the extra point to give the Seahawks a 17-16 victory over the stunned
Kansas City Chiefs.

"I thought I had him," said Thomas, a linebacker who won the A.F.C. defensive
Rookie of the Year award last season. "He just stumbled back and caught his
balance and threw the pass. That last sack I didn't get is the one I'm going to
remember."

Skansi, surrounded by defenders, leaped high in the middle of the end zone to
make the catch.

Thomas's third sack knocked Krieg loose from the ball in the third quarter and
the noseguard Dan Saleaumua recovered for the Chiefs' only touchdown in three
weeks. That made the score 16-10, and the Seahawks had one last shot after
forcing the Chiefs to punt.

Four seconds remained when Krieg took the final snap and scrambled away from
Thomas.

Seattle (4-5) had not won in Kansas City since 1980. The Chiefs (5-4) suffered
their first loss in five home games.

Thomas, who now leads the league with 15 sacks, broke the N.F.L. single-game
record of six set by San Francisco's Fred Dean against New Orleans in 1983. His
15 sacks are also a team record.

Thomas had special inspiration before the game. Robert Thomas, a captain in the
Air Force, was shot down over Vietnam and was last seen parachuting out. Derrick
Thomas grew up in Alabama thinking about the dad he never knew.

Then in pregame ceremonies Sunday before the Chiefs' game against Seattle, four
Air Force jets flew over Arrowhead Stadium. A few minutes before kickoff, an Air
Force officer, Capt. Jim Preston, gave Derrick a yellow headband for luck.

"Whenever Air Force planes fly over the stadium, it gives me a great deal of
motivation," said Thomas. "And then I was given this headband I have on by an
Air Force officer. It did have lots of significance for me."

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Chief's Derrick Thomas sacking Seahawks' Dave Krieg for a 5-yard
loss yesterday. Thomas had seven sacks in the game. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Once and Future Veterans

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 311 words


To some Americans, Veterans Day is a bit quaint, a time to honor those who
served in wars long past and dimly remembered. But the history of just the last
few years ought to remind Americans that there is nothing old about veterans and
probably never will be.

More than 230,000 American troops are serving in the Persian Gulf right now, and
at least 150,000 more will join them by early next year. Last December, 27,000
Americans invaded Panama, and six years earlier, 8,000 went to Grenada. Before
that were Vietnam, Korea, World War II and what was, with enduring irony, known
as the war to end all wars, World War I.

That's where Veterans Day comes from. World War I ended on Nov. 11, 1918, what
was then called Armistice Day. In 1954, Congress changed the name to the
more-encompassing Veterans Day. President Eisenhower, a celebrated general from
World War II, signed the name-change into law; generals understand that wars --
and veterans -- never die.

America won the cold war and yet now, only months later, is deeply involved in
the Persian Gulf, adding thousands of men and women to the ranks of future old
soldiers.

What kind of veterans will they be? Successful because their presence prevented
war? Fiercely proud, like the veterans of World War I and II? Angry and
frustrated, like those who went to Vietnam? It's too early to know.

What is known is that thousands of menJU
and women who never anticipated spending months in the desert are now doing just
that, separated from home, loved ones, jobs, cold water and fresh food.

Mercifully, their discomfort bears no resemblance to the horrors of combat, and
with any luck never will. But their lives have been disrupted. Those at home,
accustomed to thinking of Veterans Day as a time to honor relics, can pause
today to give respect as well to the former soldiers of the future.


LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Quiet Service Since '59, Then a Stunning Defeat

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 999 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11


For 32 years, Representative Robert W. Kastenmeier has been one of the
semi-anonymous people who make Congress work even when it looks as if it's
falling apart, toiling on obscure committees on important projects with little
political reward, regularly re-elected by districts that they seem to match
perfectly in ideology, ethnic background and temperament.

An old-fashioned liberal Democrat, a civil-rights and civil-liberties advocate
all his life, he has represented the Madison, Wis., area, not as a crusader but
as a legislative craftsman. Quiet-spoken and polite, dogged, a bit austere, he
was senior to all but 10 members of the House, and he was the second-ranking
member of the powerful House Judiciary Committee.

And then, last Tuesday, to the astonishment of everyone, the 66-year-old Mr.
Kastenmeier was defeated by a political unknown, a 37-year-old former anchor on
local television, Scott L. Klug, by the substantial margin of 11,500 votes, or
53 percent to 47.

Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, no ideological soul mate, mourned Mr.
Kastenmeier's political demise, describing him as "a good friend of the Federal
judiciary system," and former Chief Justice Warren E. Burger also praised him.

Even in a Liberal Haven

Other prominent Congressmen have lost their seats. But for Madison to choose a
conservative television personality stunned almost everyone who follows
politics, because Madison is perhaps the most thoroughly liberal small city in
the United States and a bastion of braininess.

It was the base of Robert M. LaFollette, the great turn-of-the-century
Progressive, who once held the seat that Mr. Kastenmeier holds. The Progressive,
LaFollette's magazine, is still published there. It is the home of the
University of Wisconsin, which helped develop the social sciences and first put
them at the service of government. It was in the State Capitol there that the
nation's first workmen's compensation law and other pioneering social
legislation was enacted.

So what happened?

"We were all absolutely blindsided," said Linda Rocawich, managing editor of The
Progressive.

James Lauer, one of the Congressman's consultants, said, "It sort of became a
referendum on Bob and whether he's been there too long, I'm afraid."

"I wish I knew," Mr. Kastenmeier said. "I was in the district the last 10 days,
and there was no visible anger."

Lost Hold of Blue-Collar Vote

Most of the incumbents defeated on Tuesday had either been touched by scandal,
personal or political, or had come from districts that have been highly marginal
for some years. But Mr. Kastenmeier fit neither specification.

Part of the answer lay in the split personality of his district. In the past,
Mr. Kastenmeier built his majorities in Dane County, which includes Madison. He
was weak in the rural counties around it, an area that includes the Ringling
Brothers' hometown of Baraboo; Frank Lloyd Wright's hilltop home, Taliesin, and
the Swiss-settled cheese-making town of New Glarus.

This time, he held on to the votes of most state employees and did well in the
neighborhoods around the university, but he did poorly in east Madison, home of
a giant meatpacking plant and thousands of blue-collar workers. Their defections
cut Mr. Kastenmeier's Dane County margin almost to the vanishing point, and he
was doomed.

In a telephone interview, he said that he thought he had been hurt by his vote,
one of only 29, against the resolution expressing support for President Bush's
deployment of American troops in Saudi Arabia. "It wasn't just a matter of a
single vote," he said, "because I made an issue of it out here. As one who voted
for the Gulf of Tonkin resolution on Vietnam and always regretted it, I felt I
had to speak up strongly on this this time."

Service Too Long and Quiet

But Mr. Kastenmeier may have been hurt even more by the length of his service,
which Mr. Klug emphasized again and again, in a year when Washington experience
was not an asset.

In addition, the Democrat was probably hurt by his failure to advance in three
decades to a committee chairmanship -- unlike his much younger colleague from
Racine, Representative Les Aspin -- and by his dislike for publicity of any kind
and his penchant for technical subjects. He spent much of the 1960's, for
instance, on a comprehensive revision of copyright law, an arcane enterprise
with no electoral appeal.

A peace activist in the 1950's, Mr. Kastenmeier was one of the main authors of
The Liberal Papers, a series of essays designed to push his party to the left.
He played a crucial role in the impeachment hearings against Richard M. Nixon,
persuading his colleagues on the Judiciary Committee that they must vote on the
charges one by one instead of together, which kept the evidence and the
roll-calls closely linked.

"But he wasn't very visible very often after that," said Erwin Knoll, editor of
The Progressive. "People wondered why he wasn't a celebrity, like Aspin. It was
a case of 'what have you done for me lately,' and copyright law just didn't do
it for them."

Respectable Challenge

In fact, Mr. Kastenmeier was never quite as secure as he looked, even though
such nationally weak Presidential nominees as Michael S. Dukakis in 1988 and
George F. McGovern in 1972 carried the district. His first three elections were
closely contested, and in 1980 he was able to take only 54 percent of the vote
against James A. Wright, a former manufacturer of yo-yos. In 1986 and 1988, he
was held under 60 percent.

David Stoeffler, who manages the political coverage of the Wisconsin State
Journal, the morning newspaper in Madison, said Ann Haney, the Republican
candidate in 1986 and 1988, might have won had she been less strident.

Mr. Klug learned that lesson. While pressing for limits on the terms of
Congressmen and criticizing waste in government, he maintained a gentlemanly
tone, and made what Mr. Kastenmeier described as "a serious, creditable
campaign."

NAME: Robert W. Kastenmeier

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Representative-elect Scott L. Klug, left, thanking Wisconsin
Republican leaders Wednesday in Madison after his election victory. He defeated
Representative Robert W. Kastenmeier, right, who was seeking his 17th term, by a
substantial margin, winning 53 percent of the vote. (Photographs by Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 13, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS: Washington Talk;
War, Class Divisions And Burden of Service

BYLINE: By JASON DePARLE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 757 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 12


"What Did You Do in the Class War, Daddy?" asked the headline of a 1975 article
in The Washington Monthly.

In the article, a former Rhodes Scholar, James Fallows, confessed that he, like
other sons of privilege, had ducked the Vietnam draft while "the less gifted and
industrious students were being shipped off as cannon fodder." The observation
was part of a bitter post-Vietnam debate about who served, who didn't, and why.

Today's military has no draft; the soldiers serving in the Persian Gulf are
there at least partly by choice. But the deployment of more than 380,000 troops
to a potential war has revived argument about the way America forms armies. The
reason is that the burden of service continues to be borne by people with fewer
opportunities, less money and darker skin than the population as a whole.

In the view of James Webb, the former Navy Secretary, duty is something everyone
should share. In recent television interviews, he criticized the all-volunteer
force for leaving the less fortunate with America's "dirty work," which in the
Persian Gulf may involve killing and dying. Forty-four American servicemen have
been killed since the deployment began on Aug. 7.

Mr. Webb's concern is echoed in Army policy. "The fighting force must be broadly
representative of the population," says a report on Army personnel put out by
the U.S. Army Soldier Support Center, which helps develop the Army's
administrative doctrine. This is needed, the report said, "to maintain political
and democratic legitimacy."

Would President Bush be slower to send the troops if among them were the sons
and daughters of members of Congress, top newspaper editors and the foreign
policy establishment?

"The people who are making this decision can't imagine they are going to pay any
human cost for it," Mr. Fallows said in an interview last week.

Mr. Webb agrees. If the military was representative, "you would have people
going through the roof right now," he said in an interview. "Instead of being,
'Hey, those are our boys,' it'd be, 'Hey, that's my kid.' "

An article in Roll Call, a twice-weekly newspaper that covers Congress, found
just 2 of the 535 members had children deployed in the gulf region. If the
military were a representative one, Mr. Webb argues, President Bush would not
have deployed the troops. Mr. Bush might still have sent the troops, Mr. Fallows
said, but the decision would be a more sober and considered one. As such, he
said, it would have less potential to create the kinds of divisions that "poison
the country internally," like those that followed Vietnam.

In recent years, some people opposed to reviving the draft have argued that it
would actually treat the poor unfairly, particularly as the post-cold-war army
constricts. The influx of the affluent, they say, would displace the less
fortunate who enlisted because they needed a job.

"That person may not be grateful to be denied this opportunity so that some
yuppie can enjoy an egalitarian moral frisson," Michael Kinsley wrote last week
in his syndicated column.

Whatever its merits, that is primarily a peacetime calculation. Few Americans
see an Army at war as just another jobs program.

With its inequities roundly acknowledged, the Vietnam draft was abolished in
1973. The all-volunteer force that replaced it was widely viewed as low in both
quality and morale. Both improved in the 1980's as the military raised its
education benefits to attract increasingly talented recruits.

Still, those recruits are not drawn from a cross section of America. For
instance, 26 percent of last year's Army recruits were black, compared with 14
percent of the country as a whole for the same age bracket.

Prof. Charles Moscos of Northwestern University, a specialist in military
manpower, calls today's army "a cross-section of lower-middle-class America."
Even fewer members of the more well-to-do classes serve in the military today
than did during Vietnam, he said.

Asked in an Army survey why they had joined, 39 percent of Army recruits said
they needed money for college. Twenty-six percent said they wanted the increased
training or earnings. (Ten percent said they were looking to serve the country.)

Having harvested those financial rewards, these soldiers incurred the obligation
to serve, and most are now doing so with little complaint. They had choices,
many people say. Should heavy casualties occur, that answer is unlikely to
suffice, and the nation may look forward to more pointed headlines about class
and war.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 13, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Too Early for Bush to Dial 911

BYLINE: By James Reston; James Reston is former Washington correspondent and
former executive editor of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 831 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


President Bush keeps saying he is "running out of patience" with Saddam Hussein,
who is, he insists, "worse than Hitler." In the process, he is helping create a
feeling in the country that war is inevitable. It's easy to understand his
frustration, but history hasn't been very kind to impatient warriors.

President Truman ran out of patience during the Korean War, invaded the North
and ran into the Chinese. President Kennedy ran out of patience with Fidel
Castro, and ran into the Bay of Pigs. Presidents Johnson and Nixon ran out of
patience with the stalemate in Vietnam, and were run out of that country. And,
of course, Saddam Hussein got into his present pickle precisely because he
didn't have enough patience to negotiate his grievances with Kuwait and took
that country by force.

It's interesting that even on Veterans Day 1990, when we were supposed to
remember the millions killed in this bloody century, little was said about the
unpredictability of war or about those two impatient scoundrels, Hitler and
Stalin, who fought their way to oblivion. Bush's comparison of Hussein to
Hitler, a madman with superior military forces in the center of industrial
Europe, is ridiculous, and the growing assumption of inevitable war is at best
premature and at worst dangerous.

The blockade of Iraq is just beginning to pinch, and the more it hurts the
greater the danger to Hussein from his own internal political opponents, who are
numerous. Dictators have a genius for provoking fierce hostility within their
own governments, and if Bush doesn't know who might get rid of Hussein, the
Soviets, who have hundreds of "advisers" in Iraq, certainly do.

So it's a little early to be talking about "surgical strikes," assuming there is
any such thing. Iraq is not Panama, and Hussein is no Noreiga.

Nor is Bush faced with a choice between war and appeasement. Iraq is not at the
point of getting nuclear weapons. Another war won't make Israel secure: Tel Aviv
would probably be the first target of Iraq's missiles.

I haven't heard many Americans clamoring for war to "get the boys home for
Christmas," but I hear a lot of people hoping the President will think before he
jumps. That includes Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat, who is not the sort
the President can ignore.

Bush might consider the observations of President Eisenhower, who knew something
about war, negotiated the truce in Korea and avoided the disaster of Vietnam.
"Every war is going to astonish you," he said at a news conference in 1955. "So
that for a man to predict what he is going to use and how he is going to use it
would, I think, exhibit his ignorance of war; that is what I believe. So I think
you just have to wait, and that is the kind of of prayerful decision that may
some day face a President."

When the French Government implored Eisenhower to send his bombers to relieve
its trapped garrison at Dienbienphu in Vietnam, he consulted Vice President
Richard Nixon, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs, Admiral Arthur Radford, all of whom urged him to intervene. He
said he would consider it if Congress approved, the French agreed to stay in the
war and grant independence to Vietnam when it was over and the British would
join in the battle. He knew full well, of course, that none of these
preconditions would be met.

My guess is that war is not "inevitable." The Saudis have insisted on approving
any U.S. offensive military action against Iraq and Kuwait from their territory,
and I don't believe they would approve the incineration of another Arab country.

Also, the Bush Administration wants the U.N. Security Council to give advance
approval of the use of U.S. force, and this would be subject to a veto by the
Soviet Union, China, France and Britain. Maybe they would all approve, provided
other means failed over a much longer period of time, and also provided they
didn't have to join in the battle. But the American people might not be
interested in such an arrangement.

Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain, impressed by her military triumph
in the Falklands, might put her troops behind her militant statements, but
President Francois Mitterrand of France is more cautious. This is a dilemma for
President Bush: on the one hand, he can't very well boast about the "great
coalition" he organized against Hussein and then insist that it does as he
pleases; on the other hand, going it alone is not likely to be a popular option.

This puts him in an awkward position, especially since his own ambassador in
Iraq, following instructions from Washington, told Hussein personally that the
U.S. did not intervene in squabbles between Arab states. It is awkward too for
the American people, who don't like to differ with a President during a crisis.
But saying "My President, right or wrong," in such circumstances, is a little
like saying, "my driver, drunk or sober," and not many passengers like to go
that far.


LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 13, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

HONG KONG CLASH OVER VIETNAMESE

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 773 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Nov. 12


A Supreme Court judge reprimanded the Hong Kong Government today for treating a
group of Vietnamese refugees "as unwelcome nuisances and not human beings" as he
ruled that they had been illegally detained for more than a year and ordered
their release.

But as the 8 Vietnamese representing the group of 111 left the court house
waving and smiling, they were immediately arrested again by 25 Hong Kong
immigration policemen, who took them to Victoria Prison. The other 103
plaintiffs were sent later from a detention center for boat people to the
prison.

The Government said they had been arrested under a part of the immigration law
that was not at issue in the court case. The judge, though, had warned against
any other arrests.

 Headed to Japan

The Vietnamese told the court that they were sailing to Japan to seek asylum
when they were intercepted in Hong Kong waters on May 1, 1989, and offered aid
by officials. They were told that if they did not land in Hong Kong, their boat
would be repaired and provisions would be supplied so they could continue their
trip.

But the Government later decided that repairs to the 70-ton steel-hulled boat
were too expensive. The boat was then destroyed, all the refugees' possessions
were lost, and the 111 men and women were held in a prison-like detention
center, where they have been for a year and a half.

The judge, Raymond Sears, said that the group had broken no law and committed no
crime, and that their detention was illegal.

"Everyone has a right to liberty," he said. "English law does not distinguish
between Hong Kong citizens and Vietnamese boat people."

 Challenge Seen in Arrests

Lawyers for the Vietnamese and several other legal experts said the Government's
re-arrest of the group was a challenge to the judiciary. But a Government
spokesman denied that, saying, "The writ of habeas corpus that freed them was
brought under one section of the immigration ordinance pertaining to boat
people, and we are re-arresting them under another section pertaining to anyone
being in Hong Kong illegally."

The judge said in court that "the Government should be ashamed" of the way it
had dealt with the 111 Vietnamese. He said that when the Government decided to
destroy the boat, the Vietnamese had a right "to expect to be consulted," and he
added that it "has not escaped my attention that not one word of apology" had
been issued by the Government.

Government officials said that because repairs were too expensive they had faced
a choice: either permitting the leaky boat to set sail again or detaining the
group. Lawyers for the Vietnamese pointed out, though, that the group was never
consulted about the decision, and that when the offer of aid was made the men
and women were not warned that they would be detained indefinitely if repairs
were not feasible.

During the trial, the Government opened its argument with one low-level
immigration official as a witness. He was unable to answer the judge's questions
about how much money was allotted for repairs, who decided that the group could
not sail to Japan and who ordered the boat destroyed.

The Government lawyer in the case, Victoria Hartstein, said that if the judge
wished to hear other officials she would do her best to find some. Later, a top
Hong Kong official was called to testify and he warned that even if the 111
Vietnamese won their case and were allowed to leave the detention camp for boat
people, they would be re-arrested as illegal immigrants.

 Judge's Warning

The judge said today, "Any arrests in this magistracy will be seriously
punished." He added: "It will be a challenge to the judiciary. It will weaken
the law in Hong Kong."

"The 111 Vietnamese must be set free," he said.

A Government spokesman said today that the arrests "were not made inside the
court room; they were made outside of it."

In court, the Government said the boat people were held because it was found
that repairs to their battered boat would cost $64,000, and that was too much.
Lawyers for the Vietnamese said that this was "palpable nonsense," pointing out
that the Marine Department's estimate included the cost of repainting the boat,
"which was really to be making only one, final 10-day journey."

The lawyers for the Vietnamese said that if they had been able to complete their
journey to Japan, the group would have arrived at a time when all boat people
were automatically accepted as refugees and processed for resettlement in a
third country. Thus, by destroying the boat, Hong Kong officials blocked that
certain chance for freedom and a new life.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Singapore to Allow Greater U.S. Military Presence

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Nov. 13


In a modest but symbolic expansion of the American military presence in
Southeast Asia, the United States and Singapore agreed today for Singapore to
serve as a base for increased American training missions, visiting warships and
Air Force and Navy personnel.

An accord carrying out the agreement was signed this afternoon by Vice President
Dan Quayle and Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore, as part of a flurry of
diplomatic activity after the enthronement of Emperor Akihito of Japan on
Monday.The agreement followed an offer by Mr. Lee last August to permit
increased American use of Singapore's military sites because of the likelihood
of United States troop withdrawals from the Philippines.

Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu and Foreign Minister Taro Nakayama of Japan also
carried out 35 meetings with visiting heads of state and dignitaries from among
the 158 countries represented at the enthronement.

Few matters of substance were the subject of any agreements, although Japanese
officials said that much of the talk centered on requests for increased economic
aid from Tokyo. Thiswas especially true, they said, in a meeting with President
Corazon C. Aquino of the Philippines.

Japanese officials also said that the Presidents of both Pakistan and Bangladesh
appealed for aid, citing sharp increases in their oil prices, and that similar
appeals came from President Ion Iliescu of Romania, President Arpad Goncz of
Hungary and others from Eastern Europe.

Still other similar appeals were made by leaders of Latin American countries,
but Japanese news reports indicated that only Peru, whose President, Alberto
Fujimori, is of Japanese descent, came away with a pledge ofnew assistance.

The Singapore-Washington agreement had been worked out in negotiations over the
last several months, with virtually no involvement by Mr. Quayle or his staff,
but officials said they thought that the presence of the two leaders here marked
a good opportunity to highlight its importance.

The agreement would permit the United States to send aircraft to Singapore
"several times each year on training deployments of several weeks each" and for
the Navy to increase the duration and number of its ship visits.

In addition, the United States intends to increase the number of its military
personnel to about 95, with another 75 Air Force men and women visiting with
each training deployment.

An issue blocking the accord in recent weeks was Singapore's request
forpayments, which the United States rejected in principle. An American
statement said that while no rent of fees are contemplated, the United States
would pay for housing, supplies and services supplied by Singapore.

Another issue was the United States' worry about Singapore's severe penalties,
including execution, for convictions on possession of small amounts of marijuana
and other drugs. In its statement today, the United States said that it had
"fully briefed" American personnel on Singapore laws, and that the accord
"recognizes the sovereignty of Singaporean law."

Prime Minister Lee, who is retiring at the end of this month after serving in
office since 1959, has been an ardent champion of the United States' remaining
in the region, especially because of the increasing possibility of withdrawal of
American forces from the Philippines.

Some Asian nations are worried that if the United States withdraws military
forces from Asia, other countries -- including China, Japan, Vietnam and India
-- could try to fill the vacuum.

The United States and the Philippines are negotiating the future of the American
military bases there, with the United States announcing last week that it would
withdraw fighter planes from Clark Air Base and take other steps to reduce its
troop strength.

In Singapore, the United States issued a statement saying that the Singapore
increase would be "modest" and that it "enhances existing military arrangements"
between the two countries, since American naval vessels have been docking in
Singapore for more than 25 years.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

EVOLUTION IN EUROPE;
New Flock for Moon Church: The Changing Soviet Student

BYLINE: By FELICITY BARRINGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1403 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 13


The Unification Church of the Rev. Sun Myung Moon has extended its proselytizing
efforts to the Soviet Union. Hundreds of Soviet college and graduate students
have been brought to America for an all-expenses-paid immersion in the ways and
beliefs of the church, which suggest that Mr. Moon may be the new messiah.

The visits, billed as educational excursions, are but one of a broad range of
church-sponsored activities in the Soviet Union. In April, Mr. Moon met with
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union and expressed support for the
political and economic transformations under way in the Soviet Union.
Church-affiliated groups like the World Media Association have sponsored
conferences in Moscow and discussions were begun on possible joint ventures in
fields like computers and ballet.

Recruiting for the educational trips started this summer, and three groups have
already visited America under the joint sponsorship of the church-affiliated
International Leadership Conference and Novosti, the Soviet press feature
syndicate. The goals, church officials say, are the same as those of many other
current Soviet-American endeavors: peace, mutual understanding, "closeness to
your neighbor."

'Learning a Lot of History'

"We're learning a lot of history," said Aleksei, a 28-year-old graduate student
at Moscow's Institute of Physical Culture, said, recalling the lectures attended
at the Ramada Inn outside of Hagerstown, Md., on this, his first visit to
America. "They talked about how the history of Israel is connected with
Christianity. How Christ was the Messiah.

"Then it seems as if there is going to be another messiah. In our time. They
have shown us how the texts show that Korea is the country where he will appear.
Then it seems as if he may be here. Then it seems he may be Sun Myung Moon."

Another of those attending, Irina Treibich, a student at the Institute of
Management in Moscow, was enthusiastic about the experience in an essay she
wrote in English for her hosts after she and about 200 others, with ages ranging
from 20 to 28, spent five days sightseeing and five days in intensive lectures
and seminars at the conference in Hagerstown.

Lectures and Discussions

"To my mind it is a very good idea what Soviet students took part in such
conference, because it help to unification of whole world," Miss Treibich wrote.
"Unification of all peoples, of whole countries, I think, it's only way which
save all people."

At the conference, according to the Soviet students attending, lectures
alternated with small-group discussions, at which attendance was strictly
enforced. Curfews were enforced by polite, insistent proctors, and the schedule
and setting insured only fleeting contact with outsiders. The format, according
to an expert on the Unification Church, strongly resembles the church's
introductory sessions with people the church regards as potential converts.

Sponsors of the exchange, both Soviet officials and American members of the
Unification Church movement, say mutual understanding and not conversion, is the
objective of the exercise. The students and their hosts, however, had slightly
different memories of what was discussed.

'Framework of Religion'

"They are having lectures on economics," said Tony Devine, an official of the
International Leadership Conference.

Aleksei said, "Mostly it's about religion."

Natasha Boldareva, a 23-year-old graduate student at the Physical Culture
Institute in Moscow sat by the swimming pool at the Ramada Inn and said, "This
is delightful." When asked the topic of the lectures, she answered: "Many
different things. Economics. History. But everything is seen through the
framework of religion."

Aleksandr Borisov, a dean of Moscow's Institute for International Relations, who
accompanied the students, said: "We are trying to increase the spiritual basis
of our politics. We are trying to understand problems through the prism of
religious tolerance."

'I'm a Materialist'

Some of the students were more practical. "No, I don't agree with what they're
telling us; I'm a materialist," said one young man, who spoke on the condition
that his name not be used. "But how else am I going to see America?"

"They're getting to see American democracy," Mr. Devine said. But none of six
students interviewed at the Ramada Inn on Nov. 5 knew that the American
elections were being held the next day. Televisions had been removed from the
students' rooms "so that they wouldn't stay up all night watching during the
conference," Mr. Devine said.

Many of the recent visitors were clearly impressed with the trappings of
American life and with the warmth of their hosts. "Almost everything about this
is positive," said Aleksei, though he compared the "pressure to conform" with
his Soviet Army experience.

Two other students expressed puzzlement at their inability to meet with American
students other than those who were part of the lectures and discussion groups
and the organized sing-alongs that opened each day's activities. Others were
taken aback when a discussion group leader said the church had chosen a wife for
him. One or two students were openly skeptical about their hosts.

'They Are Sweet With Us'

"They are sweet with us; sweet, sweet, sweet -- too sweet," said Igor Garilsky,
25, a student at the Institute for International Relations, who said he had read
a book on the church before he came. As he spoke in a hall after midnight, his
hosts patrolled the corridors of the Ramada Inn with walkie-talkies on their
hips, enforcing the curfew by insistent requests that students retire for the
night. One occasionally put his ear to the door of a room, apparently to hear
who was inside. The two sexes were forbidden to mingle after curfew.

The Unification Church traces its roots from the Christian tradition and focuses
on a belief in the imminent arrival of a new messiah. The Soviet visits come as
the church, which has tax-free status as a bonafide religion, has changed its
public image. The organization whose members once sold flowers at airports has
now spawned affiliate organizations that underwrite film projects, have
assembled parcels of real estate in Manhattan and publish newspapers including
The Washington Times, The New York Tribune and Noticias del Mundo.

But Mr. Moon still selects spouses for his followers, who are then married by
the thousands at mass ceremonies. The charges of brainwashing that came from
former church members and their families are still heard, and the California
Supreme Court last year upheld the right of two Californians -- who claim they
were brainwashed -- to sue the church for fraud.

Appealing to the Unsettled

Marc Galanter, a professor of psychiatry at New York University and author of
the book "Cults: Faith, Healing and Coercion" (Oxford University Press, 1989)
said the Unification Church had great appeal to people living in unsettled
times. The students taking part in these exchanges grew up when Communism and
cynicism were the twin faiths of everyday life, and arrived at adulthood to find
most ideological, economic and political verities shredded in a national orgy of
disillusionment.

"A large part of the reason the cult movements had the success they did in the
late 1960's and 1970's was that the society was in turmoil," Mr. Galanter said.
"There was the Vietnam war, all the civil turmoil. Youth had lost faith in the
ideologies they had been offered.

"I think there's a definite parallel" with the situation of Soviet youth today,
he added. Dr. Galanter, when told of the conference at the Ramada Inn, said it
resembled some of the introductory sessions offered by the Unification Church in
the United States.

Igor Drobyshev, a representative of Novosti who accompanied the students from
Moscow, disagreed. "They don't try to indoctrinate the student," he said. "They
wanted the students to get acquainted with this religious trend in the world.
The activities of this church are based on human values, and the idea of those
values is very popular right now in the Soviet Union."

But Mr. Garilsky agreed with Dr. Galanter, saying: "They see this as their
chance to drive a wedge into the Soviet Union, and this is their wedge. Maybe
only a few people here will become convinced. But that's fine for them. They can
go back and, as we say, 'scatter flowers.' "

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of a Soviet group visiting Washington as guests of the
Rev. Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church gave a Lenin pen to Tony Amoroso, a
Park Service ranger, during stop at the Lincoln Memorial. (Marty Katz for The
New York Times) (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS: THE BARRIERS FACING BUSH;
Gulf Actions Expose Foreign Policy Limits

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 955 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 13


President Bush is learning that limitations on Presidential power apply in
foreign policy as well as domestic affairs.

Having been forced last month to accept a budget settlement that he admitted he
disliked, the President now faces impediments to his policy in the Persian Gulf.
The most obvious of these is the rising clamor for a special session of
Congress, in which concern about constitutional war-making prerogatives appears
to be mixed with at least some element of all-out antiwar sentiment.

The White House opposes such a session both on principle, because it is loath to
cede any decision-making power in matters of national security, and on pragmatic
grounds, because it fears that Congress might pass a resolution forbidding
offensive action rather than authorizing it. But an emergency session seems
possible anyway, such is the bipartisan momentum gathering behind the idea, with
one of the Senate's most influential Republican senators, Richard G. Lugar of
Indiana, backing it, and another, Bob Dole, the minority leader, giving it
conditional support.

A resolution authorizing the United States to take offensive action might
strengthen the President's hand, in the sense that it would give credibility to
Mr. Bush's threats to drive Iraqi mili- tary forces out of Kuwait by force, if
that should prove necessary.

But a failure by Congress to pass such a resolution, once convened for that
purpose, or even a divisive debate, followed by a reasonably close vote, might
persuade President Saddam Hussein of Iraq that Mr. Bush lacks the political
backing necessary to conduct a war. In fact, the very fact that a debate has
begun, together with reports of polls showing declining public support for
offensive action, may well send a signal of irresolution to Baghdad.

With Congress scattered to the four corners of the country, head counts are not
easy, but a senior Democrat in the House, currently the more impetuous of the
two chambers, said today that he thought a vote limiting the President's options
was quite possible.

Less obviously, Mr. Bush finds himself faced, as a matter of political reality,
with the necessity of getting a United Nations resolution specifically
authorizing military action in the gulf. All the European members of the ad hoc
coalition led by the United States except Britain, and all its Arab members,
have made it clear to the Administration that they will not fight without
Security Council action under Article 42 of the United Nations Charter.

Mr. Bush says that is legally unnecessary, but he has also said that the United
States cannot, in political terms, go it alone against Mr. Hussein. It must be
the world against Iraq, he has said, not the United States against Iraq.

Within Bush's Grasp

At the moment, United Nations authorization appears to be within the President's
grasp, with France, the Soviet Union and China, any one of which could block
action through the veto, reportedly having pledged not to do so. But "there is
no guarantee that things will stay that way, and as we get closer to the
possibility of actual shooting, it could get harder to hold the other countries
in line," a senior State Department official conceded.

Although Marlin Fitzwater, the White House press secretary, spoke on Monday of
the possibility that some "unforeseen kinds of provocations" might lead to war,
the European countries, at least, are expecting something much more deliberate.
One European official spoke this week about "an announced war" in which United
Nations action would be pushed through over a period of 10 days or two weeks,
probably early in January, well before an attack.

Even the weather and the religious calendar are bearing down on the President.
If he doesn't attack by late February, experts on the Middle East say, it will
be hard to attack in the following five months or so. This is true because the
Arab allies of the United States are expected to be reluctant to fight on the
Ramadan holiday, which falls about March 17 this year -- the exact date
depending on sightings of the moon -- and because the onset of hot weather in
the desert makes sustained combat difficult if not impossible.

Some Oppose a Session

There was no unanimity on the question of a special session in the Democratic
ranks, with the majority leader, Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, expressing
his opposition. But Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who heads the Senate
Armed Services Committee, said "Congress ought to speak on this subject" before
any offensive against Mr. Hussein began.

More than a struggle for power and more than a clash of views on the appropriate
strategy is involved in the nascent debate. The memory of the Vietnam War, in
which public support when the risks seemed small became public hostility when
the costs got heavy, has made everyone -- from American voters to foreign
ministers of American allies to people on Capitol Hill -- determined that the
responsibility for initiating hostilities against Iraq, if it comes to that, is
widely shared. But there is little agreement on the methodology.

"A wise President consults with Congress," said Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the
conservative who was chief United States delegate to the United Nations, "and
George Bush is doing that." The President, said Sol M. Linowitz, a more liberal
former diplomat, ought to make absolutely sure he has his allies aboard.

The question in both cases, of course, is how much of a say Mr. Bush is prepared
to give his domestic and foreign partners in the momentous decision that lies
ahead -- and what Mr. Hussein will make of the laborious processes through which
those who lack his dictatorial powers make up their minds.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Rikers Suspect Held In September Killing Of Homeless Helper

BYLINE: By JOHN T. McQUISTON

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 267 words


A 36-year-old man being held on a robbery charge at Rikers Island was charged
yesterday with the September murder of a former recluse who helped the homeless,
the police said.

The suspect, Frank Jigs, was brought from the Rikers prison to appear in a
lineup at the Seventh Precinct station house in Manhattan. He was identified by
witnesses and charged with criminal possession of a weapon and second-degree
murder in the stabbing of Thomas Ebbers, said Sgt. Mary Wrensen, a police
spokeswoman.

Mr. Ebbers was stabbed many times in the chest on the evening of Sept. 20 in
Seward Park on the Lower East Side, near the church basement where he lived and
befriended the homeless.

Mr. Jigs, who was also known by the alias Anthony Jenkins, was being held at
Rikers in connection with a robbery he was charged with committing some time
after the attack on Mr. Ebbers.

The body of Mr. Ebbers, a 47-year-old Vietnam veteran, was found by the police
near the Augustine Episcopal Church at 292 Henry Street, where he had lived in
the basement with a dozen other homeless men.

His death shocked his friends and colleagues at the various churches where he
spoke as part of the Homeward Bound program, an organization of self-supporting
homeless men and women who reach out to help other homeless people.

Sergeant Wrensen said Mr. Jigs had "a very extensive criminal record, mainly for
violent incidents, including assaults and stabbings."

She said Mr. Jigs was apparently trying to rob Mr. Ebbers when the attack
occurred, but was not successful. The victim's wallet was not touched, she said.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Senators Asking President To Call Session Over Gulf

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1334 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 13


Influential lawmakers from both parties urged President Bush today to convene a
special session of Congress on the Persian Gulf crisis, as the White House
confronted increasing concern about the possibility of war in the Middle East.

But the White House said it opposed a special session, fearing that it would
undermine Mr. Bush's strategy, and Congress itself was fundamentally divided.
Some Republicans wanted to call lawmakers back to lend clear-cut support for Mr.
Bush's policies.

Senator Richard G. Lugar, a senior Republican on the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, said Mr. Bush needed that explicit backing because his decision to
nearly double the American military force in the gulf region "has set the United
States on a collision course in which Iraq will either withdraw from Kuwait or
be forced to do so by military means."

Kennedy Deplores Silence

Some Democrats who favored a special session hoped instead to limit the
President's ability to commit American troops to war. Senator Edward M. Kennedy,
Democrat of Massachusetts, said the United States was on a "headlong course
toward war" and added, "Silence by Congress now is an abdication of our
constitutional responsibility and an acquiescence in war."

George J. Mitchell, the Senate majority leader, gave voice to concerns that have
arisen since Mr. Bush last week dramatically increased the American force,
saying that the President "has no legal authority, none whatever," to order an
offensive against Iraq.

"The Constitution clearly invests that great responsibility in the Congress and
the Congress alone," he said.

Hesitancy to Call Session

But Mr. Mitchell said he was reluctant to hold a special session of Congress,
which is not scheduled to return until January. There was also hesitancy among
leading Republicans. Senator Bob Dole, the minority leader, supported a special
session. But after meeting with Mr. Bush, he appeared to modify his position,
suggesting that Congress might wait and see if the United Nations first
explicitly endorsed military action against Iraq.

The issue overtook a Republican caucus convened to elect new party leaders in
the Senate. Emerging from the meeting, Senator Bob Kasten of Wisconsin said,
"There are as many opinions in that room as there are Senators."

That left the prospects for a special session in doubt. The Armed Services and
Foreign Affairs committees of Congress were expected to hold hearings on the
gulf after Thanksgiving, but no date was set because the chairmen of the panels
said they were having difficulty getting commitments from top Adminstration
officials to testify.

Mr. Bush will discuss the issue with Congressional leaders on Wednesday at the
White House. Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Defense Secretary Dick
Cheney plan a briefing on Capitol Hill.

War Powers Resolution

The debate turned on complex political, military and constitutional questions.
Most fundamentally, lawmakers and Administration officials are coming to grips
with the question that has vexed American leaders since at least the Korean War:
How much power does the President have to order troops into combat without
seeking advance permission from Congress?

Like his predecessors, Mr. Bush believes that as Commander in Chief, he has the
power to use the military without a declaration of war if there is a need to act
speedily to protect American lives and national interests. Article 1 of the
Constitution gives Congress the authority to declare war.

Congress allowed Presidents to bypass a declaration of war in Korea and Vietnam.
In the gulf, Congress has not challenged the President on the basis of the War
Powers Resolution, which was passed in 1973 after American participation in
Vietnam had ended.

The resolution, which Mr. Bush and his predecessors have resisted, requires the
President to notify Congress within 48 hours of sending troops where "imminent
involvement in hostilities" is possible. Mr. Bush has asserted that the law is
not relevant in the case of the gulf deployment because the American troops do
not face imminent hostilities.

Now an Issue in Gulf

Nevertheless, the issue has arisen because the gulf deployment has taken place
over more than three months without overt conflict, and because there is now the
suggestion that American forces might be used not just to defend Saudi Arabia
but to attack Iraq.

Politically, the discussion underlined how the atmosphere of the gulf crisis has
changed since the elections last week, as lawmakers, no longer constrained by
fear for their political futures, sought to position themselves before any
decision by Mr. Bush to take the offensive against Iraq.

Some Republicans said they wanted to cement public support for the
Administration's gulf policy. Some Democrats said they wanted to make clear that
Mr. Bush does not have carte blanche and that Congress is opposed to taking the
offensive against Iraq before economic sanctions have a chance to work.

The flurry of Congressional activity came in response to Mr. Bush's order last
week to nearly double the American troops stationed in the gulf region.

Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told a French
radio station today that he did not believe war in the gulf was imminent as a
result of Mr. Bush's action.

Will Troops Be Rotated?

But the increase in forces heightened concern on Capitol Hill that the
Administration was moving quickly toward war, as did Mr. Cheney's remarks on
Friday that the Pentagon had dropped its plan to rotate troops in the gulf.

In an apparent effort to quiet that concern, Mr. Cheney told a closed-door
meeting of the House Armed Services Committee today that he was not ruling out
troop rotation and had not made a final decision, according to Representative
Les Aspin, the Wisconsin Democrat who is chairman of the committee. But General
Powell told the panel that Pentagon planners were not discussing troop
rotations, other officials present at the hearing said.

Pentagon officials say that such rotations would be very difficult to arrange in
any event. In the case of the Marine Corps, which has two-thirds of its combat
troops in or headed to Saudi Arabia, there are not enough Marines left to carry
out a rotation.

Navy Reserves to Be Called

Pete Williams, the Pentagon spokesman, announced today that the Marines would
conduct an amphibious-assault exercise in Saudi Arabia. The Washington Times
reported that the exercise would be held 10 miles from the border of
Iraqi-occupied Kuwait, within range of Iraq's Silkworm missiles, and quoted
American officials as saying that Iraq might consider that "provocative."

A Marine Corps official said the maneuvers would be held more than 35 miles
south of the Saudi-Kuwaiti border, specifically outside the range of the
Silkworm missiles.

The Pentagon also announced that it had authorized the Navy to increase its
callup of reserves to 10,000 from 6,300 and that it will take similar steps for
the other services.

'A Desire to Know'

While the White House focused on maintaining support among its international
allies, some Republicans argued that Mr. Bush should pay more attention to the
domestic side of the gulf crisis by rallying support among lawmakers and the
American public.

Senator Lugar, who first proposed the idea of a special session on Monday, said
that after talking to his constituents, "I think there is a desire to know why
we are there, and that leads me to believe people don't know."

Vexed by these suggestions that Mr. Bush had not made his case, the White House
today insisted that popular sentiment favored Mr. Bush. But Marlin Fitzwater,
the White House spokesman, went out of his way to assure the public that the
President was still seeking a peaceful solution to the crisis and had not made a
decision to go to war.

"There is no war," he said. "We want to do everything to avoid it. We want a
peaceful resolution."

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Senator Richard G. Lugar at news conference yesterday (Jose R.
Lopez/The New York Times) (pg. A1); With the possibility of war looming in the
Persian Gulf, members of Congress of both parties urged President Bush to
convene a special session on the crisis. George J. Mitchell, center, the Senate
majority leader, announced hearings to be held by Senators Claiborne Pell, left,
the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, and Sam Nunn, the chairman of
the Armed Services Committee. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times) (pg. A14)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Jailed Vietnamese Refugees Are Released in Hong Kong

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 87 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Nov. 13


The Hong Kong Government today released on bail 111 Vietnamese refugees it had
arrested Monday just after a Supreme Court judge freed them from more than a
year of detention.

The refugees have been at the center of a court case over the treatment of
Vietnamese in Hong Kong. On Monday, Judge Raymond Sears ruled that they had been
illegally detained for a year and a half, and ordered them set free.

But the Government sent immigration officials to arrest the Vietnamese as they
walked out the court house door.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Sorting Out Legal War Concerning Real War

BYLINE: By NEIL A LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1147 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 14


As the prospect of armed conflict in the Persian Gulf stirs increasing
discussion, President Bush finds himself challenged by legal questions about his
ability to wage war.

The calls in recent days by lawmakers for a special Congressional session to
debate Persian Gulf policy have provided new urgency to a 200-year-old debate
over how much of a role Congress should have in the President's decision to use
combat troops abroad.

The issue prompted debate after United States military actions in Grenada and
Panama, but with the much greater scale of the military involvement in the
Persian Gulf the war-making powers of the President are generating concern more
heated than at any time since the Vietnam War.

As President Bush is confronting questions about his constitutional authority at
home, the Administration is also grappling with points of international law,
especially the issue of how much the United States should feel constrained to
act independently of United Nations Security Council resolutions.

Only 5 War Declarations

In terms of purely national limitations, the Constitution vests Congress with
the power to declare war, as the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell, a
Maine Democrat, forcefully reminded President Bush on Tuesday. Yet according to
various expert tallies, Presidents have dispatched forces abroad between 130 and
200 times since the founding of the republic and Congress has only explicitly
declared war on five occasions: the War of 1812, the Mexican War, the
Spanish-American War and the two world wars.

In addition to those formal declarations, Congress in a few instances enacted
statutes that authorized Presidents to take action but used hedged language in a
reflecton of Congressional timidity in making war. In most cases, Congress
simply acquiesced in the President's actions, continuing to appropriate funds
for the military ventures. The Korean War is most often cited as a prime
example.

Presidents in recent years have frequently justified sending troops abroad
without obtaining Congressional consent by claiming that consultation would
compromise military operations. President Reagan used such an argument to parry
critical questions after the invasion of Grenada in 1983.

'No Emergency Here'

Mr. Bush has said that "history is replete with examples where the President had
to take action" without Congressional authorization and he would "have no
hesitancy at all to do so."

But many legal scholars and some members of Congress are claiming that the
character of the buildup in the gulf requires the President to seek a
declaration of war from Congress before any hostilities are initiated.

"There's no emergency here," said Abram J. Chayes, a professor of international
law at Harvard University. "They've been sitting around the gulf a long time and
nobody thinks that if we don't strike immediately something will be lost."

The only recourses for Congress, if a President ignores it in moving to a war
that it opposes, are a cutoff of funds or impeachment, said Prof. Peter
Raven-Hansen of the George Washington University Law School, an author of a
recent book on the subject.

The courts have been reluctant to get involved in what some judges have ruled is
a political question between the two other branches of Government.

Gulf of Tonkin Example

In the Vietnam War, the Administration cited the Gulf of Tonkin resolution
enacted by Congress in 1964 as the functional equivalent of a declaration of
war; the resolution empowered President Johnson to defend American forces
against North Vietnamese aggression. Even after Congress repealed it, the courts
said that the war could not be challenged as long as Congress was funding the
military.

The question of Congressional authority was a vexing problem even for the
framers of the Constitution. President John Adams was criticized in Congress for
sending warships to fight the French in the undeclared quasi-war that ended in
1800. When President Jefferson in 1801 sent naval forces to repel pirates from
the Barbary States, he later apologized to Congress for doing so without its
explicit authority.

In light of the debates of the Vietnam years, Congress in 1973 enacted the War
Powers Resolution over President Nixon's veto, to limit a president's ability to
commit troops abroad. Under the law, the President is required to notify
Congress within 48 hours after dispatching troops where "imminent involvement in
hostilities is clearly indicated," and calls for troops to be withdrawn after 90
days at most unless Congress authorizes the operation.

Representative Thomas Campbell, a California Republican and former Stanford
University professor of international law, said the resolution was an effort to
forge a compromise allowing a President to dispatch troops suddenly while
providing a mechanism of Congressional oversight.

But Mr. Bush has echoed the complaints of Presidents since Mr. Nixon who have
claimed that the law unconstitutionally infringes on their powers.

After he sent troops to the gulf, President Bush did not provide Congress the
notice, claiming the troops were not facing imminent hostility.

'A Dead Letter'

Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, who has complained that
Mr. Bush has put the nation on a war footing without proper consultation, said
the War Powers Resolution has become "a dead letter. It just gets you involved
in a fruitless standoff between Congress and the White House."

Mr. Moynihan, a former Ambassador to the United Nations, also said that Mr. Bush
was wrong to assert that the United States did not need any further
authorization from the United Nations to initiate hostilities against Iraq.

Administration officials are contending that Article 51 of the United Nations
Charter, which allows for the right of collective self-defense, would authorize
the United States to use military force.

The Administration has been working with its allies to fashion an even more
narrowly focused resolution for the Security Council that would specifically
authorize the use of military force to get Iraqi forces out of Kuwait. Until
now, the Security Council has enacted resolutions deploring Iraq's action and
authorizing sanctions.

Underlying the activity is a debate among legal scholars over whether the United
States, having enlisted the cooperation of the Security Council, is now
obligated to await its authorization to begin armed action.

There is no shortage of international lawyers of stature to argue either side of
the issue. And if he chooses, the President could take the advice given by
former Secretary of State Dean Acheson to President Kennedy during the 1962
Cuban missile crisis. Professor Chayes, who was the President's legal adviser at
the time, said that Mr. Acheson "told the President that international law was a
crock."


LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
No Talk of Glory, but of Blood on Sand

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2588 words

DATELINE: CHARLES TOWN, W. Va., Nov. 12


Richard Weese, a beefy man chewing on a tiny stub of a cigar, insists he is no
liberal. "I don't believe in the do-gooders who say we should go home and stick
our heads in the sand," he said the other day, settling into a seat at the
Sadler Cafe.

But Mr. Weese, a retired air controller, is not sure that he could support a war
in the Persian Gulf either. "It's kind of hard to say you're fighting for
democracy," he said, "when you know the Kuwaitis don't have one."

A few hundred miles to the north, in North Adams, Mass., Howard D'Amico stood
amid the clutter of his bargain outlet store, expressing frustration that, at
65, he was too old to go to Saudi Arabia himself. "Let the wimps step aside," he
said. "I'll go in their place."

Mr. D'Amico called himself "a strong supporter of our stand in the Persian
Gulf." But when pressed, he acknowledged that he was unsure just what that stand
was. "That's something I would like to know," he said. "What are we fighting
about?"

As more than 150,000 United States troops prepare to head for the Persian Gulf,
adding to the 230,000 already there, and as Washington talks of a possible
offensive strike, the display of unity among Americans is starting to show signs
of wear.

In scores of conversations from Vermont to West Virginia, Americans of all ages
and walks of life expressed not just a growing fear of war, but also an
increasing ambivalence about the United States' involvement and a growing
frustration that President Bush had not given the nation what they thought was a
satisfactory explanation for mobilizing the armed forces.

While many of those interviewed -- farmers and nurses and lawyers and soldiers
-- said they would support whatever path President Bush chose to pursue in the
gulf, many others said they were beginning to wonder whethe they could still
back the President once the killing started. And as Americans confront the
possibility of another war, history seems to present a troubling multiple-choice
question: Would this be another World War II, or another Vietnam?

'No One Drew a Line'

"I'm old enough to have lived through Hitler's early years, when no one drew a
line," Joseph Schaaf, a musician, said the other day over breakfast in
Bennington, Vt. "And I don't think someone like Saddam Hussein should be allowed
to build up that degree of power."

"This is not World War II," Mr. Schaaf's breakfast companion, Adelaide Fine,
objected. "This is like Vietnam. What you have is no declaration of war, and a
chief executive hellbent on fighting. I can't understand why there isn't more
outcry."

Ambivalence in the face of war is as old, undoubtedly, as war itself, and
mistrust of those in power is probably just as ancient. But what marks the
reaction to the current crisis is the way Americans are talking openly about the
President's inability to "sell" war to a wary populace.

A common complaint among those interviewed was that the Bush Administration
seemed unable to come up with a consistent -- and compelling -- account of what
the United States was preparing to fight for. Was it to protect oil sources,
they wanted to know, or to prevent further aggression, or simply to maintain the
status quo?

"What I don't like is the fact that we can't get any straight answers," said
Doreena Wimberly, a secretary from Rome, N.Y. "Just watching the news on TV and
trying to explain to my kids why are we over there, I can't give them a
justifiable reason. I just say, 'The world is crazy, I guess.' "

WILKES-BARRE, PA.: Portents Haunt Veterans Day

The Veterans Day Parade is always a good show in Wilkes-Barre, the kind of event
that draws people a few hours early to stake out good seats and stomp around in
the cold.

Linda Garrison, who has two nephews in Saudi Arabia and a husband who could get
called up any minute, thought the parade was a good opportunity to rally support
for the troops abroad. She brought several hundred little yellow bows in a big
plastic bag, and pretty soon there wasn't an empty lapel in sight.

Mrs. Garrison said she understood that a lot of people in the crowd had mixed
feelings about going to war in the Persian Gulf. But she did not think that
would affect her campaign.

"We're not asking people to believe we should be over there," she said, slipping
a ribbon into the buttonhole of a reporter's jacket. "We're just asking them to
believe in the people who are over there. I don't want the reception for those
men to be like it was after Vietnam."

 Plans Are Disrupted

The possibility of an impending war gave the Veterans Day parade this year a
portentous aspect. Who knew whether there would be more veterans to mourn next
year, or whether some of the men and women in the parade would soon be called up
to fight?

For Specialist Robert Storz, a member of the National Guard who was getting
ready to march in the parade with his field-artillery unit, the possibility of
war presented itself as nothing less than a disruption of an entire life's
plans.

Mr. Storz, a 19-year-old freshman at Pennsylvania State University's
Wilkes-Barre campus, joined the National Guard, as he put it, "to get money for
college." In return, he spent one weekend a month training with the Guard. Now
there were rumors that his unit would be called to Germany to replace forces
there that had been called to the gulf. He could only hope, he said, that Europe
was as far as he would have to go.

"I wish they had gotten the whole thing over with already," he said dejectedly.

 Oil 'Not Worth It'

Arthur Watkins, Mr. Storz's friend and fellow Guard member, said, "My parents
are threatening to break my foot or my arm so I can't go."

Mr. Watkins, a 23-year-old junior at Wilkes-Barre's King's College, said he was
not sure why the United States was preparing for war, but he thought it was
either an effort to bring down oil prices or to punish aggression. "If they're
fighting for oil, then it's not worth it," he said.

Both men, dressed in camouflage uniforms, said they were disturbed that American
forces were bearing the bulk of the burden in the gulf, even though the crisis
had obvious implications for other countries as well. "It's as if all the other
countries were paying us to use our men," Mr. Storz said. "It's like we're
mercenaries or something."

Farther down the road, Michael Basta, a Korean War veteran who was also
preparing to march in the parade, expressed similar disgust for America's
allies.

 Flying the Flag

"Multilateral is a lot of bunk," Mr. Basta said. "You don't have to be the
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to see the writing on the wall.
Unfortunately, it is our men who are going to do the fighting."

Still, Mr. Basta said he had no doubt that the President was pursuing the right
course. "We went to Korea to protect people, and there are people in Kuwait who
need to be protected, too," he said.

Tom Gaylets, another Korean War veteran, interrupted to say: "I hope and pray
every American is supporting our boys. The American flag should be flying in
front of every house."

Mr. Basta nodded gravely. "I hope we don't have any more Jane Fondas," he said.

BENNINGTON, VT.: Skepticism On a Campus

The last time the United States was involved in a full-scale war, Celene Colburn
war 4 years old. Yet she does not believe, she says, that peace is the primary
objective of the American Government.

"The whole history of U.S. intervention in South America shows that our
involvement is really relative to our economic interests," she said. "And yet
it's always played out like it's a moral or an ethical thing."

On a recent slate-gray afternoon, Ms. Colburn and several of her friends were
gathered over what passed for lunch -- a few apples -- in the Bennington College
student lounge. When a reporter pulled up a chair and steered the conversation
toward the Persian Gulf, the jovial mood of the group suddently turned sullen.

"I feel very skeptical about the information that's available to us," said Ms.
Colburn, a 21-year-old dance major, drawing her legs up to her chest. "We as a
nation make choices about when to get involved, and it seems to me that those
decisions always have to do with the interests of big corporations."

 Not Just Right or Wrong

"You can't say it's a matter of right or wrong," said Roy Kortick, a 22-year-old
art-and-literature major. "We've been giving the Iraqis arms for years."

To go by the polls, college-age Americans, brought up on a vision of "morning in
America," are supposed to be more gung-ho about their country these days, more
apt to support patriotic causes and conservative ideals. That message, however,
has apparently not yet reached Bennington, one of the country's most exclusive,
and expensive, colleges. Indeed, most Bennington students seem to dismiss the
notion of a high-minded American war as hopelessly naive and out-of-date, like
physics before Einstein.

"The Middle east is a region that has reached this point because of other
countries' involvement," Bart Arnold, a 20-year-old music major, said. "This
really isn't going to do anything positive for solving the problems in the area.
And I think it's really disgusting that they've gotten the U.N. involved. It's
all over oil, cheap oil."

 At the Legion Post

Down the hill at Bennington's American Legion post, Larry Holcomb, a Vietnam
veteran, was having a mid-afternoon beer after finishing his rounds as a water-
and sewer-supply salesman. He dismissed the college students' views as so much
pacifist cant. But he agreed that at the heart of the matter lay a vast pool of
oil.

"A dinky little country like that telling us what to do, it's ridiculous," he
said. "I don't think we should leave, mainly because I can't afford what they
want for gasoline."

ROME, N.Y.: Rumbles Felt In the Home

Rome, the home of Griffiss Air Force Base, is a straight-talking town whose
fortunes, quite simply, rise and fall with the military's. And while other towns
may be starting to grow jittery at the thought of war, Rome is already
shuddering.

Dawn Glasgow's husband, Eddie, who is stationed at Griffiss, headed for the gulf
in August, part of the 416th Organizational Maintenance Squadron. When he left,
their second child, Sean, was just 6 months old.

"I'll admit we never expected something like this to happen," Mrs. Glasgow said,
sitting on the floor of her living room with Sean in her lap. "It's tough, you
know, raising two kids on your own."

Mrs. Glasgow said she worried all the time about her husband, and wrote him
almost every day. But, she said sighing, she knew he had no choice. "It's his
job," she said. "He joined the service for a purpose. And now's his time to go
over there to defend us."

"Eddie loves his job," she said. "And if he can't find another, he can't help
but re-enlist."

 Dreading January

Mrs. Glasgow's neighbor, Denice Weil, does not herself have relatives in the
gulf but, she said, with so many local men and women over in Saudi Arabia and
the holidays coming up, "It's pretty depressing around here."

"We all have a terrible feeling of dread that come January, we're going to have
an all-out war," she said. "There are a lot of lonely wives around, a lot of
children who don't know if they're going to see their dads again."

Residents of Rome always believed that their town, with its air base and its
arsenals, would be a prime target if hostilities broke out between the United
States and the Soviet Union. Last year, when the Berlin wall was chopped up into
souvenirs and relations between the superpowers thawed, people in Rome felt
measurably safer. But now, Ms. Weil said, they were beginning to wonder again.

"I guess we were living pretty high on the hog," she said. "We saw the Soviet
Union doing things we never thought possible. And then this had to happen."

 Gloom in a Tavern

Over at Walt's, a tavern in the seedier part of town that caters to servicemen,
an early-evening crowd was gathering under a cardboard sign that read "No Tabs."
The consensus around the bar was that the civilian population did not really
know how terrible a war would be.

"I think the military is aware of how high the casualties would be," said Willie
Fletcher, who spent four years in Air Force and now works part time at Walt's.
"The rest of the people are not. Anybody who knows anything about what's going
on, they're really concerned."

Mr. Fletcher said he had a 17-year-old son who until recently wanted to be a
marine. Now he was reconsidering. "Who am I to tell him to join the Marines and
go off to get killed?" Mr. Fletcher said.

Sgt. 1st Class Richard Foster, who was having a drink at the horseshoe-shaped
bar, said: "I believe the casualties are going to be quite high. And if it lasts
any more than five or six weeks, it is going to last for quite a long time."

"Some of the young guys, they don't know what to expect," Sergeant Foster, a
member of the 82d Airborne Division who has spent 20 years in the army,
continued. "There's a lot of joking at the base. I guess they do it out of
fear."

As to the odds of war, Sergeant Foster said: "It's going to happen, that's all I
can say. And if it doesn't happen, somebody's going to be very lucky."

CHARLES TOWN, W.VA.: Sense of History Adds to Alarm

Charles Town was founded by George Washington's half-brother, Charles, more than
200 years ago, so people in the town think they have a pretty good sense of
American history. When they look at the future, many Charles Town residents say,
they are alarmed by the parallels.

J. Michael Cassell, a public prosecutor, said that what disturbed him was the
way the country seemed to be repeating its mistakes. "I don't think the
Administration has expressed clearly enough what the purpose of this is," he
said, pausing at the luncheonette on his way to work.

Despite their reservations about war, many in Charles Town said theirs is a
patriotic state (West Virginia, one of the nation's poorest states, has one of
the highest ratios of military-to-civilian populations in the country) and would
support war.

"I hate to see our guys get hurt, but I don't like the other guy neither," said
Myron Gregory, a fruit-stand operator. "I wouldn't even hesitate to use the big
bomb -- whatever's necessary to get the job done."

 Oil Is Seen as Cause

"People will accept it and support it, although they will not like it," said Ed
Dockeney, associate editor of the local weekly newspaper.

In the agricultural areas around Charles Town, several farmers said that while
they were unhappy at the thought of war, they would support just about anything
that would end the climb in oil prices, which has eaten heavily into their
profits.

"They say it's not over the price of oil, but it is over the price of oil," said
Robert Funk, climbing down from his combine. "I've got a nephew in the service,
and I don't like to see it, but I can't take much more of this."

Mr. Cassell said it was crucial that the country know the reasons for its
sacrifices: "Unless they understand exactly what we are there for, the American
people are going to turn against this, once large number of people start coming
home in body bags."

Mr. Cassell's friend, Rick Pekar, agreed. "There are a lot of young boys in this
country who have never seen war," he said. "And once they do see it, this is not
gong to be quite so popular. I grew up during Vietnam, too, and it was a very
sad time."

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Denice Weil, Rome, N.Y.: "We all have a terrible feeling of
dread that come January, we're going to have an all-out war."; Willie Fletcher,
Rome, N.Y.: "Anybody who knows anything about what's going on, they're really
concerned."; Myron Gregory, Charles Town, W. Va.: "I wouldn't even hesitate to
use the big bomb - whatever's necessary to get the job done." (Michelle V.
Agins/The New York Times); Celene Colburn, Bennington, Vt.: "I feel very
skeptical about the information that's available to us." (David Jennings for The
New York Times) (pg. A1); Richard Weese, Charles Town, W.Va.: "It's kind of hard
to say you're fighting for democracy," he said, "when you know the Kuwaitis
don't have one."; Dawn Glasgow, Rome, N.Y.: "We never expected something like
this to happen. It's tough, you know, raising two kids on your own."; Robert
Storz, Wilkes-Barre, Pa.: "I wish they had gotten the whole thing over with
already." (Michelle V. Agins/The New York Times); Howard D'Amico, North Adams,
Mass.: "What are we fighting about?" (David Jennings for The New York Times)
(pg. A20)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

PUBLIC & PRIVATE;
New World at War

BYLINE: By Anna Quindlen

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 765 words


When the police arrived they found the three children alone. They were wearing
dirty clothes because they hadn't figured out how to do the laundry, and their
father had tacked a note to the wall, telling them how to get cash with his
automatic teller card. They were 8, 12 and 13, and they were hungry. There was
no food in the house. Their father had been gone a week.

He'd left for the Persian Gulf.

The case of Staff Sgt. Faagalo Savaiki is a worst-case scenario, an extreme
illustration of the collision between a changing American way of life and the
demands of war. He is divorced, his ex-wife lives in Hawaii, and she couldn't
manage to pay the airfare to Tennessee, which is where the children live with
their father. He's back in the states now, charged with child abuse; the
children are in foster homes, and the 101st Airborne Division, to which Sergeant
Savaiki belongs, is still in the Middle East.

The world has changed since this country was last at war. It's not simply the
shifting sands of geopolitics. In the waning years of Vietnam we were
approaching our 200th birthday, an adolescent country still devoted to muscling
any comers aside and being the undisputed champion of the world. We've grown up
since. And there is nothing quite so sobering as becoming adult and discovering
the real world.

The if of war in the Middle East has turned in many of our minds to a when. We
know that once upon a time there were formal declarations of such things, but
that seems so idealistic now. We remember, too, that once we believed we fought
wars for reasons straight from the side of some marble monument. We are
realistic about this conflict as only a grown-up, slightly world-weary country
can be. We are going to war for oil, and, by extension, for the economy. The
President trots out his Hitler similes to convince us otherwise.

The military is as changed as the rest of us. A support group in California
reports that many of the soldiers writing home ask about public opinion, about
whether we're for them or against them. They remember Vietnam; they know that
uncomplicated patriotism is no longer our style. Eleven percent of our armed
forces personnel are female today, more than a tenfold increase over 20 years
ago. If heavy fighting begins, a significant number of the casualties will be
women. People who yearn for the good old days are sure that women in body bags
will convince us that women have overstepped their bounds.

For those of us who believe sons are as precious as daughters, it will simply
provide further illustration that war is hell.

There are still plenty of military families with a "Best Years of Our Lives"
quality, the mother waiting with the children for Daddy to come home from the
gulf. But the number of single parents in America has doubled in the last 20
years, and 55,000 of them are in the service, along with an undetermined number
of two-soldier couples. When they joined up, they were told that they had to
assign guardianship for their children; there is no blanket combat exemption in
an all-volunteer army for someone with babies to care for, or someone raising
children alone.

Most have found temporary homes for their children with relatives. But at least
two mothers ordered to the Mideast have left the Army, one because her children
would not stop fighting with the cousins with whom they were bunking, and
another because her parents became too ill to care for her baby daughter. Both
women are fighting to be given honorable discharges.

The military is providing more counseling for its families than ever before. The
relatives left at home are tying yellow ribbons around trees and telephone poles
from Staten Island to Seattle. This will be a different war, in some ways, than
any we have fought before, because this is a different kind of country. Our
reality has outstripped the traditional stories of brave men going out to fight
and die for a great cause while their women wait staunchly at home and provide
security and normalcy for the children.

We have become more complicated than the scripts of old movies. Now we have
brave women going out to fight and die for a cause none of us are sure about
while their children struggle to feel secure with grandparents or aunts or
uncles. Or a father who instructs the children in how to use his bank card and
then leaves for Saudi Arabia. There is neither the kind of acceptance that
lulled many of us at the beginning of Vietnam, nor the rage and betrayal that
lit up the end. There is a quiet disillusionment: ah, this again. And for what?

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 16, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Diner's Journal

BYLINE: By Molly O'Neill

SECTION: Section C; Page 24; Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 653 words



Southeast Asian

Despite waves of Vietnamese, Cambodian and Thai immigrants in the past two
decades, Indochinese cooking has been slow to make a name for itself in New York
City.

Locally, the Cantonese bias is entrenched in our ethnic eating impulse, and
masters of other exotic fare inevitably tailor their specialties to appeal.
Instead of opening Vietnamese restaurants, for instance, many cooks from Vietnam
have opened little soup kitchens, like Bo Ky at 80 Bayard Street, that serve big
bowls of Vietnamese noodle soups. But when pressed, the cooks claim that the
soups are of Chinese soo chow inspiration.

Likewise, Thai restaurants around town almost always offer chopsticks (a
Chinese, not Thai, eating implement) and use Cantonese-style sauces in the
stir-fried creations from their woks.

I've only found three Thai restaurants that are more Bangkok than Hong Kong, and
a full meal is usually less than $15.


Siam Grill is a small, dark storefront in midtown where the cooking is much
better than it ought to be this close to Broadway and Off Broadway theaters. The
soups are all made from real chicken, duck or fish stock.

The best dishes are the warm beef salad; the squid with chili peppers, onions
and basil; the deep-fried fish with ginger sauce, and the stir-fried vegetables
with a coconut milk sauce that is spiked with red curry.

(Siam Grill, 586 Ninth Avenue, between 42d and 43d Streets; 212-307-1363.)


On the East Side, Bangkok Lodge is a more sophisticated Thai haven. It's a
slightly fancier storefront and not all the food is perfect: the
baby-finger-sized Thai spring rolls are a little greasy, and so are the
honey-dipped chicken wings. None of the fried rice or noodle dishes further the
cause of discreet Thai tastes.

But the fresh frog's legs are superb pan-fried with garlic and white pepper, the
steamed whole fish with mushroom and ginger is good, and so is the sweet and
sour pork with minced fresh cucumber, onion, tomato and scallion. The house
curry is strong and is smoothed by coconut milk and tossed with sliced beef or
chicken.

On a good night, the Bangkok Lodge's tamarind duck -- a whole hacked duck that
is deep fried and glazed with a tart tamarind sauce -- could draw a mass exodus
from Chinatown.

(Bangkok Lodge, 1069 First Avenue, at 58th Street, 212-752-9277.)


The exiting droves would be well-advised to continue across the East River and
on to Astoria, Queens, to Ubol's Kitchen, home of the cleanest-tasting, and most
unusual Thai cooking I've had in the city.

The restaurant, which originally opened four years ago in a Queens bar, moved
last summer to more cheerful quarters on Steinway Street. And, in the process,
it has managed to preserve its energetic kitchen while taming and refining its
dining room.

Of the appetizers, greasy, deep-fried crab-meat balls are the only losers. Pork
satay is smoky, the accompanying peanut sauce smooth and rich with a mean,
chili-pepper punch; tiny spring rolls are addictive, as are the deep-fried
chicken and potato curry puff.

The beef, the squid and the shrimp salads, as well as the spicy sausage salad,
are sensational.

Of the main courses I tasted, only the chicken Masaman, the jungle curry, the
pot roast and the Pad Thai were ordinary.

The duck soup with preserved lime, the crisp-skinned barbecued chicken, chicken
with peanut sauce, squid with lime and chilies, frog's legs with garlic and
white pepper, eggplant with chilies and yellow pepper sauce, vegetables steamed
with coconut milk, and shrimp roasted in a clay pot with tofu, lemon grass,
coriander, chilies and bean thread will have me running back for more.
Chopsticks available on request.

(Ubol's Thai Kitchen, 24-42 Steinway Street, Astoria, Queens; 718-545-2874 or
718-932-0927.)

The Changing Scene

CLOSED: 150 Wooster, Brian McNally's trendy downtown watering hole; 1022,
Christopher Idone's New American cafe.

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 16, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Council of Churches Condemns U.S. Policy in Gulf

BYLINE: By ARI L. GOLDMAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1064 words

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore., Nov. 15


The National Council of Churches, a major voice of mainline American Christians,
tonight unanimously approved a stinging rebuke of the Administration's policy in
the Persian Gulf.

The action, which was met by sustained applause from nearly 200 delegates at the
church council's general board meeting here, came in a resolution that called
for the immediate withdrawal of most United States forces from the region. The
resolution recommended that the only troops remaining serve under the United
Nations flag.

The action criticized the Bush Administration for "reckless rhetoric" and
"imprudent behavior" and a precipitous military buildup. These actions have
"given rise to widespread speculation" that the United States will soon initiate
war, the council said.

"As Christians in the U.S., we must witness against weak resignation to the
illogical logic of militarism and war," the resolution said.

Major Denominations Included

The National Council speaks for major denominations like the United Methodist
Church, the Episcopal Church, the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), the United
Church of Christ, the National Baptist Convention of America and the Orthodox
Church in America. Its 32 member denominations represent about 42 million
American Christians.

In staking out a strong anti-Administration policy, the church council went
further than American Roman Catholic bishops, who called on the Administration
this week to exercise restraint. Only the left-wing "peace churches" and a few
Catholics and mainline Protestants associated with them have gone as far as the
church council in calling for a major American withdrawal.

The National Council has been outspoken before against American military
interventions abroad. It criticized the invasion of Grenada in 1983 and the
invasion of Panama last year. In 1965, it was the first major church
organization to call for a withdrawal of American forces from Vietnam.

The church council suffered severe declines in membership and influence in the
1980's as the country grew more conservative, and it has moderated its tradition
of liberalism in a few instances. In its heyday of the 1950's and '60's,
Presidents and Cabinet officials would call in the leaders of the council for
consultation. In the Reagan era, evangelical Christians, especially Moral
Majority, stole the political limelight.

Race to the Moral Ground

Even though the council's influence has waned, several political experts said
today that the action on the Persian Gulf would carry considerable weight.

Garry Wills, the author of "Under God: Religion and American Politics," just
published by Simon & Schuster, said the resolution could "frustrate and
pre-empt" President Bush's effort to find a clear moral justification for arming
against Iraq.

"This moral vision looks stronger than anything Bush has been able to come up
with," said Mr. Wills. "You see a broad spectrum of people occupying territory
the President would have liked to arrive at first. The resolution pins Bush into
the crass oil and jobs sphere, which is a hard place from which to rouse
Americans."

Dr. Robert W. Edgar, a former Congressman from Pennsylvania and the president of
the School of Theology at Claremon, in California, said that the church council
has "seized on an issue that is continuing to build" among average Americans.
"More mothers are asking, 'Is it worth going to war for oil?' " he said.

Charge of Double Standard

The church council resolution also links the Persian Gulf crisis with the
Israeli-Palestinian issue. It said the Administration was practicing a double
standard in pressing for an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait in accordance with
United Nations resolutions but not requiring Israel to withdraw from occupied
Arab lands in accordance with other United Nations resolutions. The church
council also calls for an international conference to resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian issue, a conference strongly opposed by the Israeli
government, which says a solution must come from the parties involved in the
conflict.

"The region cries out for a U.S. policy that seeks to redress all cases of
injustice, including those of Israel and Palestine, Lebanon and Cyprus," the
resolution says.

The church council resolution comes a day before a major Jewish gathering in San
Francisco is expected to take a very different stand on the Gulf crisis. A draft
resolution before the body, the Council of Jewish Federations, "supports the
maintenance of a firm posture of opposition to Saddam Hussein's belligerence."

Jewish Groups Differ

Maynard Wishner of Chicago, the chairman of the resolutions committee, said
today that there appears to be no firm consensus at the meeting for either
American withdrawal or American military action. Some 3,500 Jews, including
rabbis and lay people from around the country, are attending the meeting.

But the draft resolution does take a strong position against any comparison
between the gulf crisis and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. "The feeling
here," said Mr. Wishner, "is that to link these two things is to precisely play
into the hands" of Mr. Hussein.

Relations between the Jewish group and church council, which flourished in the
interfaith enthusiasm of the 1950's, have deteriorated in recent years as the
church group has championed the Palestinian cause.

A plan of action that accompanies the church council resolution calls on the
member churches to lobby in Congress and to demonstrate at military recruitment
offices and military bases "to say to President Bush and the Secretary of
Defense to stop sending our sons and daughters" to "the gulf region and bring
home at once all those not needed as part of the U.N. security force." It does
not give numbers.

Today, the president of The National Conference of Catholic Bishops, the
organization of the Roman Catholic prelates, said in a letter to President Bush
that the Persian Gulf situation might well fail the traditional Catholic "just
war" standard.

Archbishop Daniel Pilarczyk, the conference president, wrote to Mr. Bush, "I
fear that, in this situation, moving beyond the deployment of military forces in
an effort to deter Iraq's aggression to the undertaking of offensive military
action could well violate these criteria, especially the principles of
proportionality and last resort."


LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Archbishop Daniel Pilarczyk of Cincinnati speaking at the close
of a conference of Roman Catholic bishops in Washington. He held a letter to
President Bush from conference participants, who joined the National Council of
Churches, a major voice of mainline American Christians, in rebuking the
Administration over its Persian Gulf policy.  (Associated Press)


                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 16, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Double Insult From the President

SECTION: Section A; Page 38; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 370 words


President Bush asks senators to restrain their criticism in order to present a
monolithic front to Iraq. That insults two patriotic legislators who are trying
to exercise their constitutional duty. Worse still, it insults American
democracy. One of America's strengths is its will to debate life-and-death
issues.

At a meeting with Congressional leaders on Wednesday, Mr. Bush brandished a
sheaf of translated Iraqi newspaper articles. The articles recounted criticism
by Senators Richard Lugar and

Daniel Patrick Moynihan that Mr. Bush was bypassing Congress as he moved toward
war. The President complained that such statements suggested a failure of
American will, and he urged his critics to speak more circumspectly.

There is no issue on which members of Congress have a greater constitutional
duty to deliberate and vote than whether America should go to war. In order to
do so responsibly they must carefully consider, and question, those Presidential
actions that carry a risk of war.

Both Mr. Lugar, a Republican, and Mr. Moynihan, a Democrat, admire Mr. Bush.
Indeed, Mr. Moynihan has been one of his most consistent allies in the
Democratic Party. But both have advised the President to bring Congress more
closely into policy-making on the Persian Gulf.

Their perspectives differ. Senator Lugar wants the President to rally
Congressional support for his latest military moves. Senator Moynihan questions
the speed of the buildup and urges more careful deliberation. Yet both act in
the most patriotic tradition of American constitutional democracy.

U.S. foreign policy is at its strongest when it reflects considered public
positions, not merely the President's tactical judgments. Senators Moynihan and
Lugar, having lived through the Vietnam experience, well know the catastrophic
consequences of short-circuiting the careful checks and balances of American
government.

So, indeed, should Mr. Bush. He seems to think that for Saddam Hussein to hear a
clangorous debate in the United States is a sign of weakness. In this democracy,
true weakness is to paper over real differences. True strength is to raise
questions, answer them and then proceed, honestly and honorably united.


LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

About New York;
Recall Brando? The Wild One? Bet They Do, Too

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 768 words


Members of the Gotham City Riders motorcycle gang weren't pleased to see Ivana
Trump on television saying she was the recipient of New York's first case of
Beaujolais nouveau.

They claimed the honor was theirs. Better than two dozen of them had ridden
their hogs, as Harley-Davidsons are known to those who love them, to Kennedy
International Airport Wednesday night to make the acquisition at precisely 30
seconds past midnight. In keeping with their sense of high style, they
transported the prize back to Manhattan in a member's Rolls-Royce.

They took being upstaged by Mrs. Trump with all the grace you'd expect from a
bike gang. President Bert Pence, clad in denim and leather, had this message for
her: "I know where you live and where your kids go to school."

The Gotham City Riders aren't likely to carry through on the implied threat,
though the idea seemed to mightily amuse the more excitable of the club's 30
members. These are upscale bikers. Members include real-estate developers,
filmmakers, diamond merchants, lawyers, a conductor with the American Ballet
Theater, a dart importer and the man, Mr. Pence, who made serious money putting
words in the mouths of Tony the Tiger and Bullwinkle J. Moose.

Their motto is "Financially stable, mentally questionable." Their modus operandi
is to roar up to the front of a fancy restaurant, dine like kings, then thunder
off for a group ride before ending up at an exclusive nightclub. They are
planning a black-tie ride as well as a motorcycle jaunt through Europe.

Further upsetting stereotypes, the Gotham City Riders have become heavily
involved in the soup kitchen at Holy Apostles Church at 296 Ninth Avenue,
donating both money and time as volunteers.  "It's a righteous thing to do," Mr.
Pence said.

If all this seems reminiscent of the late Malcolm Forbes, the
publisher-cum-biker, you're getting the point. On the club's colors -- elements
of the Manhattan skyline -- is a tribute to him: "You're not dead until you
are."

The pity is that Mr. Forbes expired before the three-month-old club was formed.
"He would have joined," insisted Niles Siegel, vice president. "He would have
been proud to join."

The Riders made reservations for Thursday at 8 P.M. at Bimini Twist at 345
Amsterdam Avenue to sample their new Beaujolais while inhaling massive portions
of excellent cassoulet. Before they arrived, the owner, Michael DeSimone, was
out front shooing away cars so there would be space for a couple of dozen truly
large motorcycles.

"They're really a nice bunch of guys," he said, pausing to think. "Well, some
nicer than others."

One of the first arrivals had Viking horns on his helmet. Then a roar could be
heard, growing louder by the nanosecond. "That's our president!" exclaimed Mr.
Siegel, a film producer. "I know the pipes."

The president has some bike. By adding accessories, Mr. Pence has so far spent
$35,000 on the shiny hog. It is astoundingly customized, right down to stars
from a helicopter shot down in Vietnam. "It's a memorial to my buddies," he
said.

Mr. Pence was kind enough to describe his current occupation, being the voice --
and intellectual inspiration -- for a radio character named Cowboy Dick. "He
gives bad advice to children," he said.

In about a week, Cowboy Dick will release what Mr. Pence calls "the album you've
been fearing," a collection of holiday songs. He recited some lines of a
sure-fire hit: "There ain't no mistletoe down on old death row, just the nice
clean Christmas glow of Old Sparky."

As the red wine flowed on, various Riders discussed why they participated. "It's
an anti-corporate corporate group," said Glenn Zagoren, owner of an advertising
agency. "Just because you ride a motorcycle doesn't mean you can't drive a
Rolls."

Observed Brian Rose, who heads a division of an importing company: "It's a
bonding kind of thing." Kyrie Kazlov, owner of two messenger services: "I've met
a lot of intelligent, educated, motivated, energetic people."

Vonda LePage, public relations: "It's better than the singles bars." And Arnaud
Gibersztajn, precious-stone dealer: "You don't have a lot of crazy, crazy people
in this club."

That's at least debatable. But the fact is that there isn't a tattoo in the
gang, initiation fees are $150 and two members must recommend a biker for
membership. The Riders' newsletter includes wine recommendations, as well as
pictures of members' children astride hogs, or more precisely, piglets.
Respectability, as long as it is kept under control, is encouraged.

"A member is never a jerk," the newsletter specified.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
On the Left, Voices Amid Confusion

BYLINE: By JASON DePARLE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1323 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 16


For months, the Persian Gulf crisis has invited this surprising question: What
if they gave a war and no protest movement came?

While the Pentagon was presiding over the largest American deployment since
Vietnam, many of the left-liberal voices known for past condemnations of
military interventions spoke in quiet or ambivalent tones. Some even supported
the action.

That is now changing, as the recent increase in American forces in the Gulf has
brought sharp criticisms from intellectuals and organizers camped under the
broad tent of left-liberal opinion. But despite the criticisms, many on the left
disagree about what the United States should do to counter Iraq's invasion of
Kuwait.

Conservatives Are Louder

Some of the loudest objections to the deployment have been voiced by
conservatives, like the columnist Patrick Buchanan. He and several other
conservatives have parted company with their traditional allies by accusing
Washington of "war hysteria" and arguing that the United States has no
compelling interest in the Persian Gulf.

While the split on the political right has received much notice, less attention
has been paid to the evolution of thought on the left.

"I think it's extraordinary that there hasn't been a burst of
anti-interventionist activity on the left," said Paul Berman, a contributor to
The Village Voice, who characterizes his thoughts as ambivalent. "That in itself
is a sign that there's been a great deal of debate and a lot of confusion."

The contours of that debate were outlined in recent interviews with more than a
dozen influential professors, journalists and organizers who represent left and
liberal thinking. Many said they were initially reluctant to criticize the
United States deployment because they shared the Bush Administration's disdain
for Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi President. Many found much to admire in the way
the Administration summoned United Nations support for its actions.

Growing Criticism

But since Nov. 8, when President Bush announced plans to add more than 150,000
troops to the Middle East force, the vital signs of an embryonic antiwar
movement have been on the rise, and not only among left-leaning intellectuals.
Many in Congress are demanding consultation with the President on his gulf
plans. Protestant churches and Roman Catholic bishops have issued sharp antiwar
statements.

On college campuses and in the offices of peace groups, new plans are being made
for demonstrations and teach-ins to spread antiwar messages.

"The peace movement took a long time clearing its throat," said the Rev. William
Sloane Coffin, the president of SANE/Freeze, a large peace group, who initially
refrained from criticizing the deployment. "But now, it's finding its voice, and
I think it will be heard."

Within the movement, those interviewed said, people are in broad if not
unanimous agreement on several issues. They include support for the economic
sanctions against Iraq and alarm at the Administration's decision to increase
the number of troops and cancel their rotations home. Many say this puts the
United States on a war footing before the sanctions have had time to take
effect.

Bigger Role for Congress

In addition, most leftist opponents of the deployment contend that Congress
should play a greater role in the decision-making, and many say they distrust
the motives of the Bush Administration. The Administration has had difficulty
explaining the goals of the deployment, suggesting at different times that it is
to protect oil, jobs, or the sanctity of international borders.

But while many on the left say they distrust the Administration, they disagree
about what the United States should do.

Some, like Michael Lerner of the Jewish bi-monthly Tikkun, a liberal magazine,
say that questions about Iraq should be linked to the resolution of other Middle
Eastern disputes, like the Palestinian conflict with Israel. Others, like Irving
Howe and Mitchell Cohen, co-editors of Dissent magazine, have argued against any
linkage.

Some, like Erwin Knoll of The Progressive, contend that the United States should
withdraw its forces immediately, while others, including Daniel Ellsberg and
Alexander Cockburn, support participating in a smaller multinational force to
defend Saudi Arabia. Still others, including Mr. Lerner, have begun to discuss
conditions under which an eventual attack on Iraq would be justified, like
preventing it from acquiring nuclear weapons.

Among the factors slowing an antiwar response is the obvious one: there has not
yet been a war. It took several years of actual fighting in Vietnam for
widespread protests to emerge.

Other Considerations

But other reasons exist, grounded in the specifics of this conflict. One is that
Mr. Hussein has inspired none of the admiration that some opponents of previous
wars had for the enemy or its leaders, like Ho Chi Minh or the Sandinistas.
Secondly, many on the left say they found something to admire in the
international character of the Administration's initial response -- seeking
United Nations approval and assembling a multinational force that included
Arabs.

A third issue is Israel and the danger that it would suffer from a well-armed
and belligerent Iraq. Some groups on the left, particularly Jewish
organizations, say this adds to their initial support for some American military
role in the gulf.

Besides these factors, some say other, long-term trends have come into play.

Charles Peters, the editor of The Washington Monthly and a frequent critic of
fellow liberals, argues that some of them reflexively opposed the military after
the Vietnam War and then overcompensated by growing reluctant to question it.
"They began to fear not looking strong on national security matters," he said.

He faults this strain of center-left liberalism for failing to distinguish
between the differences in types of military response. While he supports the
embargo and the naval blockade, and believes the United States should defend
Saudi Arabia through the threat of air retaliation, Mr. Peters said that
bringing in ground troops "invites a blood bath like we had in Vietnam."

"What has appalled me is how few people made the distinction," he said. "Where
were the people who were supposed to have learned the lesson of 'No land war in
Asia' ?"

Who Did and Who Did Not

Those who immediately opposed the deployment of American troops included The
Nation, The Progessive, and Arthur Schlesinger Jr.

But among the prominent figures who declined to oppose the initial deployment
were Reverend Coffin, the Rev. Jesse L. Jackson, and Todd Gitlin, a University
of California sociologist who was a leader of the protests against the Vietnam
War.

In an interview this week, Mr. Jackson said the commitment of additional troops
"is boxing the nation in" and making war more likely. He added that if war came,
he would support a draft, so that the military was not composed
disproportionately of poor people and minorities.

Confusion at Magazine

In October, the editors of Dissent magazine, a journal of democratic socialism,
gathered to debate the validity of the United States' presence in the Middle
East. They came to little agreement, with most of them belonging to what Mr.
Howe, a co-editor, called "the party of confusion."

Tikkun has attracted attention with an article arguing that a war against Iraq
could be justified to protect Israel and to stop the spread of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Lerner, the editor, calls in the article for a conference linking a
reduction in Iraqi military power to other Middle East issues, including the
creation of a demilitarized Palestinian state.

Mr. Lerner's willingness to support a fight against Iraq as a final resort drew
sharp published criticisms from many of the magazine's contributors. He entitled
his article, appropriately enough, "My Inner Conflict About Iraq."


LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Heck's Angels

BYLINE: By David Handelman
; David Handelman is a contributing editor to Rolling Stone based in New York.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 48; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3242 words


Fonda: "If God did not exist it would be necessary to invent him."
Hopper: "That's a humdinger." -- "Easy Rider"

Here they come! through the shimmery heat down the dusty desert highway, a
thunderous roar warns of the imminent descent of dozens of motorcycles on
Tusayan, Ariz., a previously peaceful hamlet near the Grand Canyon. Soon enough,
the staggered double-barreled formation zooms into view, aimed right for the
mall. Cars pull aside to let them pass; local moms quicken their pace, shooing
kids safely inside stores. The bikers bring their machines to a halt in the
parking lot, lining up rows and rows of their polished-chrome and pin-striped
beasts in the summer sun.

It's lunchtime, and the gang splinters into separate packs to feast on the best
Highway 64 has to offer. Four bikers from Independence, Mo., head for the local
McDonald's. Inside, a kid with a bandanna and a Def Leppard T-shirt stares
awestruck as the group waits in line, orders burgers and Filets-O-Fish, and
takes seats at a Formica table. Before popping the lid off his container, one
biker, Curtis Wood, turns to his companions with a gleam in his eye, saying,
"Shall we?" Onlookers exchange uneasy glances.

The bikers shut their eyes and hold hands, as Wood speaks in a low voice: "Thank
you, Lord, for bringing us to this day, for our bodies, and for this food we are
about to eat." And with a rousing "Amen," four members of the Christian
Motorcyclists Association chow down.

"AT THE COUNT OF THREE," HERB SHREVE commands into the microphone, "say where
you're from." Wearing a windbreaker, Shreve, the founder and leader of C.M.A.,
the Hatfield, Ark.-based group with a membership of about 33,000, is conducting
the opening service of the organization's 1988 national rally in a wedding-size
tent at the Circle Pines campground in Williams, Ariz.

Under the gaze of three cameras, which will make videotapes for C.M.A. to sell
in its quarterly newsletter, Shreve stands at a homemade podium and counts,
"One, two, three." His congregants, sitting in folding chairs, all shout out
their hometowns at once: the Good News Riders are here from Auburn, Wash.; the
Victory Riders from Riverside, Calif.; the Jesus Team from Wichita, Kan.; the
Sierra Saints from Sonora, Calif.; the Son Crest Riders from Albuquerque, N.M.;
the One Way Riders from Las Vegas, Nev., the Cruising Christians from Tucson,
Ariz.

The turnout is good for this four-day weekend -- about 300 bikers. In fact,
campground officials have had to clear away an additional area for C.M.A.,
which, to the dismay of the Christian bikers, is still full of rocks. The
campsites here have been given out on a first-come-first-served basis. But at
other C.M.A. rallies, the joke is, organizers have had to put Baptists up front
because they can be counted on to bed down by eight o'clock, and Pentecostals in
the back because they're the noisiest.

Many of the bikes sport customized, hand-painted Bible scenes or quotations like
"Narrow Is the Road That Leads to Life." In the shade of a pine tree sits the
official trailer, where Roy Johnson from Levelland, Tex., is selling C.M.A.
"goodies" -- watches, belt buckles, caps, T-shirts, sweatshirts, golf shirts,
patches, pins, license plate holders, suspenders and mud flaps -- all featuring
the group's triangular insignia of two praying hands and a cross.

At the opening service, the almost exclusively white crowd looks as if it would
not be out of place at a country-and-western bar (though few Christian bikers
actually drink). Most are married couples in their middle years, some with
children, a few even with dogs, notably a dachshund named Schnobbles and a
schnauzer named Spice, who has logged 130,000 miles riding atop a sheepskin
cover on his master's gas tank.

Shreve, an ordained Baptist minister, smiles, waiting for the noise and
confusion to die down, then says: "We are going to get unity in here one way or
another. One, two, three." Still more places are called out: Texas, Delaware,
North Carolina, West Virginia, Oregon.

"I think it's hopeless," Shreve says. "Let's try this one more time. This time
on three, tell me who saved you. One, two, three."

"JESUS!" booms the collective reply.

Shreve does not look like an evangelist -- or a biker. He has none of the
polished slickness of the former, or the rough edges of the latter. At age 57,
he is a soft-featured, slightly paunchy, silver-haired good ol' boy who could be
easily mistaken for a retired farmer. In 1972, he was preaching at First Baptist
Church in Cove, Ark., and worrying that his long-haired teen-age son, Herbie,
seemed to be heading down the road to heathenism.

The elder Shreve had gone into preaching like his father before him, and he
didn't have much interest in motorcycles. But to bridge the generation gap with
Herbie, he bought two 450-cc Hondas, and the two of them took a long trip to the
Pacific Northwest and Canada. The preacher enjoyed it so much that he started
barnstorming solo to what he calls "secular rallies" -- rowdy leather-jacketed
get-togethers marked by drinking, fighting and general hell raising -- where he
noticed that "nobody was there to care about their problems."

After undergoing open-heart surgery in 1976, Shreve decided to resign his
church, losing his salary and the parsonage he'd been living in with his wife,
Shirley. He started borrowing money to go to biker rallies and save souls,
holding services, distributing literature, witnessing tales of sin and winning
converts. He'd head off with $60 in his pocket and come back four weeks later
still with $60, so he figured God was smiling on him.

"He chose me, a man who had only been motorcycling for three years, to go out
there and change the world of motorcycling," Shreve says. "And I didn't have any
better sense than to believe I could do it."

Since then, Shreve's mission has taken him 600,000 miles across the country.
And, with no membership drive other than a regular classified ad in American
Motorcyclist and Road Rider magazines, Shreve has built C.M.A. into a
321-chapter network with an annual operating budget of $350,000. The money comes
from merchandising, donations and special fund-raising events. C.M.A. is
overseen by eight roving evangelists, each of whom is provided with a bike and a
starting salary of $20,000 to minister to different regions of the country.
Shreve himself earns an annual income of $28,500.

"C.M.A. has succeeded in doing something that nobody else has," Shreve says.
"We've got a lot of people who feel unwanted in churches. I believe that God has
an army, and they are riding Gold Wings and Harleys. We let the privates ride
the Hondas, and the generals ride the Harleys."

Shreve's once-renegade son, Herbie, now 34, is himself one of the generals. Each
summer, Herbie, his wife, Diane, and their four children spread the word of God
via Harley, Moto Guzzi and sidecar. "We're not some super saints driving down
the highway, changing lives everywhere we go," says Herbie, who is tan and
boyish in the Jeff Daniels manner. "Riding bikes in the heat and rain keeps you
pretty humble. You know, Jesus rode a donkey."

THESE DAYS, drivers on America's interstates are more likely to pass gangs of
bikers like Herb and Herbie Shreve than the drug-dealing long-hairs depicted in
"Easy Rider." The cartoonishly extended, no-frills choppers that Peter Fonda and
Dennis Hopper rode to their deaths in that film are now practically museum
pieces. Since 1974, when Honda first introduced its snazzy, option-packed,
1,000-cc Gold Wing tour bike, the sport of motorcycling has trickled up to staid
suburbanites.

In place of the hell-bent godless unwashed is the new breed of rugged but
God-fearing citizen who keeps his bike immaculate and can be seen taking it on
"pie runs." These days, it's no big surprise to see five or six middle-aged
couples cruising the speed limit on heavy, sculptured, multi-compartment,
computerized vehicles that cost more than $10,000 apiece, talking to each other
over in-helmet intercoms and CB's and listening to Jimmy Swaggart tapes.

Instead of the pants motorcycle outlaws wear, called "originals" -- which Dr.
Hunter S. Thompson descibed in his 1966 book "Hell's Angels" as Levi's dredged
in urine, dung and crankcase drippings -- the new American biker is more likely
to be outfitted in Perma-Prest.

And some of the most vivid examples of these tamer incarnations of "The Wild
Ones" can be found among the members of the Christian Motorcyclists Association.
Christian bikers fall mostly into two categories: the preacher's kid who finally
cut loose and bought a motorcycle, or the outlaw who drove so close to death it
instilled the fear of God.

WHOA! DON'T TOUCH Travis Lee's bike when it's parked. It would set off a burglar
alarm that pages his beeper wherever he is. You can only trust in the Lord's
protection so far when your pin striping is real 14-karat gold.

"It and the trailer, I got $27,000 in," says Lee, a chemical engineer from Taft,
Calif. He carefully polishes his limited edition fuel-injected 1985 Gold Wing.
"Everything has been chromed -- the cylinder valve covers, the forks, the
cowling."

Lee, 53, has a gray mustache and a military bearing. His C.M.A. T-shirt matches
that of his wife, Joanne. Though he has a company car, he uses it only to drive
around his hometown. In fact, he and Joanne once tried a trip to the coast by
car, but after an hour they were so bored they turned back and got the
motorcycle instead. Little surprise that he puts 15,000 miles a year on it.

"You get a lot better smell than in the car," Lee says. "The trees, the grass,
new-mown hay and things like that." He proudly deciphers the dizzying array of
buttons, controls and displays on the Gold Wing's dashboard and handlebars.
There's an altimeter; an atmospheric thermometer; an automatic air compressor to
adjust the shocks; a hidden radar detector; a clock with a map of the United
States that registers changes in time zones; a CB and radio-cassette stereo that
adjusts automatically to the noise level of the ride.

"This bike cruises all day at 90 and 100 miles an hour -- if you want it to,"
Lee says. "But we usually run around 75 to 80. I hope the bikes don't get no
bigger. New ones are four inches longer, 80 pounds heavier. They're too bulky,
they get less gas mileage. Pretty soon you might as well put two more wheels on
it and make it a car."

Lee got his first bike at 18, because he couldn't afford a car. "I thought
bikers were all Hell's Angels. But I knew I wouldn't be like that, because I was
saved when I was 14." He discovered C.M.A. in 1985, and has been biking
wholesomely with the Bakersfield chapter ever since.

A few years back, the Lees were riding their 1985 Honda in Arkansas, looking at
the scenery. Spotting a deer on the side of the road, Travis missed seeing a van
up ahead taking a left turn, and he hit it going 55.

"It pulled my left arm off," he recalls. "I had five hours' surgery to put it
back. Joanne had broken ribs, pelvis, bruised heart, kidneys. The Lord was
looking over us, though. I can still pull the clutch handle with that arm!"
AAAIIIIIEE! HOMER LOWRANCE is in pain. Cruising down the road from Sedona,
Ariz., on his Yamaha -- no hands on the handlebars -- the burly 49-year-old
Lowrance is carrying his infant son, Kelly, in a Snugli; Kelly has just woken up
and is tugging the hairs on his father's barrel chest. Riding behind them is
Lowrance's third wife, Baxanne, 36, a small, bony former dental hygienist who
has red hair, freckles and a downturned mouth. Baxanne is on a small Kawasaki
454 with their son Kory, 7, who's clasping her from behind.

Prying Kelly's fingers free, Lowrance leads his family off Interstate 40 to the
Circle Pines campground, where they settle around a picnic table. Wearing
matching T-shirts emblazoned with the Pepsi logo but with the word "Jesus,"
husband and wife recall the rocky road that led them to C.M.A.

Homer had once owned two topless clubs in Lubbock, Tex., and had ridden with a
gang out of San Antonio called the Grim Reapers. "He was about as hard-core as
they come," Baxanne says.

One night, one of Homer's partners, who'd been drinking, took a shot at their
other partner, trying to scare him. "It went out the back of his head," Homer
says. "He died."

Homer watched as the gunman and two accomplices took off with the body in the
trunk of their car. They tried to set the car on fire, but managed to burn only
the front. "That's how dumb drunk they was," Homer recalls. "They went down the
road 50 feet, took their bloody clothes off and started burning them in the dark
on the side of the road. The highway patrol seen 'em.

"I was with them at the bar, so I spent a month in jail. Then I turned state's
evidence against the guy. He died, but I got entangled with his family and they
tried to blow me away a couple of times. That's why I left Texas."

The baby starts to cry, and Homer falls silent, staring out at the passing
traffic.

"But tell what happened," Baxanne urges, rocking Kelly back to sleep. "What
brought you to your knees?"

"I lost everything," Homer says. "I weighed 400 pounds and. . . ."

"He was stuck in himself," Baxanne interrupts in her Texan twang. "Watching TV,
and he was so overweight, he was abusing his body. I kicked him out. Of course,
I was doing some things, too."

"You was no angel, dear," Homer says wearily.

"Anyway," she continues, "two days later he got on a bike and was going to kill
himself. In Santa Fe there's a street with a hairpin curve called Agua Fria that
is famous for killing bikers. He hit that doing about 100 and went up in the
air, but the bike righted itself and came back down. So he had angels looking
out for him."

Today, the Lowrances manage a trailer park. "You know," Homer says, "the image
of biking has a lot to do with the movie media. Almost every movie that was ever
put out about bikers, you get a young kid who can afford his first bike, and the
first thing he's looking for is free love and beer -- status stuff. I can't say
I'm a teetotaler; if it's hot enough I'll drink a beer or two. But I haven't
gotten drunk in years. Speeding -- that's my sin."

"Yeah, we confess," Baxanne chimes in. "I repent but I can't for very long. It's
an incurable sin. It's not because you're trying to break the law. It's just
that bikes don't run at 55."

Homer remembers being raised so strictly in the customs and teachings of the
church that he rebelled. Baxanne, whose mother and father were both alcoholics,
says she was so ignorant of religion, she confused Christmas and Easter. Both
their parents' marriages ended in divorce.

"When I was growing up," Baxanne says, "my hero was Jim Bronson," of the 1969-70
adventure series "Then Came Bronson." "I used to watch him ride that bike from
town to town through all that beautiful country, and it was so free. He just
went around and helped people. He didn't have to worry about anything. No
entanglements. There is a sense of control. Everything can be falling down
around you, and you get on a motorcycle and somehow it takes all of you -- your
sight, your sound, everything physical. And when you come back, you feel you're
in control of things again."

Eight years ago, Baxanne was saved in a church in Bixby, Okla. "When I walked
in," she says, "I felt something that I never had at home growing up, and that
was love. Like somebody had put a cloak of love around me. It just broke me into
tears. I cried and I cried and I cried and I cried. I was out of control. Homer
said: 'Why are you crying? This is embarrassing me.' "

"You know," Homer says, "as little as she is, and as big as I am, they thought I
was standing on her foot."

Evening falls over another service under the big tent, with Herb and Herbie
Shreve tag-preaching about honoring wives. Donations totaling $189,000 --
accumulated from the biking event "Run for the Son" -- are presented to
representatives from the Netherlands-based Open Door Ministries and to
Missionary Ventures, a group that buys and maintains motorcycles for
proselytizing preachers in Guatemala, Nicaragua and India.

Afterward, with tables lit by lanterns, there is much witnessing and sharing
tales of salvation late into the night. Some campers are more gung-ho Christian
than biker; some the opposite. Some are just happy to have a clean-cut, cheap
way to spend the weekend -- $3.50 a day to C.M.A. members.

After their marriage eight years ago in Las Vegas, septuagenarians Jean and
Lucille Pidcock of Yuma, Ariz., spent their honeymoon logging 9,500 miles on
motorcycles. But for this trip they brought a car and trailer with them. "At our
age," Jean says, "you go 50 miles on a bike and your bottom gets tired."

Some attendees are trying out C.M.A. after frustrating experiences in other
biker groups. Buz Dougherty, a hulking, shaved-headed Harley rider, used to ride
with the Henchmen out of Chicago. "We did arms and drug deals before Peter Fonda
had pubic hair," he says with a laugh.

Dougherty, a Vietnam vet, was a P.O.W. for 5 years, and an outlaw for 17. Now
he's registered to vote and has served jury duty. But he still loves to ride.
"If there were no fences and roads, I'd probably own a horse," he says. "I like
the freedom of being able to go where you want and not having to stick to that
black ribbon out there."

THE LAST DAY OF the weekend, 145 bikers assemble at the campground entrance for
a parade through downtown Williams -- a circular one-way loop around a few
restaurants, fast-food joints and stores. Everyone gets on Channel 1 of the CB
with Harley riders cracking jokes about Honda riders, and vice versa. A police
escort shows up, and the procession rumbles to as much life as 10 miles an hour
will allow. Uplifted by the sight of their impressive ranks, the Christian
bikers let out a steady stream of "Praise God" over their CB's.

The locals come out to wave and honk. One trucker is overheard saying: "See all
them bikes? There's cops with 'em. I think they busted the whole gang."

The parade lasts about a half-hour, then everyone heads cheerfully back to the
campground.

As things wind down, C.M.A.'s evangelists help raise money by posing with their
wives and bikes for snapshots taken by assorted members. This makes up for the
previous day's rainout of a fund-raising water-balloon toss at them -- $1 per
evangelist, $2 for one at Herb or Herbie Shreve, "and 50 cents for one tossed at
a wife," Herb says with a smile.

Meanwhile, near the campground office, a handful of C.M.A. children are being
entertained by a puppet show espousing Christian morals. "Does anyone have
anything to be thankful for?" one puppet asks the audience in a high-pitched
voice.

"Yeah," a boy says. "My gum." And he pulls a wad out of his mouth to prove it.

Soon, it's time to depart. There's a final service, in which Herb Shreve
arranges rides for the few who came without bikes, and Herbie leads a still
energetic group in hymns. Then trailers are packed, tents taken down and engines
revved.

The last few stragglers hang around the campground commissary for some coffee
and burgers. Among them are Homer and Baxanne Lowrance and their children.
Before eating, Baxanne sits holding hands with Homer and Kory, and prays. "Thank
you, Lord, for this meal," she says. "And protect us from the idiots on the
road."

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lucille and Jean Pidcock, members of the Christian
Motorcyclists Association, spent their honeymoon eight years ago logging 9,500
miles on bikes. Bikers parading through Williams, Ariz., during the
association's national rally. Bridget and Charity Vadner, sisters from Powder
Springs, Ga., rode to the Christian bikers' rally with their parents, James and
Karla, in the sidecar of a Harley-Davidson. Herb Shreve, the founder of the
association, with his wife, Shirley. Shreve says God chose him to change the
world of motorcycling. (Photographs by Mary Ellen Mark)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

French Said to Spy on U.S. Computer Companies

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 534 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 17


A senior official of the Federal Bureau of Investigation today confirmed reports
that France's intelligence service recently sought to spy on American industrial
targets, but added that he knows of no current French espionage in the United
States.

The official, W. Douglas Gow, acknowledged in a television interview broadcast
today that French intelligence agents took part in an attempt between 1987 and
1989 to collect industrial secrets at foreign offices of the American computer
companies I.B.M.and Texas Instruments Corporation.

The operation was uncovered by the Central Intelligence Agency and the F.B.I.,
and the State Department later delivered a confidential protest to the French
Government. Until now, neither Government has officially acknowledged the
incident, which was first reported in the French newsmagazine L'Express in May.

L'Express reported that the French espionage service, the Direction Generale de
la Securite Exterieure, had sought to recruit agents in French offices of
I.B.M., Texas Instruments and other American electronics companies in an effort
to funnel secrets toCompagnie des Machines Bull, a struggling computer company
owned in part by the French Government.

Mr. Gow, an F.B.I. assistant director who heads foreign counterintelligence
operations, was asked today on the Public Broadcasting Service program "American
Interests" whether French agents had sought to penetrate the two computer
companies.

"There was activity on their part," he said. "You know, I'm not quite sure of
the definition of 'penetration,' and there was no activity that I knew of within
this country."

He also said that "there was action taken with regard to that" by theUnited
States, but he declined to elaborate.

Other American intelligence officials say that aside from the old Communist
bloc, France has long been among the most aggressive users of espionage to
collect American industrial and technological secrets. "The French are the ones
who show up on the screen the most," one official said in an interview last
spring.

Mr. Gow said in the interview today that he knew of no similar efforts by the
Governments of either Japan or South Korea, two nations often cited by
intelligence experts as diligent collectors of American technological
information.

American intelligence agencies so far have generally refused to use their agents
and electronic equipment to collect industrial and technical secretsfrom allies,
or to give those secrets to competing American companies. As the military
struggle with the Soviet Union winds down and the economic race with Europe and
Asia heats up, some experts have argued that that policy should be reconsidered.

For decades, Soviet intelligence officials relied heavily on Communist espionage
services in Eastern Europe to collect American secrets on their behalf. For the
first time, Mr. Gow said today that Moscow had begun to turn to new allies such
as Vietnam for the same tasks now that Eastern Europe has largely broken from
the old Communist bloc.

He said that the F.B.I. had seen evidence that Vietnamese-Americans were being
used as Soviet "surrogates" to collect classified information in the United
States.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
Bush's War Powers

BYLINE: Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 752 words


"You can't have 435 Commanders in Chief," President Bush said the other day.
"I've read the Constitution. [Congress has] the right to declare war and I have
the right, as Commander in Chief, to fulfill my responsibilities . . . " Of
course you can't, and of course he does.

The right of Congress to declare war, however, is explicitly stated in the
Constitution. The powers of the Commander in Chief of the armed forces were not
specifically set forth by the founders and are not universally agreed upon
today.

The President's "war powers" derive to a great extent from the actions of
Abraham Lincoln in the conduct of the Civil War. Woodrow Wilson did not function
as an active Commander in Chief during World War I; Franklin Roosevelt certainly
did in World War II. Harry Truman greatly expanded the war powers when he
ordered use of the atomic bomb, sent troops to Europe in peacetime and to fight
in Korea, and fired Douglas MacArthur.

Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon conducted the Vietnam War without a
Congressional declaration, although President Johnson respected constitutional
requirements enough to seek the Tonkin Gulf resolution as "the functional
equivalent of a declaration of war." Congress, on the other hand, was so
reluctant to set a precedent restricting the powers of the Commander in Chief
that the House Judiciary Committee dropped one of the most serious impeachment
charges against President Nixon -- that he had ordered and then covered up the
secret bombing of Cambodia.

The powers of the Commander in Chief, it might well be said, are what a
President says they are, limited by what Congress will permit him to do. This
makes them broad indeed, since once a President has committed troops to combat,
it's difficult for Congress not to support them and the President's action. But
Congress and the courts always have been unwilling so to define or restrict the
war powers that a President might not be able to respond quickly to an attack or
to the immediate threat of one.

Even given the vague but clearly vast powers of the Commander in Chief, however,
no legitimate conflict with the Congressional war power seems actually to arise
from the dangerous confrontation with Iraq in the Middle Eastern desert. Few
question President Bush's authority to have deployed American troops to protect
Saudi Arabia, an ally and an important oil producer, from threatened invasion.

As in the case of Mr. Truman's defense of South Korea, the approbation of the
U.N. Security Council and the support of other national forces added weight to
the widely accepted legitimacy of Mr. Bush's action. The wisdom of that action,
and of his subsequent troop additions, has been far more fiercely debated than
his Presidential authority.

If war should result, moreover, from an accidental encounter between armed
forces (the most likely and most chilling prospect), or from some obvious Iraqi
provocation (say, the torture or killing of a hostage), or from attack ordered
by Saddam Hussein (probably the least likely possibility), it's safe to predict
that Mr. Bush could and would respond without much fear of a constitutional
challenge. No doubt it would be argued that by his actions he had invited
accident, provocation or attack; but that would be political rather than legal
criticism.

How can it be argued, however, in the White House or anywhere, that President
Bush has the constitutional authority to make the deliberate decision to attack
Iraqi forces -- even for good reason, such as expelling them from Kuwait? Such a
response to Iraq's refusal to withdraw by no means would be the same as a
response to an attack or threat against the U.S. or its forces.

A deliberate U.S. attack on Iraq clearly would reflect a calculated decision to
make war on another nation -- and again, even a good reason for doing so would
be irrelevant. Such a decision just as clearly is constitutionally reserved to
Congress, in plain language that Mr. Bush says he has read.

Nor can the Security Council, by authorizing the use of force against Iraq,
order Mr. Bush to make war on another country. Only Congress can make such a
decision -- to declare war. President Eisenhower recognized that in 1954 when he
rejected U.S. intervention in Indochina: "There is going to be no involvement of
America in a war unless it is a result of the constitutional process that is
placed upon Congress to declare it. Now let us have that clear."

A sound decision then -- and wise counsel now.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Negotiating an Iraqi Withdrawal Beats War;
Vietnam Legacy

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 183 words


To the Editor:

There's been a lot of talk about going to war or not against Saddam Hussein.
Going to war is one thing. Staying at war is another. In any future conflict,
this will no longer depend on the President or Congress or even columnists. It
will depend on our soldiers, those in the desert, those waiting to go and those
who have not yet joined the armed forces. This is the legacy of Vietnam.

Already one can hear warnings by parents of those in the desert that they draw
the line on actual war. They are only a tiny minority, but because so many are
joining support groups across the country, they will swell to a force not to be
resisted once the casualties start.

This has been the overlooked development, but from now on our soldiers and their
families will have as much to say as the President about how long we remain in
any war. The President will be able to marshal our forces and prepare for war,
and he will even be able to declare war, but as soon as the fighting begins, his
power will depend on the men doing the fighting.

DAVE GOLDMAN
New York, Nov. 8, 1990

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TACTICAL POSITIONS;
Congress Asks What It Should Do In the Gulf, and How

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1395 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


CONGRESS, or at least enough of it to form the sort of critical mass that
attracts media attention, reappeared briefly here last week and found itself
engaged in a confusing, ad-hoc debate on American policy in the Persian Gulf.

The debate in the corridors might never have occurred had not Congress been
away, listening to the voters, when President Bush ordered additional troops to
the gulf. Had he moved the nation closer to war with Iraq? If so, some
lawmakers, including leaders in Mr. Bush's own party, said that Congress ought
to reconvene immediately to vote its acquiescence or disapproval.

But faced with a choice that stark, and mindful of a public increasingly nervous
about the talk of war, Democratic congressional leaders concluded that support
for Mr. Bush's initial gulf policy and official ambiguity on his more recent
actions was the better course for now.

Part of the reason lies with the ambiguity of the Constitution, which divides
responsibilities for warmaking between the President as Commander in Chief and
the Congress as the sole authority for declaring war. In a modern world, where
the enemy armada no longer arrives with three months' notice and where
hostilities thousands of miles away require an immediate response, the
congressional role has at best become a legal nicety.

Desperate to be heard in a military matter more serious than any since Vietnam,
Congress has had difficulty deciding how that is best accomplished. Should it
act as critic and face blame for undermining the President in an international
crisis, or accept consultant status to the White House and share political
responsibility for policies it is not a full partner in shaping?

In the end, Senate Democrats settled on hearings by the Foreign Relations and
Armed Services Committees as a way to force the Administration to outline its
goals and military plans more clearly.

"We have a Hobson's choice," said Senator Joseph R. Biden of Delaware, the
second-ranking Democrat on the Foreign Relations Committee. "Either we ratify or
reject a declaration of war once it is presented to us, or we attempt to affect
the thinking of the Administration prior to its committing the nation to a
course of action that leaves us only a third, unattractive option -- pulling the
plug somewhere down the road and weakening our country."

But any effort to affect the Administration's thinking requires some consensus
among members of Congress. Judging by the cacophony on Capitol Hill, it is hard
to imagine what that might be.

A Plethora of Opinions

"You have 535 opinions," said Representative Dante Fascell, the Florida Democrat
who heads the House Foreign Affairs Committee. "Actually, you have 635 because
you have to count the Senate twice. Each senator has two opinions."

For most lawmakers, the overriding concern was the President's decision to order
at least another 150,000 American troops to join the 230,000 already dispatched
to the gulf since Iraq invaded Kuwait. Some complained that Mr. Bush should have
consulted Congress first.  Others, like Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of
Massachusetts, warned that the new deployments had shifted the mission from a
defensive to an offensive one that would lead inexorably to war unless Congress
stepped in now. "It's my sense after being around here and seeing Panama,
Grenada, Libya and Vietnam that members are very unwilling to do anything other
than support the men and women under fire," he said. "Historically, we have
winked at the Constitution and simply put our fingers to the wind."

Even Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who heads the Armed Services
Committee and is a traditional Administration ally, worried that logistics had
begun to drive policy. "The President has made a very good case for sending
troops to defend Saudi Arabia and to enforce the United Nations economic embargo
against Iraq," he said. "He has yet to make the case that liberating Kuwait is
in our vital interest and worth American lives." Asked whether he thought Kuwait
was in America's vital interest, Mr. Nunn replied: "The burden is on the
President. I'll let him make the case before I respond."

At a White House meeting on Wednesday, Mr. Bush managed to quell some criticism
by assuring Congressional leaders that he had made no decision to take offensive
action against Iraq. The additional troops were necessary, he said, to make the
threat of force credible to Mr. Hussein.

Mr. Fascell said the meeting was hardly conclusive.  "I don't have the answer,"
he said. "You can't keep the troops there forever unless you are really willing
and able to use them, and in the end it's going to be a political decision. In a
technical sense, the economic sanctions are working just great, but I've never
had any illusions that the embargo by itself would get Saddam Hussein out of
Kuwait."

While the Administration and lawmakers in both parties have affirmed support for
the sanctions, there are deep disagreements on how long they should be relied
on. At the White House meeting, House Speaker Thomas S. Foley spoke for many
Democrats in telling the President that perhaps a year and a half would be
needed for the sanctions to work. An hour later, the House Republican leader,
Bob Michel of Illinois, was telling reporters that such a time frame was "far
beyond" what he considered appropriate.

Senator Bob Kasten of Wisconsin, the senior Republican on the Appropriations
foreign operations subcommittee, explained the impatience: "The sanctions may be
working perfectly and not matter.  The question is what do you do with a
dictator who doesn't care about the welfare of his people, doesn't care whether
there is enough food or medicine?"

Apply more aggressive psychological pressure, said Senator Bill Bradley, a New
Jersey Democrat, who argues that the sanctions have already begun to bite on
Iraq's industrial base and that within six to nine months the effects on the
military establishment should be visible as well. "We should be telling the
Iraqis that the sanctions are working, and what's going to happen to them next
month and the month after that," he said.

And if Mr. Hussein is still in Kuwait six or nine months out? "Then we have air
power," he said. "We don't have to have a full-scale land war."

Looking to the Future

Some lawmakers have tried to focus the debate on the longer term. "The important
thing is to think ahead," said the House Majority Leader, Richard A. Gephardt of
Missouri. "If we precipitously use force to achieve our short-term objectives,
if we kill a lot of people, where do we wind up in the Arab world over the long
run?

"I want to spend some time talking to Arab experts," he added, "to try and
figure out how the Arabs view this, to see if we can understand what Saddam
Hussein is thinking."

Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, a senior Republican on the Foreign
Relations Committee, is also thinking long term, but with a different purpose.
Convinced that there will be military action by the spring if Mr. Hussein has
not left Kuwait voluntarily, he said the real issue is what happens afterward.

"I'm talking about a change of leadership in Iraq and a winding up of their
chemical and nuclear weapons potential," he said. "That is the threat to the
Middle East and to world peace, and it must be met, because if it is not met, it
will grow."

A valid point, agreed Representative Henry Hyde of Illinois, the senior
Republican on the House Intelligence Committee. "But to talk about it is
implicitly to talk about war. Nobody believes Saddam Hussein is going to give up
that capability simply because we ask him to."

Senator Daniel P. Moynihan rued the ad-hoc debate as a poor substitute for the
formal one he said should have taken place. He blamed the Administration for not
seeking a formal statement of support from Congress. And he blamed Congress.

"I think it was our responsibility," the New York Democrat said. "If they
didn't, we should have. Maybe it was too much to ask with the gridlock of the
budget and on the eve of the election."

Mr. Lugar echoed those sentiments. "Ultimately, people in public life have to
take responsibility. If our democracy works so badly that we can't even risk
having a debate because we'd make a hash of it, that would be a very severe
indictment."

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Ideas & Trends;
America's Battle Over How to Remember Its Forgotten War

BYLINE: By SUSAN CHIRA

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words


THE Korean War holds an uneasy place in history, squeezed between World War II
and Vietnam -- America at its zenith and nadir. The war's legacy is similarly
hazy. Was it a victory or a defeat, a heroic stand against Communism or a tragic
stalemate? Was the United States a champion of freedom or an interloper pursuing
its own cold war games?

Now, 40 years after what has been called America's forgotten war, skirmishes are
erupting -- on television, with the airing last week of a new documentary; in
the history books, most notably with the publication on Friday of a major
reinterpretation by the historian Bruce Cumings; and in Washington, where a
dispute about a long-overdue Korean War memorial mirrors a disagreement about
the nature of the war itself.

The debate could shape public views of the present as well as the past. The
United States faces some of the same dilemmas in the Persian Gulf as it did in
Korea -- whether to contain an enemy or destroy it, how its intervention will be
judged, how to fight in an alien place with different rules and alongside people
whose culture it does not understand.

Last week's Public Broadcasting System documentary and recent histories of the
Korean War, chief among them Mr. Cumings's books, paint a muddy moral picture,
in which South Korea was not a beacon of democracy but a reactionary, repressive
regime installed by American occupation forces bent on squelching Communism in
Asia. Before the war, at least, this argument runs, North Korea's Government was
more rooted in popular support than that of the South.

Although Americans have long decried North Korean mistreatment and Chinese
brainwashing of prisoners of war, viewers of the documentary "Korea: The Unknown
War" also saw South Korean and American images tarnished, with unsettling echoes
of Vietnam. Photographs and interviews with witnesses described South Korean
torture of civilians and American use of carpet bombing and napalm that left
more than 2 million North Korean civilians dead or maimed.

Finally, this new interpretation also questions the assumption of generations of
Americans that North Korea was the clear-cut aggressor. Mr. Cumings's most
recent book, "The Origins Of The Korean War, II: The Roaring Of The Cataract,
1947-1950," notes that the North did invade the South on June 25, 1950. But he
leaves open the question of whether the South provoked the invasion to draw the
United States into a fight to rout the North or, at the very least, did little
to defend itself against an invasion.

For Mr. Cumings, whose award-winning first volume on the war was banned at one
time in South Korea and remains a bible of the student protest movement there,
American conduct and motives in Korea were far from noble. In his view, the
Korean War marked the beginning of America's role as world policeman and of its
military involvement in Asia -- an involvement that would foreshadow Vietnam and
profoundly influence American strategy there.

"No one knows where to place it, in the victory or lost column," he said in an
interview. "It ended on a sad note for Americans, and the war and its memories
drifted off into a void."

This decidedly unheroic interpretation of the war infuriates some soldiers,
politicians and historians.

"It was a very proud moment in United States history, but you'd never know it
from the film," said Gen. Richard G. Stilwell, a Korean War veteran and
commander of American forces in Korea from 1973 through 1976. "It is, in my
view, anti-American. It denigrates the performance of the American armed forces
who fought so valiantly." For the retired general, there is no doubt about the
war's legacy. "By stopping Communism in South Korea, we put the first building
block of the concept of containment in place and 40 years later this resulted in
the demise of Communism worldwide," he said. "We stayed the course and provided
a shield behind which the citizens of South Korea have created what is virtually
a miracle."

This debate bubbled over into the making of the documentary. Mr. Cumings and Jon
Halliday, the original writer of the script for London's Thames Television, said
the documentary was changed under pressure from critics like General Stilwell
when it was adapted for an American audience. The general said it remained
biased and that few of his suggestions were adopted.

Even critics of Mr. Cumings, like James Matray, a Korean War historian at New
Mexico State University, say that much new historical scholarship has
irrevocably changed the traditional views of the war. But Mr. Matray believes
Mr. Cumings is too hard on the United States and too soft on the Soviet Union,
which supplied North Korea with weapons to launch the invasion.

Consensus on the war remains elusive and dogs even the discussion of how to
commemorate it. Long after a monument was built to those killed in Vietnam, this
nation's most divisive war, plans for a Korean War memorial have not yet been
agreed on. The architects of the original design, the firm of Burns Lucas, Leon,
Lucas, are locked in a bitter fight with the Korean War Veterans Memorial
Advisory Board, headed by General Stilwell. The architects and the board are now
working on separate designs, although the board's altered version has been
approved by one of the three committees necessary before it can be built.

The original design called for 38 soldiers marching up an inclined plane toward
the American flag. The intent, said John Lucas, one of the architects, was to
signal the course of the war -- early defeats, later victories and the final
stalemate -- in the postures and expressions of the soldiers. But the board,
which paid $20,000 to the winning design team, has made several changes,
including having the 38 men represent one unit on a mission at one point in the
war.

While General Stilwell said the changes were largely cosmetic and apolitical,
Mr. Lucas said he sensed an attempt to make the scene convey battle and victory.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Visions of War: South Koreans carrying a wounded American from
a battlefield during the Korean War. (David Douglas Duncan/Life Magazine via
Associated Press); Civilian refugees fleeing advancing Communist armies.
(Department of Defense); American self-propelled artillery firing on enemy
positions. (Pfc. Vadim Samoilo/U.S. Army)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 18, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Building a House on One's Own, From Scratch

BYLINE: By PENNY SINGER

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 25; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1325 words


DESPITE the slowdown in real estate sales, it took Michael Morris and his wife,
Karen, only a month to find a buyer for their 100-year-old house in Ossining.

"The house sold for nearly four times what we originally paid for it," said Mr.
Morris, who is the editor in chief of Home Mechanix magazine, but he pointed out
that when the couple bought the house for $68,000 eight years ago, it was a
sadly abused, two-family handyman special that had to be 98 percent rebuilt.

Building From Scratch

"Using our own labor -- sweat equity -- we spent years restoring it to its
former one-family glory," Mr. Morris said. "We didn't have the money to pay
someone else to do the work and, besides, I wanted to see if we could bring it
off."

Now the Morrises have embarked on an even more ambitious project.

At a time when residential building in the county has all but come to a halt,
they are building a house on their own, from scratch, on a wooded site with a
stream running through it in the town of New Castle.

"It's no secret that the construction industry in Westchester is experiencing
hard times," Mr. Morris said. "But it's because of that, that it's a good time
to build. Everybody is anxious for business.

"In palmier days, suppliers wouldn't look at a guy like me who was building his
own house. Now they are willing to work with me. It's the old story of supply
and demand. Supplies are high, but demand is low. So low that a number of lumber
houses in the area have already closed -- and window companies, which are also
dependent on home building, are going out of business." The price of the raw
materials used in building, Mr. Morris noted, has come down.

"In October, for instance, wood cost less than it did during the summer," he
said, "and concrete, which was $75 a yard not long ago, now can be had for $65 a
yard. I'm also finding that the lumber mills are willing to extend the same
credit terms to me, an individual, as they would normally give a volume
builder."

Not only have representatives of large lumberyards come to visit his site and
offer advice, Mr. Morris said, but "because of the economy, a lot of good
workmen are available."

Building Loans Available

He bought his two-and-a-quarter-acre lot from a builder who had abandoned his
own plans to build a luxury house on speculation. "It was part of a larger
landholding he had," Mr. Morris explained, "but the builder was so anxious to
get some of his investment back that he agreed to let me buy a parcel with a
mortgage, which is really unusual."

And because of the economic downturn, Mr. Morris added, he was also able to walk
into a bank and get a construction loan. "Four banks were willing to give me a
construction loan," he said. "With the loan in place, I was able to start the
foundation." Yet it still took him 11 months to get the project fully under way.

"The approval process is slow," he said. "I had to appear before various boards
for everything from preservation of the wetlands on the property to building the
road."

Finally, on Oct. 2, the foundation was begun. "My excavator, Anthony Fiorito of
Ossining, is the key man," Mr. Morris said. "He suggested so many things that
have helped me, such as moving the road to the side of the hill. And when we hit
water while we were digging the foundation and I was ready to hang myself from
the rafters, he found the solution to the problem almost immediately."

Mr. Morris said he had found good workers through word-of-mouth recommendations,
from people at the lumberyard, for example, and in the Town Building Department.
"Three Portuguese masons I have from Danbury who were recommended are just
superb," he said.

Mr. Morris said that he had spent years researching plans and materials for the
house and that the final plans were a blueprint that would meld old construction
techniques with new.

"I was especially interested in combining classic, old-fashioned timber-joinery
construction, the kind that locks together and is used by craftsmen, with the
newest state-of-the-art factory-produced wall panels," he said. "The technique
calls for wrapping the panels around the timber frame to form an exterior and
interior wall in one motion. Panels are made of super materials: the plywood
waferboard on the outside with a core of five-and-a-half-inch polyethylene."

Confronting a 'Giant Jigsaw'

The timber frame, custom cut to order from oak, was ordered from the Riverbend
Company in Blissfield, Mich. "When they arrived, the pieces looked like part of
a giant jigsaw," Mr. Morris said, "but the company sends a supervisor along."

It took 10 hours to get the framework up. "It first had to be assembled
horizontally," Mr. Morris said. "A crew of six was needed to carry each
thousand-pound timber over to lock with the others. Then I had a crane lift the
whole thing in place, much like an old-fashioned barn-raising."

Then, using panels manufactured by North American Panel Systems near Keene,
N.H., which sent along a trained crew, in one week the shell, sides and roof
were attached.

"It would have taken us three to five weeks using conventional 2-by-4
construction methods," Mr. Morris said. "The one-step panel method cuts the
product costs by half, or shaves off about one-third of the total construction
cost."

Final Costs of the House

The national average for construction costs is about $65 a square foot. "My
final construction costs," Mr. Morris said, "will actually come to just under
$100 a square foot. But I'm right on target because in Westchester labor, rental
equipment -- everything -- costs more than it does in other parts of the
country."

The final cost, he said, is expected to be almost $250,000. He had received a
builder's estimate of $366,000.

"All the house is an experiment, my grandest experiment to date, something I've
always wanted to do," he said. "I'm going to use the experience of the subject
for articles in Home Mechanix and I hope to be able to show that such an
ambitious project is not beyond the capabilities of the average individual. I
believe a committed person can do it."

Mr. Morris added that he hoped to "show others how to profit from my mistakes."

"For instance, I would advise anyone to use a good local architect. I didn't,
but I would have been better off if I had had an architect who walked the site
with me; I would have been able to avoid some problems. My worst problems came
from site conditions."

Mr. Morris, who took three weeks of vacation time for the construction process,
said he visited the site mornings and after work every day.

"The key to the whole thing is scheduling," he said. "I start at 7 A.M. phoning
the lumberyard and the workers. And my wife, who teaches at a local school, is
available to go to the site during the day to make decisions. She knows the job
as well as I do."

Mr. Morris, who is 43, said he was introduced to carpentry at a young age by his
sister's boyfriend, who was a carpenter. But before he had decided on a career,
he joined the Army directly from high school and served as an infantry staff
sergeant in Vietnam. After he was discharged, he worked his way through college
doing carpentry.

"When I graduated from Southampton College on Long Island with a degree in
English, I got a job as a reporter," he said. "But frankly, I realized quickly I
could make a better living as a carpenter, and I had pretty well decided to go
back to carpentry when I got accepted at the Graduate School of Journalism at
Columbia University. I was married and we had one child then, and no money, but
my wife encouraged me to go for it. And it turned out to be the greatest year of
my life."

Several years and several newspapers later, Mr. Morris became the managing
editor of Mechanix Illustrated, the forerunner to Home Mechanix. "It was the
marriage of the two things I loved, carpentry and journalism," he said. "I have
been very lucky."

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Michael Morris with the plans for his new post-and-beam house in
New Castle. Because of the downturn in the construction industry, Mr. Morris has
had no difficulty finding reliable workers or materials suppliers willing to
discount. (Photographs by Suzanne DeChillo for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Fighting the Iraqis: Four Scenarios, All Disputed

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2262 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 18


As more than 150,000 American reinforcements head for the Persian Gulf region to
give the United States what President Bush calls an "offensive military option,"
the question of how to wage war against Iraq is emerging as a contentious issue.

Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who chairs the Armed Services Committee,
and some former Defense Department officials are saying that if the United
States goes to war, the Pentagon should forgo a large-scale ground attack in
favor of a punishing aerial bombardment carried out over a number of days -- or
longer, if Iraq does not or cannot strike back. Thousands of American casualties
could be spared that way, they argue.

In the last decade, Amerian military commanders have followed a doctrine that
combines air strikes with major land attacks to wipe out an enemy in one
relatively quick, crushing blow, as in the American military operations in
Grenada and in Panama. But in both of those cases, United States military
superiority was overwhelming, which would not be the case against Iraq.

The Experience Factor

Iraqi forces, numbering about 430,000 in southern Iraq and Kuwait, have years of
recent combat experience from their war with Iran, which ended only two years
ago. American troops, though well trained and technically much better equipped
than Baghdad's army, have had no major combat experience since the Vietnam War
almost two decades ago. And they have not fought in a desert environment since
World War II.

While the Iraqi soldiers have more recent combat experience than the forces
allied against them, military specialists note that Baghdad's army fared poorly
during much of its eight-year war against Iran.

Between the proposals for an air strike only and for a combined air and ground
approach are a variety of specific options. A number of these strategies could
be employed in rapid sequence, like bombing military and industrial targets in
Iraq, attacking Baghdad's elite armored forces by air and by ground and
launching an amphibious Marine assault on the beaches of occupied Kuwait.

It is doubtful that any single strategy would be played out in isolation. More
likely is a campaign that gradually intensifies, building on and borrowing from
a menu of military options.

Which options will be used ultimately depends on a series of interlocking
calculations about the military and political goals that President Bush hopes to
achieve through the use of force, and the number of military and civilian
casualities that could result.

Does Mr. Bush, for instance, want to force Iraq's troops to retreat from Kuwait,
or is his goal to destroy the Iraqi military and the industrial installations
that support it? Would an Iraqi military defeat be enough or is the White
House's aim to unseat Iraq's President, Saddam Hussein?

The use of force would also hinge on the consequences for American and other
hostages held by Baghdad, the ramifications for sustaining the broad coalition
opposing Iraq and the long-term political impact in the Middle East of a major
military conflict.

Once military force is unleashed, there would be no sure way of predicting how
President Hussein would respond. The dynamics of combat inevitably lead to major
adjustments in whatever strategy is selected in advance.

What follows are four possible ways a battle could develop:

Limited Air Assault
Stunning Sorties, Then an Ultimatum

 The first calls for American, Saudi and other Western air forces to seize air
supremacy by knocking out Iraq's air defenses, including French- and Soviet-made
anti-aircraft missiles, and destroying most of Baghdad's 600 warplanes before
they could retaliate.

With air defenses in Kuwait and Iraq crippled, waves of American and allied
attack planes, including F-111 fighter-bombers from bases in Turkey and F-117A
Stealth fighters from Saudi Arabia, would attack targets like runways, control
towers, fuel and ammunition depots and command and control centers.

Planes would also attack the network of Iraqi factories that make chemical,
nuclear and biological weapons, smashing Baghdad's capacity to make war. Iraq
does not yet have nuclear weapons, but experts believe it could develop an
arsenal in about 10 years.

Israelis Change the Equation

Other warplanes would try to destroy Iraq's long-range Scud missile launchers,
checking the country's ability to attack Israel.

"If Israel comes into this, it becomes very difficult to keep Egypt, Syria and
the other Arabs on our side," said Ron Hatchett, a former Middle East analyst
for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who is now deputy director of the Mosher
Institute for Defense Studies at Texas A & M University.

Stripping Iraq of its air power and long-range missiles would inflict pain on
Baghdad, leave it vulnerable to broader strikes and expose its large ground
forces, but stop short of more destructive attacks that could result in
thousands of military and civilian casualties.

"We suppress his air defenses and then give him an ultimatum," said Anthony
Cordesman, a specialist on regional security in the Persian Gulf, suggesting one
outcome.

Less Strain on Coalition

Attacking primarily military targets also places less strain on the coalition,
which could weaken as more Arabs are killed.

But this option is not without potential problems. Mr. Hussein could begin
executing American and other foreign hostages, undermining support in the United
States and other countries whose citizens are captives. Mr. Bush has expressed
sympathy for the hostages' plight but has said their presence would not alter
military planning.

Even if the Iraqi President yielded with the bulk of his ground forces intact
and withdrew from Kuwait, the issue of future aggression by Iraq would still be
unresolved.

All-Out Air Attack
Sustained Bombing And Demoralization

The second strategy, building on the first, would extend the air attack to
include additional strikes against other important military and industrial
targets like hydroelectric dams, oil refineries, electricity plants, spare parts
depots and radio and television towers.

This strategy, however, would likely take a much bigger toll on Iraqi civilians.
Casualty figures climbing into the thousands could wear down the coalition's
cohesion, making sustained bombing a riskier tactic.

Mr. Hussein could erode support for this approach by parading captured American
pilots shot down over Iraq or releasing photographs of Iraqi women and children
maimed in the bombings.

Carpet-Bomb the Infantry

On the battlefield in Kuwait and in southern Iraq, attack aircraft like
tank-killing A-10 jets and Apache helicopters could be used to attack the
430,000 enemy ground troops there from the rear, cutting off supply lines. B-52
bombers, heavily used in Vietnam, could be called in from Diego Garcia in the
Indian Ocean to carpet-bomb Iraqi infantrymen, but Washington would need to
position additional B-52's closer to Iraq to conduct sustained raids.

This approach counts on intense bombing to undermine morale among Iraqi troops
and put more pressure on traditional members of the Iraqi military command in
Baghdad to oust Mr. Hussein and his tight circle of advisers.

"With air strikes and control of the air over both Iraq and the occupying Iraqi
Army in Kuwait," said Richard N. Perle, former Assistant Secretary of Defense in
the Reagan Administration, "we can isolate that occupying force, and we can
virtually at our own pace inflict a war of attrition on Iraq, knowing they
cannot replenish the supplies they lose."

Advocates of aerial bombardment say that a sustained bombing campaign should be
given time to achieve political and military goals without sending ground troops
in quickly.

No Time Limit

"I would not say that we had to draw a time limit of two or three days," Mr.
Nunn said. "If it takes 30 days or 45 days or 60 days, and we can save thousands
of American lives by taking more time, then let's don't push our military so
hard that they feel they have to get it over within two or three days."

"Getting bogged down in a ground war there is the last thing we want," he added,
"and plays right into Saddam Hussein's hands."

President Bush vowed this week that he would not allow the United States to
become involved in a protracted conflict in the Persian Gulf that it had little
hope of winning.

"I will not as Commander in Chief ever put somebody into a military situation
that we do not win -- ever," Mr. Bush said. "And there's not going to be any
long drawn-out agony of Vietnam."

Air and Ground War
Major Destruction And Greater Risks

 Critics of the first and second approaches point to the large-scale bombing
raids on North Vietnam, and on Japan and Germany in World War II, as evidence of
the failure of air power alone to wring surrender from an enemy.

The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Colin L. Powell, and the
commander of American forces in the Persian Gulf, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf,
are both Army generals whose thinking has been colored by the painful lessons of
the Vietnam War and American involvement in Lebanon.

They have vowed not to repeat the mistakes made in those situations in the
Persian Gulf crisis.

In a recent interview with The New York Times, General Schwarzkopf said, "We
have vastly superior firepower and technology, and if we have to go to war, I am
going to use every single thing that is available to me to bring as much
destruction to the Iraqi forces as rapidly as I possibly can in the hopes of
winning victory as quickly as possible."

When the reinforcements arrive, probably by January, the United States will have
more than 380,000 forces in the gulf region, and its allies another 200,000.

Shorter War, Fewer Casualties

A short all-out war might cost thousands of military casualties, proponents say,
but would ultimately preserve lives that would be lost in a prolonged air or
trench war. It would also lessen the risk of the international coalition
unraveling, they argue.

American tank columns could try to sweep around the western flank of the Iraqi
forces or push through gaps in the front-line infantry positions in Kuwait. The
main foes would be Iraq's elite armored units, the Republican Guard, which is
deployed in reserve in the rear of Kuwait and southern Iraq.

Iraq has about 1,000 top-line battle tanks, about half of the coalition forces
will have by January.

The Iraqi tanks, spread out in defensive positions, would be forced to line up
to engage the advancing allied tanks, making them a vulnerable target to air
attack.

Ground Troops Support Aircraft

"It would be the first war in history where ground forces supported air forces,"
instead of the other way around, said Bernard E. Trainor, a former New York
Times military correspondent and retired Marine lieutenant general who is now
the director of the National Security Program at Harvard University's Kennedy
School of Government.

A Marine amphibious force of about 11,000 men could threaten Iraqi forces in
Kuwait and hold them in place or launch a beachhead assault. A similar force was
scheduled to practice such an attack in northeastern Saudi Arabia today, but the
amphibious landing portion was postponed until Monday after 10-foot waves
prompted commanders to decide not to risk personnel and equipment in an
exercise.

A ground war poses potential political problems. Allied Arab ground forces now
in Saudi Arabia presumably would take part in any ground offensive, or at least
in a holding force against an Iraqi advance. This would pit Arabs against Arabs
in a way that could cause political difficulties for Egyptian and Syrian
Governments trying to maintain support for a prolonged war.

If Iraqi forces fight better than military experts expect, a short war could
drag on for weeks, producing tens of thousands of casualties and pulling
American forces into the kind of grinding ground combat the Iraqi Army used to
its advantage in its eight-year war with Iran.

Things Go Wrong
Iraq Strikes First, Or War Drags On

 The worst-case scenario assumes that the plans go awry. Mr. Hussein could
launch a pre-emptive chemical strike against American forces, Saudi cities or
Israel, and momentarily seize the timetable for battle.

Much of the American and allied technology, unproven in battle, could fail to
work effectively. Iraqi terrorist attacks could undermine troop morale, and
American public opinion could turn against the war. A short, decisive war could
fail to materialize, and a drawn-out conflict could ensue instead, with American
and allied casualties ranging beyond 20,000 and Iraq suffering three to four
times that amount.

If They Were Pushed Out

If pushed out of Kuwait, Iraq troops could continue to launch spasmodic attacks,
forcing mainly American ground troops to push north into Iraq. In that case, the
American-led coalition's superior intelligence capabilities, night-fighting
ability and air superiority might eventually prove decisive, destroying the
Iraqi military but also devastating much of the country.

The destruction of Iraq, possibly requiring an occupation army and a rebuilding
of the Government, is not a scenario that senior military commanders or
Administration officials relish.

Such a development could leave a dangerous power vacuum in the Middle East and
create long-term instability in the region. Syria and Iran would likely vie for
power, perhaps engulfing the region in another war.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Marines on maneuvers in the Saudi desert yesterday as part of a
six-day exercise the military has named Operation Imminent Thunder. (Associated
Press); Map of Iraq showing locations of possible airstrike targets. (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Death of a Homeless Man: From Ivy League to Streets

BYLINE: By DONATELLA LORCH

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1182 words


Thomas Ebbers had all the advantages. He was financially independent, graduated
from an Ivy League college and had a bright future in the 1970's. But when he
died at age 47 two months ago, stabbed to death in a park on the Lower East Side
of Manhattan, Mr. Ebbers owned only the clothes on his back -- he died a
homeless New Yorker who had just begun to climb back from alcoholism and
despair.

Last week, the police arrested another man on the fringes of society, a
36-year-old career criminal who they said fatally stabbed Mr. Ebbers in a
robbery attempt Sept. 20. With the arrest of the man, Frank Jiggs, the police
said they had solved the mystery of Mr. Ebbers's death.

'Beginning to Resurrect His Life'

But his life remains a riddle, the story of a man who was caught in what friends
described as a struggle between his introverted personality and his talent as
photographer, and who finally found self-respect in unusual surroundings: on the
streets of New York.

"He was at the very bottom, and he was beginning to resurrect his life," said
Thomas Wilson, a college friend of Mr. Ebbers's. "There's a clear message: we
shouldn't give up on anybody or write them off. If Ebbers could pull himself
together, anybody can."

For the last year, Mr. Ebbers, a Vietnam veteran and a former photographer, had
been part of the Homeward Bound program, an organization of working homeless men
and women who reach out to help other homeless people. He lived with them in the
basement of St. Augustine Episcopal Church at 292 Henry Street on the Lower East
Side.

For six months beginning in June 1989, he was among more than 300 homeless
people who camped in front of City Hall to protest the city's housing policies.
About a year ago, he joined the Interfaith Assembly on Homelessness at the
Cathedral of St. John the Divine. He took speech classes. He went out every
Sunday to parishes to talk about homelessness and tell his story. His life began
to change.

"He was talking more," Connie Foreman, a friend and resource director of
Homeward Bound, said. "He was talking about being happy, about making changes,
of doing constructive work."

On Sept. 20 just before 9 P.M., Mr. Ebbers bought bagels, as he always did, for
his friends in the St. Augustine basement. Then he went to sit on a bench in
Seward Park near the church to eat a bagel, drink a beer and enjoy his solitude.
Detectives found him sprawled there, stabbed many times. His wallet was empty,
lying by his side.

'A Mean, Mean Felllow'

With the help of other street people during the last eight weeks, detectives
tracked down Mr. Jiggs, who was being held on Rikers Island on an October
robbery charge, and charged him with Mr. Ebbers's murder. Mr. Jiggs has 12 known
aliases and a criminal record dating to 1972, including two charges of attempted
murder, and charges of assault and burglary, the police said. He had served
prison terms in at least three correctional centers. On Oct. 16, he was charged
with robbing a student in Tompkins Square Park.

"He's a mean, mean fellow," Detective Robert DeFlaminis of the Seventh Precinct
said. The detective said Mr. Jiggs apparently terrorized people in the parks on
the Lower East Side.

People cooperated with the police in the investigation of Mr. Ebbers's killing
for several reasons, Detective Michael Swain said.

"They wanted to get the bad out of the park," he said. "They have to coexist
with themselves. And Ebbers was a human being. They also wanted to put his soul
to rest."

Excelled in His Studies

Mr. Ebbers's life is like a jigsaw puzzle, and each period of time -- that spent
in Chicago, at Brown University, in Vietnam, Rhode Island and New York -- is a
separate piece.

The only child of wealthy parents, Mr. Ebbers grew up in Chicago, where his
father headed Nationwide Food Service and was later vice president of the
Cantine Corporation. His parents divorced when he was 7.

Deeply introverted, he excelled in his studies, winning a scholarship to Campion
High School, a Jesuit school in Wisconsin, and then to Holy Cross University
before transferring to Brown University, his stepmother, Helen Ebbers Carroll,
of Cape Haze, Fla, said. He had three loves: jazz, architecture and photography.

"At 15, Tom had the best Thelonius Monk collection I've ever seen," said a high
school friend, Patrick Kealy, who is now managing director of C. L. Global on
Wall Street. For entertainment, he would go out to admire nearby buildings by
Frank Lloyd Wright.

A Degree in the Classics

He breezed into Brown University with a score of 800 on the math S.A.T., Mr.
Kealy said. In 1965, he graduated with a bachelor's degree in classics. His
friends and family said he had trouble getting along with others, but could hold
scintillating one-on-one conversations.

"The guy was extremely uncomfortable in his own skin; he was almost in torment,"
Mr. Wilson, the college friend, said. "He was simply on some other wavelength.
He lacked some sort of basic connectedness."

Mr. Ebbers was in the Air Force from 1966 until 1969, where he was trained in
special aerial photo techniques, Mrs. Carroll said. He was sent to Vietnam, but
when he returned, Vietnam was a closed subject.

Finances were never a problem. His father gave him money and when his mother
died three years ago, he moved to Rhode Island with the money from the sale of
her house. Shaken by a nervous breakdown after her death, he was rescued for a
while by Rhode Island and the memory of college days.

Became an Alcoholic

Photography became a way to vent his perfectionism, his friends said. His
photos, shot through heavy filters, were mostly city scenes. In the mid-1980's,
he opened a gallery in Westerly, R.I., but left it when he could no longer pay
the rent.

His friends said he became an alcoholic and retreated into a shell. He moved to
New York, lost contact with friends, and stopped sending holiday greetings to
his stepmother.

In a year, the broad-shouldered, lanky man had grown out his crew cut and grown
a long unkempt beard. He started dressing in jeans and construction boots
instead of pressed chinos. He lived on the streets.

Mr. Ebbers's fall into homelessness puzzled many of his friends, who wondered
how he could squander his inheritance so quickly and why he did not turn to them
for help.

'He Never Showed His Anger'

About 10 months ago, Mr. Ebbers began to feel more confident and hopeful, Ms.
Foreman said. Friends and relatives were astonished by the new Tom Ebbers, one
they had never known.

"He was a very peaceful type," said his friend, Terry LeConte, who also lived in
the church basement. "He never showed his anger."

Mr. Ebbers's homeless friends said they were troubled by the senselessness of
his death.

"I can't believe he's gone," William Custodio, a friend of Mr. Ebbers's, who
also lived with him at the church, said. "A lot of people misjudged Tom because
he was quiet and introverted. He was just tired of society. We could always
depend on Tom. You could ask him to do anything."

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas Ebbers, a graduate of Brown University, was homeless and
living in a shelter at St. Augustine Episcopal Church when he was killed two
months ago.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Americans More Wary of Gulf Policy, Poll Finds

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1795 words


Americans are increasingly worried that President Bush, who has been trying to
intimidate President Saddam Hussein of Iraq with hostile words and larger troop
levels, has been too quick to commit American military forces to the Persian
Gulf and has not been working hard enough on a diplomatic solution, according to
the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.

For the first time, a majority of the public expects the United States to fight
Iraq, even though a majority also rejects some of the Bush Administration's main
justifications for military action: protecting oil, defending Saudi Arabia and
expelling Iraq from Kuwait. But a majority does seem convinced that stopping
President Hussein's potential to build and launch nuclear missiles is a valid
reason to take action.

The country is more confused and divided over Mr. Bush's policy than at any time
since the crisis began, and the President's response to the Iraqi invasion of
Kuwait, initially applauded by most Americans, is now endorsed by only half of
them.

Drop in Gulf Support

Shortly after Iraq invaded Kuwait in August and Mr. Bush first sent American
forces to the Middle East and began assembling an international embargo against
Iraq, the approval rating for his policy peaked at 75 percent. But it has
sharply dropped over the last three months, falling 9 points in the last two
weeks alone. Only 50 percent now approve of Mr. Bush's approach, while 41
percent disapprove.

A solid 61 percent of Americans continue to say that the United States was right
to send troops to Saudi Arabia initially. But the support plunges to 41 percent
when it comes to sending about 150,000 additional troops.

The poll is based on telephone interviews conducted Nov. 13-15 with 1,370 adults
around the United States, excluding Alaska and Hawaii. The poll has a margin of
sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points.

"It's getting a little bit out of hand, 400,000 troops and all these tanks that
aren't even good in the sand," said Richard Legal, a 30-year-old carpenter from
Clearwater, Fla., who participated in the poll and a follow-up telephone
interview. "We need to be there, but we don't need all this. For Saddam Hussein,
this overbuildup is like pushing a rat into a corner. Eventually, like any wild
animal, he'll jump, and that worries me."

Mr. Legal said he was enthusastic in the beginning and told his father, a
veteran of the Korean War, "Let's get them in our rifle sights; here we go." But
with the desert standoff dragging on, with many of the Bush Administration's
allies queasy about military action and with Mr. Hussein showing surprising
adroitness at public relations, Mr. Legal said he and his father were no longer
"sure that we're going about it in the right way."

He added, "I think Bush should be trying to get some kind of negotiation going."

Americans have historically been reluctant to support military campaigns abroad
unless the country is attacked or unless the nation's leaders take action and
then appeal to the public after the fact, as was the case in Grenada and Panama,
both invasions that were swiftly completed and drew widespread public support.

In the new poll, 47 percent said President Bush had been too quick to commit
military forces instead of seeking a diplomatic resolution, up from 38 percent
in August. For the first time, a majority, 51 percent, said Mr. Bush had not
clearly explained why the United States had dispatched so many troops to a
desert halfway around the world.

The Administration's inability to make a compelling argument for a possible war
was reflected in a plunge of 19 percentage points in the public's confidence
that it understood the aims.

Out of three possible reasons for fighting -- restoring the Government of Kuwait
and defending Saudi Arabia, protecting oil reserves, and stopping Mr. Hussein
from developing nuclear weapons -- majorities of 56 and 62 percent,
respectively, rejected the first two reasons as not being good enough. But 54
percent accepted the third as a potent justification.

This result was intriguing because, even though American troops in Saudi Arabia
have cited Iraq's chemical weapons and nuclear potential as reasons for their
presence, the Administration has not been emphasizing the nuclear threat.
Officials say they have generally avoided the issue for fear that it will raise
the stakes too high by making the destruction of the Iraqi weapons cache a
specific military objective.

But the President's poll takers have begun to realize that hitting harder at the
nuclear issue may be a way of capturing the sustained public support that has
eluded the Administration so far. Marking a change in tactics, President Bush
inserted a line about the issue in a speech in Germany this weekend.

America's Next Step

Many of the people who spoke in follow-up interviews were not sure what
America's next step should be. They agreed that President Bush was in a horrible
bind because he could not back down and Mr. Hussein was unlikely to back down.

"If Bush brings the troops home and leaves a U.N. peacekeeping force without
getting Saddam out of Kuwait, people won't like it," Bill Brewer, 38, a sheet
metal mechanic and electrician from Jacksonville, N.C. "And if he loses a lot of
lives of American soldiers and hostages trying to liberate Kuwait, there will be
a public outcry."

Like others, Mr. Brewer said the President's image will be shaped by the
resolution of the conflict. "When he first went in there, I thought he was
showing a little backbone that I was afraid he didn't have," he said. "But now
it looks the other way around."

Many agreed that they had not been convinced of the need for war by what the
President had said so far.

In interviews, many poll respondents suggested that the President needed to talk
more directly to the public in prime time television addresses, something Mr.
Bush avoids because he fears he is not as good at that format as former
President Ronald Reagan was.

"He needs an open-faced talk on TV to inform the people," said Cecilia Fennell,
44, a payroll supervisor for the Naval Weapons Station in Yorktown, Va. "The
worst thing in the world is a bunch of rumors going on. That's what happens in
my office all the time. You have to talk to people or they'll assume the worst."

When asked whether United States troops should start military action against
Iraq soon, only 21 percent agreed, while 71 percent said the Administration
should wait to see what Iraq does.

"The initial buildup was terrific because you have to take a stand," Mrs.
Fennell said. "But doubling it, I don't know, because nothing's happened."

In interviews, many respondents also were uneasy about the reluctance of some
allies to send forces to the Middle East or to back offensive military action.

"Why do we have to be the only one stepping forward?" Mr. Legal asked. "Nobody
else really seems to want to fight the Iraqis. We always end up being the bad
guy."

A majority of those polled, 51 percent said they expected combat, a rise of 12
points in three months.

"War is just one of those things you have to have sometimes," said Mary White,
who has one son in the Air Force who is on his way to Saudi Arabia and another
in the Army who believes he will be sent there soon. "If we don't stake a stand,
every little country in the world will try to attack us and personally I'm
getting tired of little countries walking over us."

About two-thirds of Americans continued to say that Congress should have to vote
a declaration of war before American troops go into combat, a proportion that
has remained unchanged from five years ago when the nation was not at risk of
war.

"He should have had Congress in on this by now," said April Landreth, 27, a
hospital worker from Phoenix.

Who Has Most Hesitation?

The poll showed the most hesitation about war among women, blacks and
lower-income Americans. Women were 19 percentage points more likely than men to
say the President should have waited before committing additional troops and, by
a similar margin, women were more worried that Mr. Bush had not explored the
limits of diplomacy.

"I don't like to fight," Mrs. Fennell said. "My husband says 'Go, get in there
and knock somebody's head off,' just to show them we can do it. But I prefer
talking, getting to the root of the problem. With my two teen-age girls, that's
how I try to solve problems."

Blacks were 23 percentage points more likely than whites to say Mr. Bush should
have waited before committing additional troops, and Americans with annual
household income under $15,000 were 19 percentage points more likely than
Americans with incomes over $50,000 to say the President should have delayed the
buildup of troops.

Mr. Bush's overall job approval rating stood at 55 percent, essentially
unchanged from late October, when he reached the low point of his
Administration's popularity.

The President's ratings, as reflected in several recent public opinion polls,
increased at the beginning of the Persian Gulf confrontation but began sliding
in October. Since Mr. Bush has consistently gotten better ratings for his
handling of foreign affairs than domestic affairs, a loss of confidence in his
approach on a foreign policy crisis hurts him where he has been strongest.

"It reminds me of Vietnam, and that's everyone else's opinion I talk to," Mr.
Legal said.

How the Survey Was Conducted

The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews
conducted Nov. 13-15 with 1,370 adults around the United States, excluding
Alaska and Hawaii.

The sample of telephone exchanges called was selected by a computer from a
complete list of exchanges in the country. The exchanges were chosen so as to
insure that each region of the country was represented in proportion to its
population. For each exchange, the telephone numbers were formed by random
digits, thus permitting access to both listed and unlisted numbers. The numbers
were then screened to limit calls to residences.

The results have been weighted to take account of household size and number
ofresidential telephone lines and to adjust for variations in the sample
relating to region, race, sex, age and education.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20 the results from a poll like this will differ
by no more than three percentage points in either direction from what would have
been obtained by seeking out all American adults.

The potential sampling error for smaller subgroups is larger. For example, for
blacks it is plus or minus nine percentage points.

In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any
survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: Poll results on the possiblity of war in the Gulf

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Marines on the Edge Are Trained, Ready And Mostly Young

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1467 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Nov. 18


With occasional talk of death, grimly realistic chemical warfare drills and the
explosion of 81-millimeter mortars being zeroed in, the Second Battalion of the
Seventh Marines is palpably preparing for war in its third month here in the
Saudi desert.

Although no one knows if the time for killing and dying will come soon, or even
come at all, the young men here and their more grizzled noncoms and officers
seem to have drawn their conclusion from the news that there will be no rotation
home and that as many as 200,000 reinforcements are on the way to join them.

They say they are ready to fight and glad President Bush is coming to visit this
week for Thanksgiving. Some marines from this unit will meet the President,
their commanders say.

"We know what we're doing here," said First Lieut. John Lesniak, 26 years old,
as he directed a mortar team.

"I think it's going to happen," said Cpl. John Hughes, 23 and a member of the
battalion's scout and snipe platoon.

"I mean, the freedom of the Kuwaiti people is gone, so what are we waiting for?"
chimed in Cpl. Kevin Krotzer, 23.

The battalion commander, Lieut. Col. Roger Mauer, however, took the more knowing
view of a veteran of Vietnam.

"No military man who has been in a war is ever eager to see war begin," the
43-year-old officer said as the rising sun dimmed the last morning stars.

"But what I like about this one is that we're being given the forces to do the
job," Colonel Mauer added. "If it happens it will come down to execution. We
have what's needed to win."

This Marine combat battalion has close to 900 men and is among the most
forward-deployed battalions, although under military rules here neither its
exact size nor its location can be reported.

The vast majority of the marines are between 19 and 24 years old. There are no
women in this battalion or any other forward combat unit, although marines and
soldiers who are women are deployed elsewhere in Saudi Arabia.

While the braggadocio of young men was frequently heard here, in unguarded
moments marines would suddenly speak of loneliness and tugging memories of home,
often describing every feature of a waiting girlfriend, or pulling out the last
letter or box of cookies from their mothers.

"It's at night that it goes through your head," Corporal Hughes said. "You think
about the States, drinking a beer, your woman, getting home."

Only Captives Are Scorpions

After 14 weeks of sun, hot water and dust, living conditions here have hardly
softened. This week a 25-mile-per-hour wind was choking the entire camp under a
horizontally driven storm of gray grit and dust.

But the men of the battalion's scout and snipe platoon seemed to thrive on such
conditions. Compared with some Army units, their morale appears almost defiantly
high, judging from a day and night spent with them.

"We're marines," said Lance Cpl. David Kuehn, 21. "This is what we joined for."

Scorpion bites are common at night, since cooling temperatures make the insects
seek warmth by crawling under sleeping bags and other gear. One marine said he
had been stung three times.

Lance Cpl. Dennis Viveiros, 20, showed a swollen finger that had been bitten
that morning by a large black scorpion, which he proudly displayed in a cookie
can where it nestled with five other recently captured scorpions.

"I'm going to kill it, super-glue it on a board and take it home with me,"
Corporal Viveiros solemnly pledged, gazing affectionately at his spiny
assailant.

Most of the time, the marines seem to train, train, train.

In the afternoon they held a startlingly realistic chemical warfare exercise in
which members of a decontamination unit put on protective suits to hose down a
mock-contaminated armored personnel carrier while medical corpsmen tried to
treat a marine acting out the role of a combatant who had been gassed.

Practice is Sobering

The practice appeared to sober the unit of marines, who watched in a grim-faced
hush as the medical team clumsily tried to decontaminate, bandage and evacuate
the marine. Because of the need for the cumbersome protective gear, the work was
agonizingly slow.

"I don't ever want it happening to me, that's for sure," said Lance Cpl. Robert
Kane, 21.

"It makes it a whole different ball game," said Lance Cpl. Mathew E. Lawson, the
field medic who tended the marine pretending to be wounded. "Even a light wound
can be serious since I have to contaminate him when I open up his suit to work
on him."

Nearby, three marines splayed in the dirt to provide mock covering fire for a
unit practicing a retreat with 16 wounded comrades. A sergeant shouted: "Keep
down your silhouettes! Stand up and you'll get shot!"

The next morning, in a stretch of desert designated for firing live ammunition,
two machine-gun squads ricocheted .50-caliber bullets off an abandoned truck
chassis nearly 600 yards away.

Six other squads dropped 81-millimeter mortar rounds that detonated with a
series of sharp explosions in a tight, lethal pattern on a nearby low dune,
sending up clouds of black smoke and dirt.

No Raves for Rations

When they are not running night patrols, most marines throw their sleeping bags
on the sand under a bit of camouflaged netting and sleep from dusk to dawn.

They get one hot meal a day, when the field kitchen is set up. But on days like
this one, when the battalion has just moved its position, the fare is cold
rations, which are richly described in unprintable terms, then hurriedly eaten
and washed down with water.

Candy bars, chewing tobacco and other goodies from home help ease the monotony
of military rations. There is no alcohol and few radios. News is late and
scanty, usually supplemented with plentiful rumors, most of them false.

The only diversion besides training, pickup football and volleyball, is a
biweekly break at a rear base, where the marines can telephone home, swim in a
pool, play pinball, shower and sleep for four days if they want to.

Letters to Read, Again and Again

Back in the sands, letters from home are read and re-read and then read again. A
girlie magazine is passed through so many hands that it appears to risk
disintegration.

The men offer story after story of suddenly divided families, tearful
departures, snap marriages and divorces, newborn sons and daughters.

"I've got a little girl I haven't even seen," said John Duncan, a 27-year-old
medical corpsman for the scout and snipe platoon.

One of the top snipers in the platoon, Lance Cpl. Frank Lloyd Dickerson, joined
the Marines a little over three years ago. He is 21 now, preparing to fight even
while he wonders about his girlfriend, Leah Freeman, back in Blaine, Wash. He
says he writes to her and to his mother two or three times a week.

"I talked to my girlfriend just before we left and told her not to worry,"
Corporal Dickerson said. "She was crying, so I told her I'd call her again the
next day, but the next day we were gone."

"I guess I just hope she'll wait for me," he added. "There are times though when
I wish I hadn't met her so that I wouldn't have to be putting her through this."

None of these young men, now at the peak of life, speak easily of death. But,
when asked, they will talk of feelings they otherwise hide.

"I don't plan on dying here," Corporal Dickerson said.

"You see a change in people now," he added. "At first they were all gung-ho. Now
they're more quiet. No one wants war, but if it happens we've got to do it.
We've got to get the job done."

From East L.A. Comes a Bible

His platoon mate, Lance Cpl. Nelson Fountain, 22, agreed. He survived the tough
housing projects of east Los Angeles and north Las Vegas to become a marine. He
says he is ready to fight, but that he is aware of the presence of death.

"Every time I write home I think about it," he said. Talking about his wife and
his mother, he opened a pocket Bible wrapped in a red ribbon sent by his wife.

Inside Corporal Fountain, whose family is Cuban-American, had tucked a picture
and a prayer to the Virgin of Guadalupe, sent to him by his mother.

"She told me to carry it, and I do," he said.

It was Sunday, a time to rest, to enjoy a special breakfast treat of sweet
rolls, to hear a church service or to write a letter home.

Staff Sgt. Duane Sieck, a 30-year-old career veteran who leads the scout and
snipe platoon, walked across an expanse of barren sand to another camouflaged
position that looked just like all the others that are now filling the otherwise
empty desert of northern Saudi Arabia.

"They've gotten real close out here," he said of the young troops he watches
over with something approaching paternal discipline tempered by almost maternal
affection. "They're all good men."


LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Man Perishes in Fiery Suicide Outside the Capitol

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 536 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 19


An unidentified man set himself afire and burned to death on the west side of
the Capitol today, leaving no immediate clues to the reason for his suicide.

Dan Nichols, a spokesman for the Capitol Police, said two officers on patrol
along the broad plaza that overlooks the Washington Mall spotted the flames and
went back inside the building to get fire extinguishers. The fire was quickly
doused, he said, but the man died at the scene, his body charred beyond
recognition.

"I heard a 'poof' sound as if somebody had lit some gasoline," Larry Schuster, a
writer who witnessed the immolation, told the Reuters news agency. "He never
said anything. There was no sound from him."

The authorities later found a plastic jug containing gasoline in a truck parked
a few blocks from the Capitol. A key to the truck, a 1990 Toyota, was found on
the body, officials said. The officials traced the ownership of the vehicle,
which had no license plates, but they withheld the name pending a determination
that the owner was the same man who set himself afire.

'I've Seen Many Things'

The authorities determined that the victim was a white male about 30 years old.
They were seeking further information on his identity and trying to determine
whether his suicide was linked to any political issue.

Howard Greene, secretary for the Senate Republicans, watched from his office
window as the first officials on the scene covered the body with a sheet and
cordoned off the area. "I've seen many things in my time from this spot," he
said, "parades, political demonstrations, Presidential inaugurations. But I've
never thought I would see anything like this. It's just awful."

The Capitol is visited by millions of tourists each year. Its west front, which
commands a sweeping view of the Mall and major monuments, is frequently used for
political demonstrations. But the Capitol has been the site of relatively few
violent incidents over the years.

In 1915, a former German instructor protesting anti-German attitudes in the
United States planted a bomb in the reception room just outside the Senate
chamber. In the early 1920's, a Senator from Nevada was shot in his office by a
man who had recently been released from a mental hospital.

Perhaps the most spectacular incident occurred in 1954, when a group of Puerto
Rican nationalists opened fire in the House chamber, wounding several members.
In more recent times, a group protesting the Vietnam War planted a bomb in a
women's restroom in the Senate in March 1971. In November 1983, a group of
people describing themselves as anti-imperialists, planted a bomb in the
corridor outside the Senate chamber.

While no one was injured, the bomb caused $265,000 in damage and resulted in
stringent security measures throughout the Capitol. Although tourists are
screened by metal detectors as they enter the doors of the Capitol and screened
a second time if they wish to sit in the gallery of the House or Senate, they
are largely free to wander the vast grounds surrounding the Capitol.

Officer Nichols said a man shot himself to death on the east steps of the
Capitol about a decade ago, and that a man attempted suicide on the grounds in
1989.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Chicopee Journal;
Once Again, an Air Base Is a Magnet for Protest

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 734 words

DATELINE: CHICOPEE, Mass., Nov. 19


At the rear gate of Westover Air Force Base here, Alice Swift quietly made her
way through a six-man police guard this morning to take her place amid a ragtag
band of 85 Quakers, students and Buddhists, who were beating peace drums and
chanting anti-war slogans.

"It's my first time here," said Mrs. Swift, a Quaker and a soft-spoken mother of
four from Amherst, 20 miles up Interstate 91. "But I felt this was something I
had to do. With the troop buildup and everything, I just feel things are getting
out of hand."

Since late August, when American troops first went to the Persian Gulf,
protesters from neighboring cities and towns have stood outside the base from 8
to 9 every Monday morning, blocking half the road into it. Their visits have
stirred mixed emotions in Chicopee, the conservative, working-class city of
55,000 people that is Westover's home.

At first, there were only five protesters. Now there are 85, carrying banners
that read, "Don't Die for Oil" and "Jobs at Home, Not War Abroad." And as the
weeks drag on and the number of troops deployed from the base soars past 13,000,
some Chicopee residents have joined the demonstrators in voicing doubts about
the action.

"People are just becoming more aware of what is really going on," said Paula
Dubin from Chicopee. "Some of us are really scared."


For much of its 50-year history, Westover, a former Strategic Air Command base
that is now the major staging site in the Northeast, has been a focal point for
protesters, most of them from five nearby campuses: Amherst, Smith, Mount
Holyoke and Hampshire Colleges and the University of Massachusetts.

On May 11, 1972, the Chicopee police arrested 500 out of more than 1,000 people
gathered to protest the Vietnam War; they were sitting in the road, blocking two
gates to the base for nearly two hours. Among those arrested were John William
Ward, then president of Amherst College, and his wife, Barbara.

In recent weeks, the protests have led to 23 arrests, and the tactics of the
police have again become a subject of dispute. But this time the dispute was
between the base commander and Chicopee's Mayor.

Late last month the commander, Brig. Gen. Frederick D. Walker, wrote Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis and the Chicopee Board of Aldermen to complain that the
demonstrations were "weekly outbreaks of lawlessness" and that the Chicopee
police "coddle and placate the lawbreakers."

Outraged, Mayor Joseph J. Chessey Jr., wrote the general's superior in Atlanta,
Maj. Gen. Alan G. Sharp, asking for help. "The City of Chicopee," he wrote, "is
a community that takes its patriotism very seriously." And though the Mayor did
not support the protests, he said, General Walker was "attempting to play a
political game to cover up his inability to work with local officials."

The next week, an Air Force mediator visited Chicopee. He told the general that
the police were acting appropriately and that no further action was warranted.


Other divisions of opinion are surfacing in Chicopee, which sits just below the
hills where Daniel Shays led a band of farmers 204 years ago in a short-lived
rebellion to stop the county courts from foreclosing on their farms.

At a "town meeting" last Friday in Springfield, the journalist Bill Moyers asked
250 residents to discuss their views on the gulf crisis for his program
"Frontline," which will be broadcast Tuesday.

"Each and every morning when I wake up I'm embarrassed and angered," said a
Chicopee man, who said he regularly heard the C-5A cargo planes flying over his
house.

"Why don't you move?" asked an angry veteran in the audience.

Al Giordano, a radio talk show host, said two-thirds of 344 respondents in an
informal call-in last week said they opposed the military buildup.

And just as the local high school finishes wrapping packages to send to the
troops, the Federated Church of Chicopee has allowed its building to be used by
Quaker protesters for training in nonviolent action for a demonstration on Dec.
1.

"We're not anti-military; we're just anti-misuse of the military," said Stephen
C. Sossaman, a Vietnam combat veteran from nearby Huntington, who is organizing
a group of local veterans to oppose the gulf buildup. "This is the first
political activism I've done. And I'll just say I'm amazed at how many people
have called to say they are concerned but didn't know what to do about it."

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Demonstrators protesting United States involvement in the
Persian Gulf crisis yesterday outside the Westover Air Force Base in Chicopee,
Mass., where they have been gathering every Monday since late August. (Richard
Carpenter for The New York Times); Map: Chicopee, Mass.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
Senators and Their TV Awareness

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1347 words


Several players in the current hearings of the Senate Ethics Committee have
noted that there are television cameras in the committee room, and viewers of
C-Span and CNN may be noticing the effects of that awareness on the five
Senators under investigation.

Without uttering a word on opening day, John Glenn managed to distance himself
emphatically from the four others. He was the only one without a lawyer by his
side. It was a visual declaration by Mr. Glenn that he had done nothing to
require that sort of assistance. (The sight of Alan Cranston's table, occupied
by two lawyers and no Senator, carried a quite different signal.)

Mr. Glenn sat alone at his little table, back rigid, shoulders squared, looking
ahead sternly while Robert S. Bennett, the committee's special counsel,
presented details of the five's involvement with Charles H. Keating Jr., the
soiled savings-and-loan executive. Mr. Glenn, palms down on the green felt of
the table, scarcely moving, never relaxing, presented a model of rectitude, or
at least of good posture.

By an accident of alphabet, Mr. Glenn was seated smack in the middle of the
five, so that on Friday morning, when he was late in arriving, his empty table
served to separate Mr. Cranston and Dennis DeConcini, the two whom Mr. Bennett
called "by far the most active" in behalf of Mr. Keating, from John McCain and
Donald W. Riegle Jr., who by Mr. Bennett's account were less involved. The gap
gave visual force to the efforts of Mr. McCain to dissociate himself from his
fellow Senator from Arizona, Mr. DeConcini.


In his half-hour defense on Friday, Mr. Glenn, still seated alone at his table,
seemed at moments to be talking about somebody else: "John Glenn does not peddle
influence, period." The self-tribute sent forth the message that this man was
above the need for a lawyer, or any props to declare his guiltlessness.

Mr. McCain spoke even more briefly; he took 10 minutes to report simply that he
had said no to what he considered improper requests by his old friend and
contributor, Mr. Keating. In a show of self-assurance, Mr. McCain would later
take calls over C-Span; the callers did not seem to have been much reassured.

It remained for Mr. McCain's lawyer, John Dowd, to blame Senator DeConcini, who
could be seen making notes and occasionally shaking his head slightly in what
might have been meant to signify disbelief, for embroiling Mr. McCain. Mr. Dowd
made much of the fact that Mr. Keating had called Mr. McCain "a wimp" for
refusing to put pressure on officials of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board to
take it easy on Mr. Keating. Some viewers must have remembered that Mr. McCain
had been a prisoner of war in Vietnam.

By taking it on himself to criticize Mr. DeConcini, the lawyer spared his client
the appearance of impugning the actions of a colleague, from his own state at
that. And it was also more becoming that heavy praise for Mr. McCain should not
issue from his own lips.


Perhaps a media consultant had told Mr. Riegle that viewers require props to
abet comprehension. He brought with him a jigsaw puzzle, which he displayed to
the committee and the cameras several times. The point was, "We don't have all
the pieces of the puzzle." Get it?

Mr. Bennett had said only that Mr. Riegle had "played an active role in early
stages in the case," a mild slap.  But Mr. Riegle went on for almost 90 minutes
(interrupting himself occasionally to say, "I don't want to go on too long
here") and risked coming across as protesting too much. About an hour into his
explanations that his contacts with Mr. Keating were in the interests of
Detroit's sorry economy and his professions of commitment to public service, the
camera panned over the faces of the committee members. You could see a veil of
exhaustion descending. A television reviewer would have had to convict Mr.
Riegle of cruelty to his peers.

The star of Friday's appearances was Mr. Cranston. The news that he was
suffering from cancer of the prostate had been confirmed the day before by a
letter from the Senator, which included the names of all the hospitals where his
condition had been diagnosed. So his presentation on Friday would probably be
the Senator's sole on-camera response to assertions that he had promoted Mr.
Keating's interests even while he was successfully soliciting the businessman
for hundreds of thousands of dollars in political contributions.

Several large white boards had been set up, raising the promise of some
revelation. They turned out merely to carry the names of Senators and their
staff members responsible for raising money; the camera duly rolled down the
list, documenting Mr. Cranston's point that everybody did it, or anyway,
something like it. As visual aids go, these were not enthralling, but they were
all the detail that Mr. Cranston was to offer.


He used his half-hour instead to avow his reverence for "this great institution
of democracy," "this body which I love." Referring to his reported pro-Keating
pressures on bank regulators, he spoke harshly of "bureaucrats" and asked his
colleagues, "Can you only help people who haven't contributed, or who haven't
contributed lately?" He seemed bent on persuading the nation that Alan Cranston
was not one to discriminate against a constituent just because he was rich.

Perhaps it was in part the viewer's knowledge of Mr. Cranston's illness that
made him look so thin. His condition was an implicit plea for sympathy, to which
he added family feeling. When he expressed indignation over the "false charges
attacking my flesh and blood," the camera went to members of his family. And he
appealed to "listeners around the country" to share his distress at having his
"wonderful son," Kim, who ran voter-registration groups that received $850,000
in Keating contributions, implicated by Mr. Bennett. In its dips into bathos,
Mr. Cranston's script borrowed from those made-in-Hollywood shows that tend to
be more popular with audiences than with critics.

Yesterday, it was the turn of Mr. DeConcini, who, in Mr. Bennett's telling, had
been particularly active in Mr. Keating's interests. Although he had tough words
for Mr. Bennett's treatment of some of the evidence -- "disgraceful,"
"unconscionable," "biased" -- he characterized himself as the sort of hands-on,
sleeves-rolled-up (at one point he actually pushed up his jacket sleeves)
Senator who goes all-out for service to constituents. "What is wrong," he asked,
"with intervention for someone who sends you a check for your campaign?"


The statement, which ran about two hours, not counting the remarks of his
lawyer, was striking for its attacks on the motives of Mr. Bennett, who Mr. De
Concini shouted, wanted "to nail somebody" and put "another trophy on the wall,"
and on Common Cause, the liberal lobby that brought the charges against the
five. Its motive, said the Senator, was to raise money, get members and damage
Congress.

If these assaults were meant to ingratiate him with viewers, they were probably
misdirected at a time when negative campaigning is in bad odor. But despite an
occasional remark straight into the camera, his appeal was mainly to his fellow
Senators, he and they together against the bureaucracy, the press, Common Cause
and Mr. Bennett. "But for the grace of God," he cautioned in his peroration,
"there go I -- or you." The single blemish on senatorial solidarity was in
reference to Mr. McCain, who had already failed Mr. DeConcini. In addition to
suggesting that his colleague's memory was faulty, Mr. DeConcini argued that Mr.
McCain had enjoyed softer treatment by the committee counsel than he had.

Whatever the television audience may have made of Mr. DeConcini's explanation of
his relationship with Charles Keating, it was informative about the workings of
at least one senator's office. Viewers who have never had the privilege of a
personal meeting with a senator may have been left wondering: could they expect
that kind of constituent service?  "That's what has made me the Senator I am,"
said Mr. DeConcini.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

George Bush, Meet Woodrow Wilson

BYLINE: By John B. Judis; John B. Judis is author of the forthcoming book "Grand
Illusion: Critics and Champions of the American Century."

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 985 words

DATELINE: KENSINGTON, Md.


In May 1915, a year after World War I began, Woodrow Wilson called for
establishment of a League of Nations, which, through collective means, would
prevent future world wars from breaking out. His proposal -- partly embodied in
the feeble post-World War I League and then after World War II in the U.N. --
never achieved the kind of collective security he hoped for.

In the wake of Iraq's conquest of Kuwait, President Bush seems to have revived
Mr. Wilson's proposal. In his address to Congress on Sept. 11, Mr. Bush called
for the creation of a "new world order . . . in which nations recognize the
shared responsibility for freedom and justice."

Is this quest for collective security and a new world order a recurring delusion
that well-meaning statesmen like Presidents Wilson and Bush use to rationalize
their more narrowly conceived actions? Or is it a practical goal that is worth
pursuing even if it has eluded us?

As America's place in the world has changed in the last 75 years, the argument
for collective security has also changed. In 1915, the U.S. was weaker
militarily than Britain and Germany but had become the world's strongest country
economically.

Mr. Wilson saw the League of Nations as a means of curbing great-power
imperialism, which had caused World War I, and of laying the groundwork for a
disarmed world order in which economic strength -- the U.S.'s strong suit --
would prevail over military strength.

Today, the U.S. remains the strongest military power but lags behind Europe and
Japan in key industries. With a decaying infrastructure and educational system
and soaring public and private debt, the U.S. could fall behind even further.

It was evident in recent weeks as the Administration tried simultaneously to
defend the Persian Gulf and reduce the budget deficit that the U.S. no longer
has the funds and resources to act unilaterally in the world. Seventy-five years
ago, it sought collective security to insure its economic superiority; today, it
has to seek collective security for the sake of economic solvency.

But is collective security possible? President Wilson's proposal foundered on
the Russian Revolution, which split the West; on the refusal of Britain, France,
Italy and Japan to abandon imperial ambitions, and on the opposition in the U.S.
of Republican imperialists and progressives.

The imperialists, led by Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, insisted that the U.S.,
combining military and economic superiority, had to remain the master of its own
fate.

The progressives, led by Senator William Borah, attacked the League as an
instrument for maintaining the British-dominated division of the world.

Today, two major obstacles to Mr. Wilson's dream of collective security have
been removed: the European and Japanese empires have been dissolved and the cold
war has ended. What remains are domestic obstacles, a lack of urgency among the
major powers (except, ironically, the Soviet Union) and an absence of inspired
international leadership to forge new arrangements.

Mr. Bush's proposal for a new world order has encountered opposition from
descendants of Senators Lodge and Borah. Republican conservatives are divided
over tactics in the gulf. But they agree that pursuing new collective security
arrangements is -- as John O'Sullivan, editor of the National Review put it --
"bunkum." They want the U.S. to remain militarily supreme and unbounded by
commitments to a revived U.N. or other supranational body.

Left-wing opponents of Mr. Bush's intervention in the gulf dismiss the proposal
for a new world order -- "prattle," editor Erwin Knoll's Progressive called it
-- as a rationalization for imperial ambitions there. Where Senator Borah and
the progressives questioned Britain's motives in supporting collective security,
today's left questions our Government's motives.

The right ignores not only our country's economic plight but also the diplomatic
pitfalls of unilateral action; the left, still reeling from Vietnam, sees our
foreign policy through the prism of that era's lies and deceptions.

The Bush Administration has done little to meet these challenges to its
policies. After proclaiming a new world order to be their "fifth objective" in
the gulf, Mr. Bush and Secretary of State James Baker have been decidedly vague
in spelling out what that order entails.

Does it mean a strengthened U.N.? And new regional security arrangements in the
gulf and elsewhere? Will the U.S. be willing to put its own military under
international leadership? In the gulf, Mr. Bush has rejected a U.N. command
outright.

Sometimes, when Administration officials describe their goals, they say the U.S.
must reduce its military burden and commitment. Other times, they appear
determined to seek new arrangements in order to preserve U.S. military supremacy
and to justify new expenditures.

In September, Pentagon officials hinted that even after Iraq was driven from
Kuwait, they anticipated keeping 10,000 U.S. troops in the gulf and establishing
new bases throughout the region. Mr. Baker has suggested that the U.S. could set
up a NATO-like structure in the Persian Gulf.

By sending 230,000 more troops to the gulf, with the result that U.S. forces
will outnumber Arab and European forces 4 to 1, Mr. Bush threatens to undermine
the concept of a multilateral force and has set the stage for what may end up as
a unilateral U.S. offensive. Not only Kuwait but also plans for a new world
order may perish in the process.

As our involvement in the Persian Gulf deepens and becomes more perilous, it
becomes important for Mr. Bush to explain fully why we are there and what larger
objectives we hope to fulfill. Taking a first step toward a new world order
could be a legitimate goal, but Americans have to understand better what this
could involve. Otherwise, Mr. Bush's proposal, like Mr. Wilson's, may become
another faded dream.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Victim of Fiery Suicide at Capitol Is Identified as Vietnam Immigrant

BYLINE: By KATHERINE BISHOP, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 323 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Nov. 20


The man who set himself afire and burned to death outside the Capitol in
Washington on Monday was identified by friends today as Nguyen Kim Bang, a
Vietnamese immigrant from San Jose, Calif.

Mr. Nguyen, who was in his middle 50's, apparently killed himself as an act of
protest against the totalitarianism of the Vietnamese Government.

Mr. Nguyen had lived in San Jose since 1976, a year after arriving in the United
States, and had until recently been one of the publishers of a local
Vietnamese-language newspaper, Vietnam. In recent months, he had been working in
Washington as an adviser to another Vietnamese-language paper, Voice of the
Capitol.

The Washington police declined to identify the dead man this afternoon, saying
his family had not yet been notified. But in a telephone interview from
Washington, Nguyen Bachac, who identified herself as the editor of Voice of the
Capitol and Mr. Nguyen's godniece, said she had been working with the police
regarding his death.

 Family in Seclusion

Mr. Nguyen's wife and five children were in seclusion today. A family friend
answering the telephone at their home on San Jose's East Side said they had no
statement to make.

But friends and associates who would not comment in detail on the reason for Mr.
Nguyen's suicide all suggested a political motive.

And Lina Nguyen, assistant to the editor of Vietnam, said Mr. Nguyen, to whom
she was not related, had told friends that he planned to commit suicide sometime
in 1991 to protest the totalitarian nature of the Hanoi regime.

"A lot of people knew he was going to do something for his country," she said.
"Yes, I knew someday he was going to do it. Everyone tried to talk him out of
it. He wanted to do something for his country. He was extremely nationalistic
and anti-Communist."

Ms. Nguyen said Mr. Nguyen had recently written to President Bush to protest
human rights violations in Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
45 in House Sue to Bar Bush From Acting Alone

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 948 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 20


Forty-five House Democrats, predominantly liberals, filed a lawsuit today to bar
President Bush from taking offensive action in the Persian Gulf without
obtaining a Congressional declaration of war "or other explicit authority from
the Congress."

Representative Ronald V. Dellums, a California Democrat, said at a news
conference on the steps of the Federal courthouse, where the suit was filed,
"Only the Congress of the United States has the capacity to declare war under
Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution."

The Administration contends that it has fulfilled its constitutional
requirements by consulting with Congress on the Middle East crisis. But the
lawmakers say that the President has consulted with only a handful of
congressional leaders. The 45 legislators seek an injunction to bar the
President from taking action in the gulf, and expect a hearing in 10 days.

Previous Efforts Rejected

The Federal courts have rejected previous Congressional efforts to enforce
Congress' war-making powers, but on peripheral issues.

Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said at the Paris summit meeting,
"We believe that this lawsuit is unnecessary in the sense of the commitment by
the President and the Administration to work with the Congress at every
opportunity in this matter and to keep them informed."

Attorney General Dick Thornburgh said the Administration would strongly oppose
the lawsuit, which he said involved complicated questions involving executive
power. "We will indicate quite clearly what we think the President's
resonsibilities are and what limits, if any, exist," Mr. Thornburgh said.

Mr. Dellums, who organized the lawsuit, said, "War is a very solemn and sobering
and extraordinary act, and the decision to go to war should not be granted to
one person."

He said the lawmakers had not cited the 1973 War Powers Resolution because the
resolution was "a meaningless piece of legislation." The resolution provides
that in the absence of a declaration of war, the President must send Congress a
written report of any hostilities or threatened hostilities involving American
troops within 48 hours, and terminate the action within 60 days. Every President
since its enactment has considered the resolution unconstitutional.

Representative Don Edwards, a California Democrat, said: "There is no necessity
for quick action here. We are not being invaded. There is no reason at all why
the Constitution in this case should not be honored."

Called a Moot Issue

Mr. Edwards said that consultation with Congress after the outbreak of
hostilities would be moot because "traditionally, Congress supports a war when
our troops are in jeopardy."

Representative Marcy Kaptur, an Ohio Democrat, said the undeclared Vietnam War
"split this nation in two."

The legislators acknowledged that the courts had rejected previous Congressional
efforts to end hostilities..

In Lowry v. Laird, a Federal appeals court in 1988 dismissed a lawsuit by 110
members of Congress who said that President Reagan should have invoked the War
Powers Resolution when Navy ships were sent to the Persian Gulf, on the ground
that the cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war had rendered the issue moot.

1982 Suit Dismissed

In Crockett v. Reagan in 1982, an appeals court dismised a lawsuit brought by 29
members of Congress who challenged the Administration's program of military aid
to El Salvador on the grounds that there were only 55 military advisers, and
that Congress did not intend the War Powers Resolution to be supervised by the
courts.

Michael Ratner, a lawyer with the Center for Constitutional Rights, a leading
civil liberties group that is representing the lawmakers, cited two Federal
appellate decisions that said that the question of whether a President's
decision to use force had sufficient Congressional approval was "a justiciable
issue," to be decided by the courts. The cases were Mitchell v. Laird and
Orlando v. Laird. The courts said that Congress could indicate its approval of a
President's use of force through a joint resolution.

The lawmakers rejected the suggestion that they were undermining President
Bush's position in the gulf, and that Mr. Bush was merely "bluffing" and did not
intended to initiate hostilities in the Middle East. "Our country is built on
dialogue," Representative Edwards said. "It is not built on bluff."

These are the representatives who are plaintiffs in the Congressional lawsuit:

Les AuCoin, Oregon; Jim Bates, California; David E. Bonior, Michigan; Barbara
Boxer, California; William L. Clay, Missouri; Cardiss Collins, Illinois; George
W. Crockett Jr., Michigan; Ronald V. Dellums, California; Richard J. Durbin,
Illinois; Mervyn M. Dymally, California; Don Edwards, California; Lane Evans,
Illinois; Thomas M. Foglietta, Pennsylvania; Barney Frank of Massachusetts;
Charles A. Hayes of Illinois; Marcy Kaptur, Ohio; Thomas A. Luken, Ohio; Edward
J. Markey, Massachusetts; Jim McDermott, Washington; Kweisi Mfume, Maryland;
George Miller, California; Norman Y. Mineta, California; Jim Moody, Wisconsin;
Mary Rose Oakar, Ohio; James L. Oberstar, Minnesota; Major R. Owens, New York;

Also, Wayne Owens, Utah; Leon E. Panetta, California; Donald M. Payne, New
Jersey; Donald J. Pease, Ohio; Nancy Pelosi, California; Charles B. Rangel, New
York; Edward R. Roybal, California; Gus Savage, Illinois; Patricia Schroeder,
Colorado; Jose Serrano, New York; Fortney Stark, California; Louis Stokes, Ohio;
Gerry E. Studds, Massachusetts; Ed Towns, New York; James A. Traficant Jr.,
Ohio; Bob Traxler, Michigan; Craig Washington, Texas; Ted Weiss, New York, and
Alan Wheat, Missouri.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Representatives Don Edwards, second from left, Ron V. Dellumes,
standing behind him, and Marcy Kaptur were among 45 House Democrats who filed a
lawsuit to bar President Bush from having United States military forces tak
eoffensive action in the Persian Gulf without the consent of Congress. They
talked to reporters yesterday on the steps of the Federal courthouse in
Washington. (George Tames for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1206 words



International A3-16

Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain failed to knock her rival, Michael
Heseltine, out of the contest for the leadership of the Conservative Party. The
fight goes to a second ballot next Tuesday.  Page A1

Thatcher vows to keep fighting for Tory leadership A16

The U.S. and Soviet Union said that further U.N. action would be needed get Iraq
out of Kuwait, but apparently failed again to reach an agreement on what steps
the Security Council should take to achieve that aim. A1

News analysis: A matter of timing, as opposed to a rupture in the solid front
against Iraq, appears to separate members of the U.N. Security Council on
whether to authorize use of force against the Iraqis.  A10

Iraq will free all German hostages, Baghdad announced, acknowledging that the
move was meant to divide the international coalition against them and to prevent
military action in the Persian Gulf. A11

Perils seen for Hussein new troop buildup A11

45 in House sue Bush over gulf war A11

Arab nations to ease stand on Israel A3

Ex-C.I.A. official says U.S. ignores Syrian terror A11

A cultural gap between U.S. soldiers and their Saudi hosts appears to be
widening, leaving each staring at the other across a chasm neither can easily
bridge. A10

A warning at the meeting in Paris was sounded by Eastern European leaders. They
said Europe's stability could be threatened if ideological separation is
replaced by an economic and social divide. A1

A new cult of the Romanovs is rising in the Soviet Union. A warm embrace from
both church and state is helping to give the last czar, Nicholas II, who was
killed along with his family 72 years ago, the kind of following that eluded him
in life. A1

Valdice prison blues a bit happier now A14

Ohrid Journal: Pharaohs in their past? So Yugoslavs say A4

20 die in rebel assaults in El Salvador A3

South Asian nations, in turmoil, will meet A7

Attack by Punjab gunmen kills 13 and wounds 15 at market A6

Burma sentences two from opposition A8

 National A18, B8-10, D21

A preference for peppy cars with less fuel-efficient engines explains in part
the American dependence on oil from the Persian Gulf. The U.S. makes up only 4
percent of the world's population but consumes 40 percent of its gasoline. A1 A
curfew for teen-agers in Atlanta went into effect, with some residents hoping
that it would reduce drug-related violence and others charging that it is
singling out poor black children and their parents. A1

The murder of a woman in Boston has drawn outrage, and not just at the crime.
The woman was raped, beaten and stabbed 132 times. Yet the case attracted no
special attention -- some say because the victim was poor, black and possibly a
prostitute.  A1

The space shuttle Atlantis landed at Cape Canaveral as the space agency scrapped
a scheduled touchdown in California because of winds and rain. Landings in
Florida are considered riskier because of the runway.  A18

A television station in Baltimore was charged with discriminating against an
anchorwoman in pay and working conditions because of her sex. TheFederal agency
bringing the charges said it wanted to "send a message" to the television
industry.  A18

Los Angeles Journal: An amusement ride? No, a train A18

Victim of fiery suicide at Capitol was Vietnam immigrant A18

An aide to Sen. John McCain testified that she warned him that his Democratic
colleague, Senator Dennis DeConcini, was seeking to pressure him into improper
negotiations with Federal regulators on behalf of a savings and loan executive
in 1987. B8

Teamster leader assailed in ouster B8

CNN gives Noriega tapes to court B9

F.D.A.'s tests on milk are called inadequate D21

New pictures from space show giant storm on Saturn D21

Smoking researcher seeks grant from tobacco company D21

The Christmas shopping season this year looms as more of an enigma than any
other recent one, and retailers have been cutting back on merchandise and
holding big sales as a result. D1

 Regional B1-7

Bridge and tunnel tolls may go up a dollar for Hudson River connections, and the
fare on PATH trains may rise 25 cents under a proposal announced by the Port
Authority of New York and New Jersey. B1

Hundreds of livery-cab drivers, in angry protest over a $2,700 workers'
compensation fee that the state has ordered them to pay, all but sealed off the
Brooklyn Bridge and the Queens-Midtown Tunnel and snarled traffic on other
highways. B1

News analysis: Governor Cuomo seemed to be trying to re-establish himself as a
sound manager with his latest budget plan. But as stringent as the proposed cuts
seem, they are only a partial solution. The real challenge is still to come. B1

Sexual abuse charges were filed against a Brooklyn woman and her boyfriend. The
police said the two abused four sisters -- aged 6, 9, 12 and 16 -- who were
placed in their care by city child welfare officials. B1 Killing continues at
record pace in New York City B2

Defense foiled in alibi effort at jogger trial B7

News analysis: Mayor Dinkins and Schools Chancellor Fernandez now agree that New
York City's school system must cut $90 million. But there remains a battle
between the two: whether to cut by attrition or by layoffs.  B3

What constitutes a family? A bill before the New York City Council would expand
the definition by protecting unmarried domestic partners against discrimination
and extending municipal benefits to them.  B2

The Daily News sues strikers over its financial loss B2

Company indicted in theft of tenants' money B7

New Jersey sued over financing of health care B4

Business Digest D1

The Living Section

Food

Cooking turkey: Everybod does it a different way C1

Giving Thanks, the 18th-century way C1

Real men don't carve anymore C1

Eating Well C3

Wine Talk C7

Living

Metropoliatn Diary C2

Arts/Entertainment

Milli Vanilli on the Grammy C8

Michael Jackson's megadeal C9

Changes on "Sesame Street"C9

Theater: "Shogun" opens C9

"Carnal Knowledge" C15

Film: "The Nutcracker Prince" C10

"Three Men and a Little Lady" C14

Word and Image: Book Notes C17

Muppets celebrate Henson C20

"The Spiritual Life of Children" C20

Education Page B11

A school in Minnesota doesn't have a principal

A class sends a message to Harvard law school

 Sports

Baseball: Clemens penalized B13

Millionaire lineup at 162 B13

Basketball: Knicks routed B13

Nets set record B13

Column: Vecsey on bowl-game picture B13

Football: Dolphins' Shula says unbeaten season is possible B13

Hockey: Devils lose B14

 Obituaries

Edgar D. Croswell, a retired New York State Police official D23

Gen. Sun Li-jen, a Nationalist Chinese war hero D24

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A22

Twilight for Mrs. Thatcher?

Closed gap on Medigap

Objectivity up in smoke

Topics: All-American disease

Letters A22

Flora Lewis: One empire to go A23

Tom Wicker: Bush's midterm crisis A23

Jan Urban: Eastern Europe -- divided it fails A23

Michael Lewis: Milken's morals, and ours A23

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Washington Talk;
Private War Within Public Hearings

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 697 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 21


They are Senate col leagues from Ari zona. They say "hello" when passing each
other in the hallway. But they rarely smile at each other anymore. Indeed, they
barely hide their mutual dislike.

For Senators Dennis DeConcini and John McCain, any remnants of senatorial
courtesy have given way to senatorial combat the likes of which are almost never
seen between colleagues from the same state.

Both lawmakers, who are among five Senators being investigated by the Ethics
Committee for links to the indicted savings and loan operator Charles H. Keating
Jr., are fighting to salvage their reputations as the hearings proceed. And in
doing so, they are virtually tearing each other apart.

The exchanges grew in rancor when the committee's special counsel recommended in
September that three of the Senators, including Mr. DeConcini, be the subject of
further inquiry but that the two others, including Mr. McCain, be essentially
cleared. Now the barbs have become as sharp and prickly as an Arizona cactus.

Mr. DeConcini, a Democrat, accuses his state's junior Senator, a Republican, of
getting lenient treatment from the ethics panel because of a "pretty cozy"
relationship with the special counsel, Robert S. Bennett. Mr. DeConcini has
bluntly asked Mr. Bennett why he did not delve into such possible transgressions
by Mr. McCain as the trips he took to the Bahamas with Mr. Keating. And Mr.
DeConcini's aides have suggested that Mr. McCain leaked confidential Ethics
Committee documents to the press to bolster his case.

Mr. McCain, described by his chief aide as having "a little bit of an Irish
temper," has been somewhat less openly hostile to his colleague. But his lawyer
and aides have accused Mr. DeConcini of trying to further implicate him by,
among other things, writing "a phony letter" further linking Mr. McCain to Mr.
Keating.

The two camps have even clashed over which Senator was attacked by Mr. Keating
as a "wimp," the implication being that whoever is the biggest wimp is the least
guilty.

In interviews -- separate ones, of course -- both Senators insisted that there
was nothing personal between them and said their staffs had worked together on a
major wilderness bill and other issues of importance to Arizona.

But neither was very convincing.

"I'm not a bearer of any ill will," Mr. DeConcini said. "I said hello to him
this morning, shook his hand. But I haven't asked him to go out to dinner or
anything."

Mr. McCain put it this way: "We say hello. But we don't stop and engage in any
long conversation." Then, in a round-about dig, he added, "When two people from
the same state are under investigation and one has been exonerated, there's
bound to be tension."

Senators McCain and DeConcini have much different backgrounds and, by most
accounts, never cared for each other even before the savings and loan scandal
broke. Mr. DeConcini's family has been politically prominent in Arizona for
generations; Mr. McCain was a peripatetic military man, Vietnam veteran and
celebrated prisoner of war who settled in Arizona only because his wife is from
there. Mr. DeConcini is a moderate Democrat; Mr. McCain is a conservative
Republican. And in the past they have bitterly clashed on a number of issues.

"This just brings up old wounds," said Ruth S. Jones, who heads the political
science department at Arizona State University. "But I can't think of anything
that has been this ugly, with the fierceness and nastiness of the exchanges."

Historically, though, there is nothing particularly rare about bad feelings
between two senators trying to lay the greatest claim to the loyalty of one
state's citizens.

Perhaps the feud to end all feuds was waged by two Oregonians, Senators Wayne
Morse and Richard Neuberger, who saw eye to eye on very little and fought a
bitter battle by letter back in the 1950's.

"I have had my fill of your deceit, trickery and completely untrustworthy
tactics as a colleague," Mr. Morse wrote in a typical missive to his colleague.
Before closing with a "very truly yours," he declared, "My disrespect for you
has become so complete that there is no basis on which you and I can work
together."

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Senators from Arizona, John McCain, left, and Dennis
DeConcini, are battling each other to salvage their reputations in the Ethics
Committee's hearings into their links to Charles H. Keating Jr., the former
savings and loan operator. (The New York Times; Reuters)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Army is Moving to Halt Retirements

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 807 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 21


Senior Defense Department has given the military services authority to halt
retirements and indefinitely extend all periods of enlistment to avoid depleting
their ranks as the United States builds up its troops in the Persian Gulf
region, officials said tonight.

The officials said the Army is expected within the next few days to present a
formal plan to defense Secretary Dick Cheney that would allow it to delay all
retirements, transfers to other jobs expirations of the terms of enlisted
personnel. Officials estimate that this figure reaches about 3,800 a month.

Pentagon officials said tonight that Mr. Cheney was likely to approve the
request.

Broader Authority

The army's request, which would take effect at the beginning of December, would
broaden the authority all services now have to suspend retirements and transfers
for personnel involved in the Persian Gulf operation.

Under this limited authority, the Army has already stopped the departure of
about 2,300 service members a month with critical, technical and combat skills.
The broader authority would allow the Army to increase that number by 1,500, to
a total of 3,800 a month, roughly the number of people who retire, transfer to
other posts or leave the Army each month.

The new authority would also suspend vacations for trainees attending Army
schools.

Officials said that the authority sought by thre Armywould cover all personnel
worldwide, not just those involved in the Persian Gulf operation, which has been
the case since August. It is the first time that the military has sought such
authority.

The authority to hals departures and transfers - so-called "stop-loss" authority
- was approved by Congress after the Vietnam War but has never been sought until
now.

Several thousand members of Air Force and Marine Corps have been affected by the
order since President Bush gave Mr. Cheney authority late in August to stem the
departure of service members with special skills. The Navy Air Force, Marine
Corps and Coast Guard have not requesterd the broader authority to stop
personnel departures, saying that it would not be necessary.

The Army, however, with about 120,000 troops now in Saudi Arabia and more than
100,000 additional soldiers on the way, has more forces in the gulf region than
any other service.

The American deployment in the Persian Gulf now numbers about 230,000 troops.
More than 150,000 additional American troops are expected to arrive in the gulf
regtion by late January.

"The Army has a smaller base in Europe now and is losing some trained people and
people with critical skills there," said a Pentagon official, who spoke on the
condition of anonymity. "They are moving people around, but they are worried
about covering themselves for the future."


Rest of the World, Too

An ARmy official, who also spoke on the condfition of anonymity, said that with
the large number of soldiers now in Saudi ARabia, it would be difficult to
replace officers and enlisted personnel who retired or departed for other
reasons from Army posts around the world.

The official said that this could weaken military readiness and leave American
forces vulnerable if trouble broke out elsewhere.

"The purpose of this is to maintain the readiness capability of troops elsewhere
in the world," the Army official added.

The Army has about 760,000 active-duty personnel. The move was first reported on
CBS News tonight.

A Marine official contacted tonight said he the first "stop-loss" order applied
to virtually all 196,000 Marines and if continued through Sept. 30, 1991, the
end of the current fiscal year, would halt the departure of 12,000 Marines.

The Navy has not used the authority under Mr. Cheney's original order, but Navy
officials said tonoght that they were considering using the broadened authority
to retain Navy doctors, dentists and medical technicians who are assigned to
Marine units.

An Air Force spokeswoman, Capt. Sylvia Freeman, said that about 1,300 Air Force
personnel had been affected by the order since August, and that the service
expected the order to stop the departure of another 1,300 in the next three
months.

Presidnet Bush, in a little-noticed executive order on Aug. 22, gave Mr. Cheney
the authority "to suspend any provision of law relating to promotion, retirement
or separation applicable to any member of the armed services determined to be
essential to the national security of the United States."

The order was overshadowed by another Presidential edict issued at the same
time: the authority for the Defense Department to call up as many as 200,000
reservists.

Army officials said that they were still working out details of the plan, which
would make exceptions only for certain mandatory retirements and hardship cases
that included family medical emergencies.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: American airmen placing barbed wire around the perimeter of an
airfield yesterday in Saudi Arabia. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
Films That Live on the Border Between Fantasy and Reality

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1192 words


You never know what words will turn an object of affection into a subject of
romance. In "Tune In Tomorrow," Barbara Hershey is a glamorous 36-year-old who
challenges her 21-year-old nephew-by-marriage with this unseductive line: "I'm
almost old enough to be your mother, you know?" Keanu Reeves flashes a
hopelessly enamored smile and leaps right back with the answer that wins her
heart: "Then I've almost got an Oedipus complex." It's not "Romeo and Juliet,"
but it's got a spark all its own.

"Almost" is the crucial term in this unlikely banter, for it defines the space
between what might have been and what is, between fantasy and reality -- that
narrow yet richly populated space where many current films are set.

As "Tune In Tomorrow" weaves back and forth between the "real" world of New
Orleans in 1951 and a "fictional" radio soap opera, it employs a fashionable
screen device. Jumping between nightmares and reality is the dizzying tactic
that the director Adrian Lyne wields against a willing audience in his current
hit "Jacob's Ladder." And the sentimentality of "Ghost," the year's
highest-grossing movie, is informed by the fantasy of a dead lover's return.


But only "Tune In Tomorrow" lives so purely and successfully at the place where
fantasy and life meet, blending the two with no apparent effort or import yet
always keeping them straight. Adapted from Mario Vargas Llosa's autobiographical
novel "Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter," the story includes such comic quirks as
Pedro Carmichael, the writer of the soap opera, who is inspired by dressing as a
French maid, a rabbi and a cardinal.

We never learn which costume provoked the lovelorn monk (Peter Gallagher) in
Pedro's incestuous family soap opera to tell his pregnant sister (Elizabeth
McGovern), "I'd rather be an Albanian goat salesman than leave you, Elena." No
matter; next to that family's problems, the love affair of Aunt Julia (Ms.
Hershey) and Martin (Mr. Reeves) is harmless, though cleverly connected to the
soap-opera scandals it reflects and inspires.

There is little of Art and Life, and much of life, love, wit and imagination in
this absurd, congenial and finally touching comedy. Fantasy is the soul of "Tune
In Tomorrow," but it leads to emotional and psychological truths more urgent
than those in supposedly realistic films.

In its effective use of fantasy, the film resembles two previous works by its
director, Jon Amiel: the mini-series "The Singing Detective" and the film "Queen
of Hearts." The brilliant innovation of "The Singing Detective" can be traced to
its writer, Dennis Potter. But Mr. Amiel's direction accounts for the smooth way
in which the hero's fictional alter ego enters his thoughts -- and appears on
screen -- while he sits in a hospital bed. The musical fantasies about the
singing detective suggest a triumph of the imagination over a bedridden body
even as they create a painful counterpoint to the hero's real life.

In "Queen of Hearts," an Italian family emigrates to England amid much intrigue.
A dollop of magical realism appears amid the lucid reality of their lives as
shopkeepers: a roast pig lets the apple roll out of its mouth and offers a
prophecy.

These are precisely the lessons Mr. Amiel uses so gracefully in "Tune In
Tomorrow," where the soap opera intrudes on reality in the fluid way that
daydreams interrupt and propel our real lives. And they do so more easily than
in the novel, where chapters devoted to Martin and Julia's romance alternate
rigidly with nine of Pedro's stories. In adapting the novel for the screen,
William Boyd not only changed its setting from Peru to New Orleans. He also
eliminated all the soap opera stories except the one that best reflects the
scandalous romance.

Though the fictional serial, "Kings of the Garden District," gains its humor
from comic exaggerations, its forbidden loves (including one between a woman and
her son-in-law) mirror the way Julia and Martin confront social taboos. And
while the hyperbole of the radio fiction makes the "real" romance seem that much
less sensational, Pedro's fiction also has a powerful effect on life. When he
arranges a wedding for the couple and Julia discovers it's a fake, she feels
hurt, foolish and betrayed; this fiction is no joke. She drives away as Martin
races after her. At this point the soap-opera in-laws drive a car off a cliff
(they reappear later; it was only a dream). Without abandoning its
light-hearted, unpretentious style, "Tune In Tomorrow" captures Martin and
Julia's genuine, deeply felt crisis.

"Jacob's Ladder" never begins to approach such truths -- though that film is
ostentatiously about Life, Death, Dreams and Reality. "Jacob's Ladder" begins as
if it will be about the harsh reality of Vietnam, with soldiers suffering the
effects of some bad drug in the jungle. But that turns out to be the dream or
the memory of Jacob (Tim Robbins), trapped in the harsh reality of the New York
subway.


Throughout the rest of the film, the audience is constantly asked to sort out
the real from the imagined. When Jacob sees a woman with horns in the back of
her head, is he haunted by demons or simply crazy? Was he ever in Vietnam? Is he
hallucinating the hot-blooded woman with whom he lives -- she is named Jezebel,
if that's any help -- or is he imagining the beautiful wife from whom he is
separated? Is it real or is it Memorex? Finally, who cares?

For "Jacob's Ladder" is the kind of film so filled with pretentious symbols and
portents that everything comes to seem significant. What does it mean when
Jacob's lawyer chews ice? Why is he eating Fritos? If everything is significant,
ultimately nothing means anything at all.

Mr. Lyne, famous for "Fatal Attraction," creates an effectively unpleasant,
creepy sensation in "Jacob's Ladder." This is the kind of film that makes you
look over your shoulder leaving the theater. But it has no foothold in reality.
The story is not a descent into one man's extremely stressed-out psyche. It is a
shrewdly manipulative narrative that reveals nothing except the facility of Mr.
Lyne and the screenwriter Bruce Joel Rubin.

Mr. Rubin, who also wrote "Ghost," obviously knows how to reach an audience's
deep fear of death. "Jacob's Ladder" exacerbates those fears, and "Ghost" tries
to assuage them with the promise of a glorious afterlife. In both films, heaven
is a place with a golden glow -- a trite but commercially foolproof concept.
Nothing in either film is weightier or more psychologically astute than that
cliched afterlife.

"Tune In Tomorrow," however, succeeds because it is rooted not in some stock
commercial concepts, but in a twilight area that Nathaniel Hawthorne described
more than a century ago when separating what he called the "romance" from the
novel. The romance could indulge in improbabilities and fantasies, he wrote, as
long as it captures "the truth of the human heart." To Hawthorne that truth was
embodied in a scarlet letter or a wizened old woman in a seven-gabled house, but
the distinction is just as timely when applied to scriptwriters and Albanian
goat salesmen.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Barbara Hershey and Keanu Reeves, top, and Elizabeth McGovern
and Peter Gallagher in "Tune In Tomorrow," which weaves between the real world
of 1951 New Orleans and a fictional radio soap opera. (Photographs by Jim
Bridges/Cinecom Pictures)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Vietnam Bank

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 38; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 61 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Nov. 23


Vietnam said on Thursday that it had set up its first bank that is partly owned
by foreigners. A senior Vietnamese banker said Indonesia's PT Bank Summa had
established Indovina Bank in joint cooperation with Vietnam's Industrial and
Commercial Bank. Indovina, whose headquarters are in Ho Chi Minh City, will open
early next year with capital of $10 million.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Still Gonzo After All These Years

BYLINE: By Ron Rosenbaum; Ron Rosenbaum is a contributing editor of Vanity Fair
and the author of the forthcoming "Travels With Dr. Death: And Other Unusual
Investigations."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1568 words


SONGS OF THE DOOMED
More Notes on the Death of the American Dream.
Gonzo Papers: Volume Three.
By Hunter S. Thompson.
315 pp. New York: Summit Books. $21.95.

SAIGON, May 1975. The city is about to fall to the National Liberation Front.
The last American reporters left in the besieged capital are calculating when to
fly out before the honorable desire to stay to the bloody end becomes merely
suicidal. Meanwhile, Hunter S. Thompson has just flown in to the encircled city
with $30,000 in cash taped to his body (don't ask). Only to learn he has been
fired by Rolling Stone (some bitter dispute with its publisher, Jann Wenner,
over a book advance) and both his medical insurance and his Telex card link to
the outside world have been canceled by the magazine.

No problem. He's got a plan. He's going to convince the enemy that he's their
one true friend in American journalism, that he should be the one to cover the
final assault on the capital -- from behind enemy lines. And so up in his room
in Saigon's Hotel Continental Plaza he bangs out a "Confidential Memo to Colonel
Giang Vo Don Giang," one of a number of memos, cables, fragments of memoirs and
novels, and eviction notices collected in "Songs of the Doomed," along with some
of Mr. Thompson's best work of the past three decades.

In his memo to the Vietcong colonel Mr. Thompson tries heroically to communicate
just what kind of writer he is, why he's different from other journalists. It's
not an easy job.

"I trust you understand that, as a professional para-journalist, I am in the
same position today that you were as a para-military professional about three
years ago," he tells the colonel, and he offers to send him one of his classic
works, "Fear and Loathing: On the Campaign Trail '72." He tells the colonel that
he knows Jane Fonda. And he informs him, "I am one of the best writers currently
using the English language as both a musical instrument and a political weapon."

While self-effacement has never been one of Mr. Thompson's strengths, I think he
was absolutely right about how good a writer he was then. Fans across the
political spectrum from Norman Mailer to Tom Wolfe and William F. Buckley Jr.
have said as much in the past.

Is it still true now? Those of us who lack access to the biweekly column he
wrote for The San Francisco Examiner until earlier this year (Mr. Thompson's
chief outlet since his split with Rolling Stone) have had to await periodic
appearances of these volumes of "The Gonzo Papers." The last one, Volume Two,
cheerfully titled "Generation of Swine," chiefly concerned itself with Mr.
Thompson's jeremiads against the 80's.

This new volume, it should be noted, arrives under something of a cloud, if
internal evidence is to be believed.

A peculiar editor's note before the final section informs us, "Our contract
allowed us to go to press with whatever sections of the book we already had our
hands on -- despite the author's objections and bizarre motions filed by his
attorneys in courts all over the country."

Reading between the lines one gathers that Mr. Thompson is planning on coming
out with an entirely separate book on his recent legal ordeal and vindication --
this summer a judge in Aspen, Colo., threw out charges of sexual harassment and
drug and weapons possession against Mr. Thompson, which grew out of a dispute
that involved a former pornographic film maker and a Jacuzzi. Mr. Thompson is
now suing authorities for "malicious prosecution" and general revenge.

Evidently, Mr. Thompson did not want to skim the cream off the forthcoming book
(working title: "99 Days: The Trial of Hunter S. Thompson"), but the editors
wanted something from him about the celebrated case in this volume. So they have
apparently chosen the dubious tactic of appending various clippings, reports and
public domain documents on the case to the book, seemingly against the author's
wishes.

Of course, this whole business of Mr. Thompson making "bizarre" threats against
his own book -- indeed the editor's note itself -- could be a device concocted
by the author.

He is often at his best when he deploys the apparently extraneous detritus of
the journalism process as his most expressive vehicle. One of the high points of
"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas," arguably his best book, is a section
introduced by an editor's note declaring that, "in the interests of journalistic
purity," the editor is presenting a "verbatim transcript" of a cassette found
among Mr. Thompson's effects after he disappeared to escape Vegas debt
collectors.

Of course that is the heart of the book -- that ostensibly artless but
suspiciously artful transcript of a conversation with a waitress in a coffee
shop on Paradise Road about the precise location of the American dream.

Indeed, one of the high points of "Songs of the Doomed" is another alleged
document, Mr. Thompson's "Secret Cable to Willie Hearst." Subject: his expenses.
According to Mr. Thompson, Mr. Hearst's Examiner hasn't been paying them.

"I now list my Examiner expense bills on my 1040 form as 'uncollectible debts,'
" Mr. Thompson writes. "And we now have a column that will never be written from
anywhere more than 2.1 miles from the Post Office in Woody Creek," Mr.
Thompson's Colorado home.

Mr. Thompson characteristically extracts a profound truth about journalism here
from what might seem on the surface to be the standard expense-account memo
whine. "The Old Man [William Randolph Hearst Sr.] was a monster," he writes,
"but nobody ever accused him of skimming nickels and dimes off his best writers'
expense accounts -- and it wasn't his cheapjack accountants who made him a
legend in American journalism and the highest roller of his time."

The classic Thompson pieces in "Songs of the Doomed," the kind of stories that
have made him a high-rolling legend in journalism, are the ones in which he is
out there on the highway running up expenses in search of emblematic weirdness,
"Whooping It Up With The War Junkies" in Saigon" or pursuing "Bad Craziness in
Palm Beach."

But even more interesting than such successes in the book are the
self-acknowledged failures: fragments of novels begun in the late 50's and early
60's, before Mr. Thompson burst onto the scene with "Hell's Angels" and his two
"Fear and Loathing" books. While not a formal autobiography, the early novels,
"Prince Jellyfish" and "The Rum Diary," do give us glimpses of the man behind
the maniacal mask, the struggling writer before he attained sacred-monster
status.

In the novel fragments we see the young former serviceman, an idealistic good
ol' boy from Kentucky who reads Fitzgerald, comes to New York full of wonder
hoping to make his mark in journalism by telling The Truth, finds himself
rejected and scorned by cynical big-city editors, gets beaten up and
disillusioned, and ends up in a kind of self-created hell as a reporter for a
bowling magazine in San Juan (don't ask). There he almost self-destructs,
stewing in his own bitterness before he catches on with The National Observer,
the short-lived Dow Jones weekly, and his work starts getting noticed.

One thing you take away from these fragments is a sense of Hunter Thompson as
far more complex and, well, sensitive than the cynical Uncle Duke caricature of
him in "Doonesbury." All that rage in his work, all that fear and loathing, is
the product, it seems, not of the sneering cynic but of a bitterly disillusioned
idealist.

Reading "Songs of the Doomed" reminds us how good he was at his best, and how
good he still can be when he's given the freedom -- and expenses -- to hit the
road, rather than stewing in his own bitterness in Woody Creek.

Memo to Willie Hearst: Give this man back his expense account.




THE MONSTER OF WOODY CREEK



Now that he knows he's not going to jail, Hunter S. Thompson can concentrate on
his favorite activity: writing.

With drug and other charges against him dismissed, and with "Songs of the
Doomed" (originally subtitled "33 Years of No Sleep") published, he has resumed
work on a novel and may resume his column in The San Francisco Examiner. He is
also planning a book about his recent legal troubles.

"I can do a column and a novel at the same time," Mr. Thompson said in a
telephone interview from his home in Woody Creek, Colo., "but I can't do a
column and go on trial and edit my 30-year-old writing at the same time."

Mr. Thompson's forthcoming novel, "Polo Is My Life," is touted on the jacket of
"Songs of the Doomed" as his "long-awaited sex book" -- a delayed response, he
said, to a comment made by William F. Buckley Jr. in a review of his book "The
Great Shark Hunt." "He said something like 'Thompson never mentions sex;
apparently he doesn't believe in it.' I said, 'O.K., if you want a sex book,
I'll give you one.' And when the Monster of Gonzo says he's going to write a sex
book, I guess it's not going to be anything normal."

The inventor of the term "gonzo journalism" ("Nobody really knows what it means,
but it sounds like an epithet") said that, for him, journalism "can be an
effective political tool." "When I started writing the column, there were three
people I wanted to get: Evan Mecham, who was then Governor of Arizona; Ed Meese,
who was then Attorney General; and George Bush. I did get two out of three, but
the big one got away."

PETER KEEPNEWS


LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hunter S. Thompson (Paul Chesley/Summit Books)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Q and A

BYLINE: By Carl Sommers

SECTION: Section 5; Page 4; Column 4; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1093 words



Visiting the Aleutians

Q.  I would like to visit Kiska and Attu in the Aleutian Islands this spring and
would like information on how to get there and on accommodations. -- John A.
Dillon, Waitsfield, Vt.

A.  Attu, the westernmost of the Aleutians, is the site of a Loran station,
manned by the Coast Guard as a navigation aid to ships. Travel to Attu and to
Kiska is generally restricted to those on military business. Attu and Kiska were
occupied by the Japanese for 15 months during World War II, and some Japanese
tour groups visit the islands by ship. However, the biggest draw for Americans
is bird watching. Birds migrating in late spring from Asia to Eastern Siberia
can be sighted, among them the Siberian rubythroat, the Mongolian plover and the
long-toed stint. Also of note is the nonmigrating white-tailed eagle.

Visiting on your own is an elaborate undertaking. First, to visit either island
you must request and receive permission from three offices: Commander (DAN),
17th Coast Guard District, Post Office Box 3-5000, Juneau, Alaska 99802;
Commanding Officer, United States Coast Guard Loran Station Attu, care of Box
90, United States Coast Guard Support Center, Kodiak, Alaska 99619, and Refuge
Manager, United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Post Office Box 5251 NAS,
F.P.O. Seattle, Wash. 98791.

Second, you must take along camping equipment and food, as there are no hotels
or restaurants on the islands. (Some travelers stay at the Loran station on
Attu, but they are usually on official business.)

And third, you must arrange transportation. There is an airstrip on Attu but no
scheduled air service. One company that charters flights to Attuout of Anchorage
is Peninsula Airways (4851 Aircraft Drive, Anchorage, Alaska 99502;
907-243-2485), which will fly seven or eight passengers for $10,000 round trip.
Each 1,400-mile leg takes about six hours or more. If a group stays overnight,
the plane will return to Anchorage and come back to Attu, charging for two round
trips. Kiska Island, 200 miles east southeast of Attu, can be reached only by
sea. The nearest place a boat can be chartered is Dutch Harbor, more than 700
miles to the east. The cost is said to be prohibitive.

There is, however, an annual bird-watchers' tour to Attu that takes care of
lodging, food, transportation and paper work, organized by Attour Inc. (2027
Partridge Lane, Highland Park, Ill. 60035; 708-831-0207). The next trip takes
place May 11 to June 2, 1991, and will cost $4,300 a person out of Anchorage.
Participants stay in two abandoned Coast Guard buildings that are furnished,
supplied with electricity, heat and a kitchen. The trip is limited to 48
participants. During May, high temperatures on Attu average in the mid-40's and
the lows in the mid-30's.

 Tours to Cambodia

Q.  I am interested in finding a tour out of Bangkok to Angkor Wat and possibly
Phnom Penh and Saigon. -- Harriet Tamen, New York, N.Y.


A.  A tour company in Bangkok that is experienced in running such tours is
Diethelm Travel, 140/1 Kian Gwan Building, Wireless Road, Bangkok 10500,
Thailand; telephone 255-9150 through -9170. The country code is 66 and the city
code is 2. The company can be faxed at 256-0248. Diethelm runs a five-day tour
of Laos and Cambodia for $1,350 a person.  There can also combinations with
Vietnam, and also a variety of Vietnam tours from three to nine days.

H.M.C. Travel (4066 Drummond Road, Niagara Falls, Ontario, Canada L2E 6B9;
416-356-3381) runs eight-day programs out of Bangkok December through April that
go to Ho Chi Minh City (formerly Saigon), Phnom Penh, Angkor Wat, and the
seaside city of Bungtau. The cost is $3,895 a person in double occupancy,
including ground and air transportation, hotels and all meals.

Travel Corporation of America (Post Office Box 2630, Newport Beach, Calif.,
92658-2630; 800-992-2003 and 800-992-2004 in California) is planning to run
17-day tours from Bangkok to Laos, Vietnam and Cambodia (including Phom Penh and
Angkor Wat) for $3,595 a person, which will cover land costs but not flights.
Pending State Department permission to run the tours, the company is taking
names of interested participants.

 Caribbean Thalassotherapy

Q.  Can you help me find a spa in the Caribbean that offers thalasso therapy? --
Sally Steinberg, New York, N.Y.

A.  The term thalassotherapy derives from the Greek word thalassa, or sea.
Thalassotherapy treatments may involve seawater, seaweed, algae or mud, all said
to be rich in vitamins and minerals and to be beneficial to skin and hair.

There is a spa resort on the island of St. Lucia that has a thalassotherapy
center. It is Le Sport (Post Office Box 437, Cariblue Beach, St. Lucia, West
Indies; 800-544-2883 or 809-452-8551), which offers a "Body Holiday" program.
For one price, it provides guests with room, all meals, spa treatments and land
and water sports. Thalassotherapy treaments include an "algae bubble bath"; a
small salt-water swimming pool with sea-water jets; seaweed wraps; massages
using seaweed extracts, and high-pressure showers of sea water. The current
lowest cost is $195 a person a day in double occupancy. From Dec. 16 to Jan. 4
and Jan. 19 to April 5, the lowest daily rate is $260, and Jan. 5 to Jan. 18 it
is $220.

Vienna Opera House

Q.  My husband and I will be in Vienna April 16 and 17. What is being performed
at the Opera House and how can we get tickets ahead of time?  -- Ruth Manishin,
Morristown, N.J.

A.  On April 16 there will be a performance by Ballet of the Vienna State Opera.
The program includes "Verklarte Nacht" by Schonberg, choreographed by Jirschi
Kilian, and Beethoven's Adagio for Hammerklavier, choreographed by Hans Manen.
Tickets are $10 to $96. Set for April 17 is the opera "Ariadne auf Naxos" by
Richard Strauss featuring the soprano Gwyneth Jones and conducted by Horst
Stein. Tickets are $14 to $115.

Tickets can be obtained from the Austrian Association of Federal Theaters
(Bundestheater-Verband, Goethegasse 1, A-1010 Vienna, Austria; telephone
514440). When dialing from the United States, precede the number with 431.
Requests for tickets must be in writing, either by mail or fax (514442969).
Include a credit card number for billing.

Some ticket requests come in a year or more before an event, and the opera house
advises ordering tickets as soon as possible, certainly no less than six weeks
before an event. However, any tickets remaining can be bought by credit card
within six days of an event by phoning 5131513.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE

BYLINE: Roland Foster Miller

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 23; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2071 words


Read With Me

By Walter Anderson

Houghton Mifflin. 180 pages. $14.95.

Behold my magic. I can cast a thought a thousand miles, through storm and stone,
even beyond time. Long after my flesh has withered and my bones have crumbled to
dust, the very best of me -- my ideas, my dreams -- can live, can burn with
undiminished fire and passion. All because I have a gift, a power, and I am not
alone. You share my miracle: You cannot touch me, but I am here; you cannot see
me, but I am real. At this very moment, I am alive in your mind. We call this
miracle language.  -- "The Miracle," from "Read With Me."

Walter Anderson's efforts on behalf of improving the human condition continue in
his third book, "Read With Me." Two years ago, he told us he was "on an
irreversable course now to make a better world," and he has followed his star
with a steady arm.

"The passion started in my childhood," Mr. Anderson said recently from the
Manhattan office of Parade, where he is editor in chief of the 35
million-circulation magazine. "I was the abused child of a violent alcoholic.
Years after my father's death, I asked my mother, 'Why did you encourage me to
read when you knew Daddy would beat me?' She said, 'Because you could find a way
out.' I read myself out of poverty, out of the slum."

Mr. Anderson, a high school dropout at 16, left a rough section of Mount Vernon
to serve with the Marines in Vietnam. He returned to the county to work full
time as a reporter for The Reporter Dispatch in White Plains while also
attending Westchester Community College full time. He was valedictorian of his
class there and at Mercy College, where he was a pschology major. He is now
trustee emeritus at Mercy and has been editor of Parade since 1980.

Mr. Anderson, a man whose house was built with words, said he could not imagine
being wordless: "To me that would be without existence. Words are what make us
human. We create ourselves, whether it is large or small. I recall something
Elie Wiesel once told me, 'That I exist is not significant, it is up to me to
give life significance.' "

"Read With Me" offers anecdotes from the famous -- like Alex Hailey, Jack
Anderson and Norman Vincent Peale -- and from people in the trenches, volunteers
who teach reading, and some adults who have learned to read.

The battle lines have been drawn. As much as there are haves and have-nots,
those with advanced college degrees and those who have dropped out of school,
there are those of us who read and those of us who can't. Some estimates say 27
million Americans fall into the last category.

Literacy is "a fair-weather issue," Peter Waite, head of Laubach Literacy
Action, the largest private literacy program in the United States, says in "Read
With Me."

"And by that I mean that literacy maintains its high profile when other issues
are not at a very high level of involvement, because it's difficult to galvanize
a specific event or continually declare a crisis around literacy. I can't
announce tomorrow, for example, that we have a major outbreak of illiteracy in
Peoria. Nor can I say that illiteracy is running rampant in Texas and will soon
take over Oklahoma."

Mr. Anderson, who lives with his wife, Loretta, in White Plains, said his
publisher had approached him with the idea for "Read With Me." "And Houghton
Mifflin was willing to publish this book pro bono if necessary," he said. "They
have been spending so much money on this that they can't possibly get a fraction
of the money back on it. This is our commitment. We think the book is
significant and it makes a difference. Nader F. Darehshori, the chairman and
C.E.O, called this their 'Silent Spring.' I was so involved in literacy that I
never thought about writing about it. I was like a fish in water saying, where's
the water?"

Mr. Anderson's book tour of the country included some television interviews.
After one, the "Sally Jesse Raphael" show, he said, "10,000 people called in."

"Read With Me," which took a year to write ("I guess you could also say it took
a lifetime") is for people involved in literacy and, beyond that, for the
parents of children with reading problems, Mr. Anderson said. "It's not whether
children can learn to read, but how," he added.

Mr. Anderson, who is weighing a novel as his next writing project, said he has
been offered many television opportunities. But he can't let his life become too
crowded.

"I have priorities in my life," said Mr. Anderson, the father of two children.
"My first priority is my family.  If I am not a good father and husband, nothing
else is going to matter. Next is my work as editor of Parade -- that's more than
a full-time job for me."

He said, however, that literacy would continue to play its own large role in his
life: "I'm in a position now to influence a great many people in literacy. And
more and more I'm going to get involved in education. When I speak to children
in schools today, I tell them that the revolver in your pocket is not power;
reading is power. Read yourself out of fear and pain."

Stamping Our History

The Story of the United States Portrayed
On Its Postage Stamps

By Charles Davidson and Lincoln Diamant

Lyle Stuart. 254 pages. $49.95.

Aside from gritting one's teeth at the thought of pasting 25 cents worth of
paper and glue onto each of the monthly bills, it is likely most of us give
little thought to stamps. Well, for the price of a couple of hundred stamps, you
can own an oversize book that might change your opinion. It treats stamps like
art and throws in a painless history lesson as well.

The authors of "Stamping Our History" shared an early interest in stamps.
Charles Davidson began collecting when he was 7; Lincoln Diamant, when he was "8
or 9 years old." Both men got involved through their parents.

"At a point in my life when I had a paper route," Mr. Davidson said from his
1750 Dutch farmhouse in Croton-on-Hudson, "I would take my money and buy stamps
for $15, which was a lot of money as a kid.

"I got the idea for the book in 1972. I found out how little our young people
know about history in America. If you're not interested in it, you're not going
to retain it. And my feeling is that when you don't have an interest in history,
you don't feel as if you belong -- to the heritage of it and the richness of
it."

Mr. Davidson, who is creative director for the North American Watch Corporation
of Manhattan (Movado, Concord, Piaget and Corum), said he and Mr. Diamant
started on the book eight years ago, when they put together 10 prototype pages.
Since then, they have worked at night and on weekends around their regular jobs
(Mr. Diamant has his own broadcast advertising consultancy, Spots Alive, based
in Ossining).

"Stamping Our History" is the kind of book that is nice to have around. Not only
does it have a pretty face, it has a brain, too. The stamps really do look not
so much like stamps as elegant woodcuts and the writing, snapshots of historical
facts and figures.

There are some truly fabulous tidbits for trivia sufferers in "Stamping Our
History." Here is one: "Like the earliest stamps of countries all over the
world, those first U.S. sheets were 'imperforate'; you simply scissored off a
stamp when you needed it. Ten years later [1857] came the more convenient
tear-apart sheets, whose perforations have been with us ever since. (Each year,
more than 75 tons of those minuscule punched-out wastepaper dots -- called
'chad' -- fuel a special boiler at the Treasury Department's Bureau of Engraving
and Printing.)"

In a discussion of the transcontinental railroad between Omaha, Neb., and
Sacramento, Calif., -- the Central Pacific Railroad, the Union Pacific, the
golden spike, remember? -- we find this "Jeopardy"-like piece of information:
"By some patriotic accident of geography, America's newest railroad line was
exactly 1,776 miles long."

But the stamps themselves are the headliners in this show. They are in glorious
color and, in some cases, they are enlarged 2,000 percent to show detail -- some
of which calls to mind Albrecht Durer.

Care must be taken in depicting stamps, however. "There are all kinds of laws
regarding the illustration of stamps," Mr. Davidson said. "They must be at least
three-fourths or one-and-a-half times their normal size, or you could end up in
the post office, on the wall."

"Chuck actually designed the format of the book and I wrote all the words of the
book," Mr. Diamant said. "And then we got together and I commented on the format
and he commented on the words.

"Our worries originally were, were there enough little pieces of gum-to-paper
around to cover it all? And the answer was yes. We use in the book about 10
percent of all commemorative stamps that were issued. We sought stamps that
typified a particular period."

The book, Mr. Diamant said, "obviously has considerable visual appeal to stamp
collectors." In fact, the Postmaster General, Anthony M. Frank, wrote the
authors in praise of the book. But Mr. Davidson said that it was a volume for
parents and grandparents of young people.

"Anyone can give the history of the United States to their grandchildren with
this book. I used stamps because they're a visual medium. I look at the visual
drama of this book to make a subject that at best is dull into a way to retain
history."

While "Stamping Our History" was Mr. Davidson's first book, Mr. Diamant has
written several. His last, "Chaining the Hudson," won a 1990 Book Award from the
Sons of the Revolution. Mr. Diamant has lived in Ossining with his wife, Joan, a
painter for 24 years, and Mr. Davidson has lived in Croton, with his wife,
Deena, four daughters and two horses for 10 years.

The two men plan to get together for another book. "We love each other," Mr.
Diamant said. "Chuck is so inventive; he's a purebred, unalloyed genius. Between
the two of us we're a happy couple."

Kids of Westchester

By Jane Berger

Outreach Publications. 196 pages. $8.95.

Jane Berger's "Young Children of Westchester" has grown up. Her new book, "Kids
of Westchester," is a sourcebook of services for 6- to 12-year-olds.

Once again, the County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, writes a note of gratitude
at the book's onset and once again, Mrs. Berger produces a yeomanly research
effort in compiling this information-packed handbook.

"Children from 6 to 12 are enthusiastic, curious and interested in expanding
their world," Mrs. Berger notes in her introduction. "With better motor
coordination and keener thinking skills, they are ready to participate in more
challenging activities than when they were younger."

With more than 100,000 Westchester children in the 5- through 14-year-old age
group, Mrs. Berger's second handbook should have an excellent market.

"Kids of Westchester" is an easy-to-use volume and has entries in nearly every
category conceivable -- from the more mundane, like birthday parties (some, to
be fair, feature karate and unicycling) to baseball-batting classes and
psychological evaluations.

"I have tried to reach out to all children in Westchester, to provide for those
who are average, advanced, disabled and economically disadvantaged," Mrs. Berger
said recently from her home in White Plains, where she lives with her husband,
Neil, a psychoanalyst and director of psychology at the Manhattan Children's
Psychiatric Center on Ward's Island. The couple have two children, a daughter,
7, and a son, 5.

"There are a lot of my philosophies and agendas that go into this book," Mrs.
Berger said. "Many times parents have to rely on the opinions of experts because
they don't know what is available themselves. I want to offer them 'parent
empowerment.' "

Mrs. Berger noted that Westchester is a dynamic children's market. "Things are
coming and going all the time," she said. "Throughout the year I'm making
additions and deletions to my database."

As writer, researcher, editor and publisher of "Kids of Westchester," Mrs.
Berger has employed not only her husband (the data processing department) but
also her children and her neighbors, who work in their homes.

"Kids of Westchester" is available at independent bookstores, toy stores,
juvenile furniture and children's clothing stores and, soon, in the local
libraries.

While Mrs. Berger said her next project would be an updating of her first book,
she dropped the hint that she has a file on "seniors of Westchester."


LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Details from "Read With Me," " Stamping Our History," and "Kids
of Westchester"

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Seasoned in Vietnam, 'Harlem Hell Fighters' Report to the Gulf

BYLINE: By GEORGE JAMES

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 643 words


They are members of the 369th Transportation Battalion of the New York National
Guard, but their nom de guerre, earned in combat during World War I, is the
"Harlem Hell Fighters."

This month the unit, the 719th Transportation Company of the 369th, became New
York City's first Guard unit in Saudi Arabia.

Normally operating out of the armory on Fifth Avenue and 143d Street, the
company consists of black and Hispanic soldiers, 80 percent of whom are New York
City civil servants, including transit employees, sanitation workers, and police
officers like the 719th's commander, Capt. Dennis Bush.

They range in age from 22 to 55, with the bulk about 40, and there are 12
enlisted women and one woman who is an officer, said the battalion commander,
Lieut. Col. Francis Kairson. Many served in Vietnam.

Supplying the Front Lines

In its infancy in World War I, the 369th was the first American infantry
regiment to serve as an integral part of a foreign army, France's, because black
Americans were not allowed to fight beside white countrymen.

Its members did fight -- at Bois d'Hauza, Minaucaurt, Maison en Champagne and
elsewhere. The 369th received the Croix de Guerre for gallantry, and
individually, 171 officers and enlisted men received that medal or the Legion of
Honor.

Now a newer breed has been sent to an environment that could not be more
different from the congested streets, avenues and alleys of East Harlem that
Captain Bush patrols as a police officer.

In the event of war, his soldiers will drive semi-tractor trailers, supplying
the front lines with everything from computers to armored personnel carriers.

'Your Corner of the Sandbox'

On Nov. 7, the first contingent left McGuire Air Force Base in New Jersey. Their
cavernous C-5A transport plane soon lost an engine and had to lay over at
Westover Air Force Base in Massachusetts, where soldiers passed the time
watching the Vietnam movie, "Platoon."

They arrived at Torrejon Air Base in Spain on Nov. 8 and Saudi Arabia early on
Nov. 9.

After a long ride on a school bus, they saw a flickering on the horizon that at
5:59 A.M. suddenly became a harsh sun, popping up as if from a toaster and
giving a first look at the strange expansiveness that would be their home.

"Welcome to your corner of the sandbox," said Sgt. Joel Maul, a police officer
for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, as they arrived at a camp
called Guardian City. The new arrivals put up signs to make it home: "El Barrio,
Puerto Rico," and "Seventh Avenue, Harlem."

Concerns About Attack

Sgt. Lamar Jones soon was voicing an unusual complaint at mail call.

"No sand in the mail," he said. "I repeat, no sand in the mail. You men send
sand, your letters will be returned."

There was the usual grousing as to why they were there. But Sgt. Alvie Grimes,
an accountant who joined the Guard seven years ago for the extra pay, said:
"It's a good cause. I never expected to be here. I've been enjoying the benefits
for seven years, and now it's time to do what I was trained to do."

She was concerned about being attacked.

"You see, we're in the last tent," she said. "And I feel this would be the first
tent they'd come to knowing there are all females here."

'I Love Being Here'

As he sat inside a truck, ready to scout a new location for a camp, Sergeant
Maul, who had been a ranger in Vietnam, looked around him.

"I really love this," he said. "This is special for me. I love being here."

By Nov. 11, a generator still had not arrived to light their section, and so at
night, the soldiers played cards by flashlight under the stars.

And they joked about where a soldier could get a drink in a land where alcohol
is forbidden, while the plaintive voice of Anita Baker drifted from a portable
stereo, rising and falling in the desert night.


LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: INTO THE DARK NIGHT: Members of the 719th Transportation Company

 filed out into the darkness of a Saudi Arabian night on Nov. 9.
 Two hours later, they would set out for what one soldier
 called their "corner of the sandbox."; HARSH LIGHT OF REALITY: On a school bus
bound for camp,
 Sgt. Robert L. Fuller gazed at the strangeness of the
 expansive landscape illuminated by a harsh sun that
 moments before had been a flicker on the horizon; DESERT TRANSPORT: Sgt. 1st
Class James Murphy glanced
 at camels at roadside as he lighted a cigarette. The company's
 tractor trailers would ferry equipment like
 armored personnel carriers to the front; SETTLING IN: Sgt. James L. Sumpter,
who at 48
 is one of the oldest soldiers in the unit, told the
 troops to get off their duffle bags and
 prepare to settle into their tents; CREATURE COMFORTS: Her M-16 at the ready on
a shelf, Sgt. Alvie Grimes
 took a moment to wash her hair. She and her colleagues had
 been ordered not to go anywhere without a weapon,
 a gas mask and two canteens of water; TIME ON THEIR HANDS: By Nov. 11, a
generator had still not
 arrived to light their section of tents. At a picnic table under
 a canopy of stars, soldiers whiled away a long
 night by playing cards by flashlight. (Photographs by Angel Franco)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The New Order;
Peace Isn't So Simple as the End of Cold War

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1175 words

DATELINE: PARIS


WHEN revolutions or wars turn things upside down, the politicians, craving
stability, always start trying to institutionalize the new world order. After
Napoleon came the Holy Alliance, after World War I the League of Nations, after
World War II the United Nations. So last week, 34 countries -- the United
States, Canada and all the European states except Albania -- had a go, around a
hexagonal table in Paris, at inventing something to replace the cold war and its
institutions.

The conference did better at architecture than at construction, describing and
to a degree designing the common European home that President Mikhail S.
Gorbachev of the Soviet Union likes to talk about, but not actually building
much.

It ratified the end of the cold war -- even Mr. Bush finally overcame his
reluctance to confine that conflict to the dustheap of history -- but all it
actually created were three offices (in Warsaw, Prague and Vienna) and a
schedule of future meetings for foreign ministers and heads of government.

Worse, all sorts of uncertainties kept crowding in upon those who had come to
Paris, reminding them how many unresolved questions they faced.

Groping its way toward a new foreign policy whose prime aim may be to contain
conflict that threatens its economic interests, rather than containing
Communism, and toward a new multilateralism, based in considerable degree on the
United Nations, the United States finds itself curiously dependent upon the old
adversary, the Soviet Union.

Before and during the conference, Mr. Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker
3d held three long and apparently difficult meetings with Mr. Gorbachev and with
Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Soviet Foreign Minister, seeking, in effect, their
blessing for the use of force against Iraq. The United States no longer feels
completely comfortable about going to war, as it did in Vietnam, without
clearing it with the Soviets and with many others.

If the United States needs the Soviet Union in that respect, Moscow desperately
needs Washington and Washington's old cold war allies if it is to have any hope
of successfully tackling its economic difficulties. Facing the onset of winter
with grocery store shelves bare, Mr. Gorbachev went shopping in Paris for food.

He gave Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada a list of shortages that
included flour, pork, cooking oil and other commodities, and he won the promise
of an early visit from a high-level European Community delegation bearing the
details of emergency assistance worth at least $1 billion.

The United States is reluctant to pour money into what it sees as an impossibly
inefficient system. But even if most of the effort is wasted, Washington will
find itself obliged to try to help ward off famine; that issue, along with new
arms-reduction initiatives, is sure to stand at the head of the agenda for the
next Bush-Gorbachev meeting, tentatively scheduled for January.

But an even greater concern was discussed here, though not reflected in any of
the official documents or much mentioned at news conferences. Finnish, Czech and
Polish officials talked openly with their colleagues about their fears that Mr.
Gorbachev may open his borders, allowing millions of refugees, many with ethnic
ties outside the Soviet Union, to head west.

Such a tidal wave of migration, if it developed, might put a particular strain
on Germany, which is already struggling to bring its eastern regions up to the
level of the western areas, and which must also absorb ethnic Germans from the
wobbly new democracies across Eastern Europe.

There is little that the rest of Europe can do about migration; there is nothing
it can do about the threat of national disintegration in the Soviet Union. While
Mr. Gorbachev has comprehensively reorganized his country's system of government
for the second time in a year, there is no assurance that the new system will
take hold in the republics far from Moscow, and Boris Yeltsin is still
threatening that Russia may have to raise its own army.

There is much irony in all of this, of course.  Perestroika and glasnost have
made freedom in Eastern Europe, arms reduction and the end of the cold war
possible; in that sense they have helped to build stability. But they have
raised expectations where once there were few, unleashing economic and ethnic
and political forces that have helped to destroy stability.

The tanks facing each other across central Europe are no longer the problem, in
other words, but the economic and political tumult swirling about them can be
every bit as lethal.Jozsef Antall, the Hungarian Prime Minister, spoke here of
the dangers of replacing the Iron Curtain with a Welfare Wall.

In such a situation, there can obviously be no certainty that Mr. Gorbachev will
last until January. The tenuousness of power was demonstrated for all to see
during the conference, not only by his troubles, rumbling away over the horizon,
but also by those of leaders who live nearby. The minority Government of Premier
Michel Rocard of France survived a censure motion by only five votes, and Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher didn't survive at all.

Mrs. Thatcher's downfall introduces another uncertainty into Mr. Bush's
calculations. If Mr. Gorbachev has been the agent of change over the last
decade, working with two American Presidents to dismantle decades of hostility,
the Iron Lady has been the most reliable ally in all things, from the bombing of
Libya to preserving NATO to the crisis in the Persian Gulf.

A New Tune?

None of the three contenders to succeed her is likely to change the words that
constitute British foreign policy, but each will have his own music -- Michael
Heseltine, who first challenged Mrs. Thatcher and ran her a close enough second
on a first ballot for the Conservative Party leadership that she chose not to
stay in the race for a second, or John Major or Douglas Hurd, who both joined
the fray after Mrs. Thatcher withdrew on Thursday.

The Soviet Union and Germany want the mechanism established here, known rather
cumbersomely as the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, to grow
eventually into a pan-European security system to replace NATO and the Warsaw
Pact.

Britain and the United States have prevented that, for the moment. But the
leader who succeeds Mrs. Thatcher, together with Mr. Bush, will eventually have
to find some means to ease Moscow's feeling of isolation from Europe's main
organizations, NATO and the Common Market, and to assure Eastern European
nations that they are not permanent poor cousins.

Vaclav Havel, the President of Czechoslovakia, says his country and others in
Eastern Europe sense that they are in "a political and security vacuum." That
kind of feeling breeds resentment, especially when accompanied by reawakened
nationalist emotions.

If they are to achieve the stability they want, the leaders of the big countries
will have to find ways to address that problem, along with all the others,
before meeting next in Helsinki in 1992.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
What Will It Take to Make Saddam Hussein Nervous?

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 958 words

DATELINE: ALGIERS


AFTER more than three months and a commitment of almost 400,000 American
soldiers, the Bush Administration and its Arab allies still wonder how to get
Saddam Hussein's undivided attention.

The question last week in Washington, at the pan-European summit meeting in
Paris and in Arab capitals was whether the Iraqi President gets the message:
Withdraw from Kuwait and free all hostages, immediately and unconditionally, or
face what President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt has called the "greatest
concentration of military force I have ever seen in the area."

"It seems to me he doesn't realize the danger," Mr. Mubarak said, searching for
a rational explanation for President Hussein's adamantly consistent position of
wanting to talk to the United States while refusing to withdraw from Kuwait.

"Not until he feels the heat of the edge of the knife at the back of his neck
will he withdraw," said Taseen Bashir, a former Egyptian official.

Last week, the knife finally became visible, if not yet hot, as the Soviet Union
signaled its willingess to work with the United States to draft a Security
Council resolution that force can be used unless Iraq leaves. The Soviet leader,
Mikhail S. Gorbachev, refused to say Monday that he would support such a
resolution. But on Tuesday Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze said "the
time has come" for the United Nations to decide whether Iraq is ready to heed
the world's demands that it withdraw from Kuwait, and to "adopt new resolutions"
if it will not.

The kind of resolution the United States wants, authorizing force to expel Iraq,
could supply the real heat of the knife, and this has alarmed countries that
opposed the American presence in the region in the first place -- especially
Jordan and Algeria, and Yemen, which will hold the Security Council chairmanship
next month. Mohammed Sahnoun, the diplomatic adviser to Algeria's President,
Chadli Benjedid, said the pressure on Mr. Hussein "should not mean an actual
blow rather than a credible threat." Algeria and others that share the goal of
getting Iraq out of Kuwait but reject the use of force have tried through quiet
diplomacy to persuade Iraq to leave. Most of their mediating efforts are known
to the United States, which quietly approves.

Little Rancor

In fact, there has been surprisingly little rancor between Washington and its
Arab critics. The United States has even tried to help patch up Arab quarrels
over Riyadh's invitation to foreign forces to defend it, Arab leaders said.
During his recent visit, for example, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d urged
the Saudis to resume oil deliveries to Jordan. In interviews before President
Bush visited the region last week, senior officials of Jordan, Yemen and Algeria
described relations with Washington as good, despite strains over how and when
to force Iraq out of Kuwait.

Most Arab governments do not criticize the Bush Administration for failing to
detect in advance the danger Iraq posed to Kuwait. Nor do they echo arguments
heard earlier in the region about America's lack of "stamina," assessments
frequently aired after the United States left Lebanon within a few months of the
1983 bombing of the Marine compound in Beirut and a subsequent showdown with
Syria.

In the current crisis, these Arabs have instead been impressed by President
Bush's ability to sustain the anti-Iraq coalition, which they had predicted
would be destroyed by tactical disputes and divergent interests. Supporters of
the coalition, in particular, cite the deft handling of the Chinese and the
Soviets, the effort to include Syria and the steady escalation of pressure on
Baghdad. What this region respects, they say, is strength. And the Americans are
being seen as people who will no longer cut and run, as they are perceived to
have done in Vietnam and Lebanon.

Algeria, Jordan and Yemen do not share this view. Their officials express anger
about what King Hussein of Jordan last week called America's "double standard"
toward Israeli and Iraqi occupation of Arab land. In a speech, the King cited
the many resolutions passed over many years urging Israel to withdraw from
occupied lands; none, he said, was backed by American troops. Officials in
Algiers, Amman and Sana are not interested in discussing the differences between
Iraq's aggression and how Israel came to occupy Palestinian land. "The new
international order you are trying to build must begin with Israel if it is to
have any credibility among Arabs," said Sid Ahmed Ghozali, Algeria's Foreign
Minister.

In addition, these officials argue that force will bring chaos to the region and
have other effects that Washington underestimates. "The push toward democracy in
this region will be a casualty of force," Mr. Ghozali warned. These officials
criticized the Bush Administration's unwillingess to offer President Hussein
what they call "face savers" -- terms that the Administration has dismissed as
"rewards for aggression." A senior Arab official said that President Hussein
recently told the Soviet envoy, Yevgeny Primakov, that unconditional withdrawal
would mean death or the overthrow of his Government.

Moreover, critics of United States policy doubt that America's ultimate goal is
limited to forcing Iraq out of Kuwait. They cite other objectives, such as
insuring access to and a low price for oil, and insuring that Iraq does not
threaten Israel. "The Bush Administration wants to destroy Iraq as a military
power," said one Arab leader. "Kuwait, for you, is a mere pretext."

The difference between war and peace may well depend on which Arabs are right --
those who think a credible threat will, in the end, persuade Mr. Hussein, and
those who say only concessions can work.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush tossing presidential tie clips to Marines at a
desert encampment in Saudi Arabia during a whirlwind Thanksgiving visit to the
troops. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
The 'Super' Concept

BYLINE: Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 707 words


Now that the Soviet Union has been deflated, and may even be breaking up, does
the world still need the U.S. as a remaining superpower?

Can the U.S. still play that role? It's clear that maintaining superpower status
is becoming more difficult -- nearly impossible -- for the United States. Even
in the Middle East, allies are having to pick up much of the tab, allies
necessarily have substantial control over U.S. actions, and an ultimate triumph
is by no means assured.

At home, and no matter what U.S.  policies are abroad, American society and the
American economy are anything but super. Congress and the President have just
demonstrated that they can't even manage the Federal budget; and Washington
veterans will be surprised if the nation finally sees anything like the $460
billion in savings projected for the next five years.

Nor is the deficit the only economic problem. Billions are needed for investment
-- in education, in infrastructure, in environmental cleanup, to restore the
dwindling ability of states and cities to provide necessary public services. The
shameful savings and loan scandal adds to the problem. A struggling and badly
undercapitalized banking system limits the availability of needed credit for the
present, and threatens economic collapse for the future.

The nation's energy vulnerability has been dramatized by the Middle East crisis;
but the country seems paralyzed when confronted with the obvious need for
greater energy independence. Research and development, once a prime U.S.
strength, lag behind the efforts of Japan and Western Europe.

Even a President who denies being a "gloom and doom person" concedes that the
economy is heading into a recession, and some economists think it may be the
worst of the postwar era.

Compounding all this is the apparent reluctance of the voters -- who now are
only about half or less of those eligible -- to approve any form of new taxes.
Yet, after a decade of reduced taxes and inflated military spending, there may
be no way to attack some of these problems without well-targeted taxes -- on
gasoline, for instance, to reduce oil imports, help clear the air we breathe and
produce needed new revenues for, say, education and infrastructure. Better such
a tax, even if stiff, than the higher price now being paid at the pump, mostly
to enrich foreign potentates.

Where is the superpower in all of this? And where is it to be found in other
American ills -- crime, homelessness, inadequate child care, limited and costly
medical care, a growing underclass? Even the military, upon which so much
American wealth has been lavished in the last half-century, demonstrated crucial
weaknesses in the great victories in Grenada and Panama, not to mention Vietnam.

If the most pressing U.S. problems therefore lie at home (not least the lack of
political will to face them), playing the superpower role abroad is hard to
defend. It also emphasizes the corollary: Is it necessary?

The need to match a second superpower, dollar for dollar, bomb for bomb, has
disappeared. The need to organize, arm and lead the "free world" in deterring
and/or defeating the Communist world no longer exists. The need to provide
capital to what used to be the Communist world, as well as to Latin America and
other friendly nations, can far better be met by Japanese and European financial
interests -- who have, in most cases, as much at stake as the U.S.

In a multi-polar world, composed of at least Japan, Western Europe, China and
the United States, as well as whatever power (including nuclear) remains to the
Soviet Union, the need for any one of these to claim status as a lone superpower
-- policeman and banker to the world, the dominant voice among all -- is hard to
see. The ability for any one to achieve or maintain such status may be
nonexistent.

Regional discord no doubt will continue to require United States military power
to be projected occasionally, at least in the third world; few would wish such
power to be Japanese, German or Chinese. But that's a different scale of power,
for a far more limited purpose, than the vast military establishment once
required for what looks more and more like the outmoded concept of the
superpower.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PUBLIC & PRIVATE;
The Questions Continue

BYLINE: Anna Quindlen

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 776 words


It's hard to imagine that there was an American household this Thanksgiving that
did not have, at its holiday table, a liberal helping of war talk laced with
confusion, skepticism and doubt.

Even in Dhahran, a truckload of soldiers driving past a group of reporters
opened fire, armed with loaded questions. "I want to go home!" two of them
shouted. "This isn't our war! What are we doing here? Why are we over here? We
aren't supposed to be here -- this isn't our war!"

It's hard to know if the President is really listening to questions like those,
shouted out by two young men who may die for his decision. The threat of war
sends Presidents into a dizzying spiral of self-justification; George Bush could
soon become as isolated from real public opinion as Lyndon Johnson became in the
shadow of his war, and Richard Nixon's war rendered him from beginning to end.

Many of the questions have been inspired by the President's public fumbling for
the right answers. First we were defending the sovereignty of little Kuwait.
Then we were repelling Saddam Hussein, the new Hitler. (This appears to be the
standard by which all foes will herein be judged; whether they are properly
Hitlerian or not. Madmen, too; they must be madmen.) When these reasons proved
too broad, we segued to oil and jobs. The President made a package of all,
combined them with the impending threat of Iraq's nuclear capability and offered
this to the troops on Thanksgiving Day.

Vietnam hangs like Marley's ghost over these holiday celebrations, ready to
provide us with the present and future contained in the past. For the President,
this is as much a millstone around his neck as all the chains and cash boxes
were around Marley's. But I wish he could be taken by spirits, as Scrooge was,
into taverns and kitchens and city streets to hear public opinion that is not
hand-picked or filtered through the screen of advisers or reporters, to know the
consumers of his foreign policy.

What he would see are Americans talking, talking, talking. Arguing. Anguishing.
Wondering. Wishing. Remembering past mistakes and vowing not to repeat them. We
will not blame the troops this time for doing the politician's business; we know
it is possible to support the soldiers and repudiate the policies. And we will
talk about the politician's business as our own, before, not after.

We know from experience that the reasons to sacrifice our children's lives must
be clear and compelling. The economic consequences of a stranglehold on oil are
the most tangible, but the least effective rationale for this war. If the
President knows the American people at all, he certainly knows one thing: They
never have been and never will be people who will knowingly trade their sons and
daughters for economic stability.

The President left Saudi Arabia still trailing more questions than answers: if
we are going to war to counter the threat of atomic weapons in the hands of a
madman, does that make us the nuclear policeman of the world, ready to step in
whenever some despot becomes technologically sophisticated and border oblivious?
Can we live as a country with the knowledge that once again the children of the
poor and of people of color will be killed for the convictions of well-to-do
white men?  And how much of the decision to go into combat will be reasonable,
how much the President's subconscious fear of the wimp factor that has dogged
him, and has always dogged our feisty nation? Will this be a war built, on both
sides, around that thankless business of of saving face?

George Bush tries often to be consumer responsive. Critics think this makes him
unprincipled, and admirers believe it means he's pragmatic. It is a problem when
he misreads the consumer.

Because he thought baby boomers were looking for the same thing in a running
mate they wanted in a sports car -- recent vintage, good looks -- he impulsively
chose Dan Quayle. He overlooked the value Americans place on intelligence and
experience. He cannot act impulsively again. He cannot overlook how smart and
experienced the consumers are.

"What are we doing here?" the soldiers in the truck shouted. And there are
millions more like them here at home. Traditionally, a war begins and public
opinion follows. And that opinion is bolstered by patriotism and loyalty, the
feeling that American soldiers dying thousands of miles away deserve our
unquestioning support at home. It's happened backward this time. We are
envisioning the body bags, and that is a very, very good thing. If the President
thinks a declaration of war would mute the questions of the people, he has
misread his consumers.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Campus Life: M.I.T.;
A Professor Is Given a Coveted Appointment: to the Rank of Student

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 47; Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 696 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


John L. Wyatt never liked taking timed exams when he was an undergraduate at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Now, more than two decades after earning
a degree in electrical engineering and computer science, Mr. Wyatt is a tenured
professor in the department at M.I.T.

But in contrast with previous years, he is preparing to take exams this fall,
rather than mkae them up for his students. And to his great delight, the exams
are of a take-home format.


This fall Mr. Wyatt became the school's first Adler Scholar. An appointment
given to one faculty member in the department of electrical engineering and
computer science, it allows the appointee to take the term off from teaching and
instead take class as a regular student.

'Real Scholarship'

For Mr. Wyatt, a friend of the late Richard B. Adler, the M.I.T. professor for
whom the program is named, the chance to take a graduate course in "Machine
Vision" (or 6.866 in M.I.T. parlance) was an invitation to return to what he
calls "real scholarship."

Sitting in his eighth-floor office in the Sherman Fairchild Building, Mr. Wyatt
leaned back in his chair, placing his feet comfortably on another chair, and in
a soft Tennessee twang outlined why he welcomed becoming a student again.

"The tendency of a busy place like M.I.T. is to turn every faculty member into a
research supervisor," he said. "In some cases it's not even that. In some cases
you become just an administrator rather than a researcher, and it's quite easy
when you do that to leave all of the actual problem-solving to the graudate
students. And you can become sloppy.

"I don't want to be research supervisor particularly. I want to be a
researcher."

These days Mr. Wyatt's research interests lie primarily in developing V.L.S.I.
(very large-scale integration) analog microships for "Machine Vision."

The M.I.T. course bulletin describes "Machine Vision" as an "intensive
introduction to the prodcess of generating a symbolic description of the
environment from an image." In simple terms, the course deals with devising
methods for a robot to process images.

Although Mr. Wyatt conceded that he could learn the material from a textbook or
by reading journals, he said: "Where are you going to get the time to do a hard
problem set every week? To actually go through the gory detail by yourself,
rather than hand it off to a graduate student?"

Such tasks are sheer pleasure to Mr. Wyatt. In fact, the chance to "continue
learning things," he said, prompted him to become a professor.

'One of the Guys'

"I'm a little worried," said the instructor of the course, Berthold K. P. Horn,
"that Mr. Wyatt's advanced training and loquaciousness may hinder other
students, and they may feel like they can't compete." Mr. Wyatt's advanced
training in mathematics, he noted, made him one fo the stronger students in the
class.

Cynthia L. Ferrell, a graduate student in electrical engineering and computer
science, from Livermore, Calif., did not appear at all intimidated. Mr. Wyatt,
she said, is "definitely one of the guys."

"He asks a lot of intelligent questions, which is nice. It helps me understand
what Professor Horn is talking about."

Ms. Ferrell said she had not realized until very recently that Mr. Wyatt was a
professor.

Years of Studying

After graduating from M.I.T. in 1968, Mr. Wyatt went on to Princeton University
for a master's program in electrical engineering, but he was drafted for service
in the Vietnam War. As a conscientious objector, he entered the Public Health
Service in 1969 and became a commissioned officer.

He spent 1971 to 1978 at the University of California at Berkeley, where he did
bachelor's and master's work in mathematics and received a doctorate in
electrical engineering. After a one-year postdoctoral stint in physiology at the
Medical College of Virginia, he came to M.I.T. in 1979.

He was surprised to find "how little time there is for real scholarship in a
faculty member's life."

But doesn't it "feel funny" stepping down from his faculty post and going back
to class?

"No," Mr. Wyatt said. "It's just the most normal thing in the world."

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hope in Hell's Classroom

BYLINE: By Richard Louv; Richard Louv, a columnist for The San Diego Union, is
the author of "Childhood's Future," from which this article is adapted. The book
will be published in January by Houghton Mifflin. Copyright © 1990 by Richard
Louv.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5717 words


COMING INTO NORTH PHILADELPHIA, I CAN SEE TRASH and blight everywhere. A few of
the blocks are attractive, with little row houses painted in bright colors; but
many of the old storefronts and apartment buildings are burned out, boarded up.
Some doors are covered not with boards but with steel plates. The sidewalks are
eerily silent, except for one corner near the Blaine elementary school, where
four or five young black men stand watching the street. One of them is bouncing
a basketball.

The school, a three-story brick building, scarred and gouged, looks as if it is
under siege. Parts of the structure are boarded up, the wood peeling in great
blue strips, and an attached gym is bordered by a high chain-link fence topped
with rolls of razor wire. A sign out front reads James G. Blaine Public School.
The "m" in the first word is missing, and beneath the name, graffiti announces,
"Ace polo kid, ace."

Despite its disrepair, I knew that Blaine was a clean, scrubbed island -- a safe
zone. This was largely because of its principal, a powerful-looking woman with a
do-it-now philosophy named Madeline Cartwright.

I had heard about Cartwright's magical touch from several officials of
Philadelphia's school system. Cartwright was known throughout the city for her
innovative administrative techniques and for her no-nonsense yet compassionate
treatment of her students.

Blaine, which is almost exclusively black, breaks the stereotype of the
inner-city elementary school. Though 63 percent of the school's families receive
some form of public assistance, its students rank high academically in
comparison with similar inner-city institutions -- and Blaine's attendance rate
is a remarkable 92 percent. To keep students and teachers on their toes,
Cartwright likes to pay surprise visits to classrooms. If she doesn't like what
she sees, she won't hesitate to take over the teaching of a class. She says
there are two type of principals -- "office principals" and "classroom
principals" -- and she is hardly ever in her office.


ARTWRIGHT CAME TO BLAINE IN 1979. SHE WAS 41 AT the time, and a former teachers'
union organizer. She'd grown up in Coatesville, then an all-black town 37 miles
from Philadelphia, and in the projects of Pittsburgh's poor Hill District. Now
10 years later, she was, if anything, more determined to make a difference in
North Philadelphia, one of the nation's most devastated, drug-ridden inner-city
neighborhoods.

In this area, like so many other pockets of America, children grow up in a
violent poverty beyond what Americans have previously defined as poverty. If a
new web of support can begin to take hold here, it can be woven anywhere.

"All they have is us, you know, that they can really depend on," Cartwright says
in a rumbling voice so low it is difficult to hear. Then the volume and pitch
come up sharply. "We come every day so they can depend on us. I don't miss a day
for anything. I don't miss a day."

We are sitting in the spring of 1989 at a folding table in Blaine's
kitchen-cafeteria, next to a gyrating washing machine. Cartwright talks, hands
flat on the table, about growing up in the projects in Pittsburgh. "We didn't
just have poor people there," she recalls. "The rent was arranged according to
how much people made, so there were many, many role models. My mother always
worked. My sisters, when they were old enough to get a job, they had a job.
Everybody went to church. Some went to college."

Cartwright herself graduated from West Chester State Teachers College in 1959
and received a Master of Elementary Education degree from Antioch University's
Philadelphia branch in 1974. Her father held jobs as a steelworker and hospital
attendant; her mother worked as a domestic for wealthy families from the time
she was 11 years old until the day she died at 64. Cartwright's husband of 25
years, Earl Cartwright, is an eighth-grade teacher, also in the Philadelphia
school system. She has one daughter, Jill, now 20, and also helped raise her
brother's grandson, Tyrone, 13, whom she refers to as "my little boy."

Sometimes, Cartwright says, she thinks about a young girl from the old
Coatesville neighborhood named Fanny Q.

"When I was a girl, my clothes weren't always as clean as they should be," she
says. "It's difficult for children to wash. You can't wash your dress every day.
That's crazy! You couldn't wash your shirt every day. You couldn't! But I did
the best I could, and I kept the outer ones pretty good. There was this girl who
lived next door. Her name was Fanny Q. Can you imagine someone's name was Fanny
Q? Fanny didn't have a mother. She had a lot of disadvantages, many more than I
had. By the time I got to be 17, Fanny Q was still behind the eight ball. And
she'd remark about how nice my clothes were. And I'd say: 'Fanny Q, this skirt
cost me 49 cents. And you smoke cigarettes. If you didn't smoke those
cigarettes, you could take 49 cents and buy you one yard of material -- that's
all I got here, one yard of material.' And I said, 'I'll make you a skirt.' So
Fanny Q listened and talked, but she never did bring me the one yard of material
for 49 cents. She never had the kind of molding that it took to be successful.

"She was six feet tall, Fanny Q was, and 12 years old. One day in class the
principal said to her" -- Cartwright's voice booms -- " 'Fanny! You haven't been
to school in two weeks! How come you haven't been to school?' Fanny Q said, 'Mr.
Anderson, I don't have no shoes.'

"The principal says: 'You don't have no shoes? It's because your feet are so
big! You can borrow mine!' And the whole place just laughed, the kids were
falling out of their chairs. And I looked at that man, and I didn't laugh, and I
looked at Fanny Q and she just cried and cried. And I wondered how that man
could have said that to her. There's no way I'd treat a child like that."

Cartwright's eyes flash fire: "That principal inspired me. I said to myself that
the Fanny Q's in my school are going to get help, not ridicule. I'm tellin' you,
there's things you can do!

"What have these people got if they don't have us? One lady came to school and
told me somebody stole her front door." Cartwright laughs derisively. "Took the
door off the lady's house! A man sees this house, it's not in bad shape, just
needs a door. So he takes this lady's front door and puts it on his vacant
house. You go out and somebody steals your toilet while you're gone. I'm
serious!

"They took one woman's television. While she was sitting there watching, a man
walked right in, ripped it off. There was nothing she could do. The cops don't
protect her. If I were to call the cops, they would come right now because the
kids are in the school. See, they'd be afraid the newspapers would be here. But
let school be over at 4 o'clock, and I get a call from a house across the street
and a woman says, 'There's somebody beating me up,' and the cops ain't coming.
There's no help for these folks."

Many people in the neighborhood, the ones not making out in the drug trade, live
in the abandoned, burned-out houses surrounding the school, according to
Cartwright.

"Our parents move up the street, down the street, across the street," she says.
"Take a mother, she has one child. Welfare gives her $130 every two weeks, so
she's making $260 maximum from the welfare. Can she pay rent -- $250, $300 --
with that? So they just move and move. They live in these abandoned houses, no
running water, with an electric wire that came from next door to their house.
The kids take a two-liter soda container and go borrow water. That's how our
children live. Many of our children don't have addresses. They don't have
anything."

Cartwright shakes her head slowly. "The preachers and doctors and all the rest
of the black middle class that once set examples for children, those people are
all gone," she says. "I don't have enough working families to use as role
models. So my role models are my welfare families who take care of their
children, who keep a clean house, who keep the children dressed up, who send the
kids to school. Now I'm seeing these role models go right down the crack drain."


A FEW DAYS BEFORE my visit, a mother had walked into Madeline Cartwright's
office at Blaine and sat down. The woman, her hair in frizzed-out tufts and her
eyes bloodshot and bleary, had come to the principal's office because she didn't
know what to do about her son, who had died suddenly of a heart attack. She had
no money to bury her child. "She had nothing except a dead kid," says
Cartwright, who made phone calls, helped the woman fill out papers and then
arranged for the burial of one of her students.

"Another morning, a mother and four of her children were sitting at my desk,
waiting for me," Cartwright recalls. "The mother says, 'What do I do now, where
should I go?' Her daughter had died the day before. This girl, her brother shot
her. He's on drugs. Fifteen years old. Double-barrel shotgun. He pulled both
barrels. They were fighting with each other.

"I'd met this little girl in the sixth grade. Very hostile child, but she had an
inner good. After a while you can tell who's hard-core crazy, and who's just
surfacy crazy, and she was just surfacy. The mother asked me if I would go with
her to the undertaker to see the child, because she said she was not so sure
what her daughter would look like -- he'd shot her in the face. And she wanted
to make a decision as to whether she should have an open or closed casket, and
she wanted me to help her make that decision. So we went.

"The little girl didn't look like herself. But she wasn't grotesque. And the
casket, which we left open, was elaborate. How the mother could afford that, I
don't know, unless it was drug money."

Cartwright looked out the window at the schoolyard. It was recess time, and the
children were dashing across the asphalt.

"I had asked this mother if her girl could come spend the summer with me,
because I could see that there was nothing good in this kid's life. Nothing at
all. The mother said no, so I dropped it."

Just then the clothes washer behind us roared into another cycle. Not long after
she'd arrived at Blaine, Cartwright helped organize a raffle to buy a washer and
dryer for the school. She installed the appliance in the kitchen-cafeteria.
Every morning she and members of her staff personally washed the clothing of
many of the children. A Philadelphia chemical company supplied her with free
soap powder.

Cartwright maintains that this is the only way most of her schoolchildren will
ever know what it's like to have clean clothes. Her "little boy," Tyrone,
attended Blaine, and she washed his coat right along with the rest. "I never
washed his coat at home," she says. "I washed it right here so the others could
see that Tyrone missed recess too because his coat was still in the dryer.

"This is one of the things you can do to bring about a change. My kids look
good."

A few pupils, usually the offspring of dope dealers, come to school wearing $200
bomber jackets, designer jeans and gold chains. Cartwright washes their clothes,
too -- in the same load with the other kids' ragged clothing. "Just 'cause they
have fancy clothes doesn't mean their parents know how to wash 'em!," she says
softly, her eyes narrowing.

"I've seen youngsters good in the first grades, and then all of a sudden they're
gone. Won't do anything. I say, 'I'm going to call your mother.' They say: 'Call
my mother for what? She's on crack, what can she do?'

"When the mother is cracked out, this child sometimes becomes the head of the
household, feeding younger children. How you gonna tell them what to do when
they had to find food for their brothers and sisters yesterday? The mothers sell
the food stamps to buy drugs.

"This one boy, I washed him every day. He was from one of the ill-kempt
families; they all slept together, and wet each other. Every day I washed him
because he'd come to school smelling. Then one day, here was this child standing
there dressed up in a little suit. He was clean. He reaches in his pocket to buy
a bar of candy -- we had a candy sale that day -- and takes out a wad of money
and peels off a bill to buy a bar of candy for him and his sister. I said, 'Are
you dealing drugs?' He said, 'I'm not telling you.' He just smiled and left the
building.

"Out on the streets, kids 10, 12, 15, sell drugs. The drug pushers don't use
adults as runners, they use children. The dealers have double-barrel shotguns.
They keep the gun in the house so that if anything goes wrong with a drug deal,
they have protection from the drug supplier.

"Two weeks ago, this kid was killed -- drug pusher put a gun to his head and
shot him -- 13 years old. The dealers use these kids because you don't need bail
to get them out. The mother can get 'em out."

Cartwright has a strict rule forbidding students from carrying any significant
sums of money. She thinks it's an invitation to trouble. "I don't allow any
money in this building. We sell homework books for $1.25, and we sell pretzels
twice a week for 25", and that's it. If they bring money, they have no business
with that money and I'll take it. I don't give it back, just to the mother or
father. If a youngster's dealing drugs, he can't do it in this building."


CARTWRIGHT, MARCHING with her characteristic rolling gait, leads me down a
bright hallway to a classroom where the walls are freshly painted yellow. On the
teacher's desk sits a ceramic elephant, a Jesse Jackson for President button
fastened to it with a rubber band.

Cartwright tells the students, about 30 fourth graders, that I am writing a book
about what it's like to be a child in America today. With Cartwright looking
silently on, I ask the class my usual first question: Is childhood better or
worse today than when their parents were kids?

At first the answers are surprising.

"I think it's better now," one girl says. "The girls had to wear skirts to
school, and underalls, and we can wear pants."

Another girl says: "My grandma told me that back in those times they only paid
50 cents where she worked. Fifty cents a day."

What kind of work did she do?

"Clay potting," she replies. "She was back when Dr. Martin Luther King was
living."

A girl wearing cornrow braids disagrees. "I think it was better in those days
than these days because there wasn't so many drugs," she says.

She is a pretty, delicate-looking girl, with big eyes and a tiny voice that is
strangely fierce. "It wasn't so trashy in the neighborhoods like now," she says.

A girl wearing a clean white pullover raises her hand. "In my life, I see that
if you get hooked on drugs too bad, you could faint or die," she says.

A little boy chimes in: "I have three uncles that's on drugs. One of them is on
pot, another one has a drinking problem, the other one will try anything. My
mother and my grandmother, they're trying to quit. I keep telling my uncles to
stop 'cause it will mess up their brains, and they won't be able to think right.
I don't think they listen to me."

The girl with the cornrows adds, "On my block they got cocaine capsules all
around the ground and the dirt."

She speaks so quietly I have to bend over to hear her. "My friend, she was 9,
picked up one of the capsules," she says. "She put it on her tongue and she
swallowed it and then she went in the house and got some water. When she came
out, she started spitting out white and red blood. Then she died."

"In front of you?"

"She just fell out on the street."

The girl looks down at the desk and doesn't look up again for a long time.

Other students tell how when they walk to school each day, their shoes crunch
empty crack capsules, how they must pass crack houses and groups of young men
selling dope on the corners. They tell how they had to watch their favorite
candy store go up in flames after, as one child describes it, "some men argued,
and they had a bag of cocaine and they were pulling on it and then one man took
out this pouch of gasoline, and then he took a lighter and lit it." Another in
the class tells how one of the men had gone crazy one night, and "he raped his
girl, and her baby died 'cause it fell on the back of his head. In glass."

"You saw this happen?"

"Yes."

They see it all happen, growing up in a real-life living-room war.

One boy talks about his cousin, Anthony, who sells drugs. Anthony, he says, is
10 years old. "He delivers 'em for his dad." he explains. "He steals stuff from
people, like coats. He sells the coats to get money and then takes it to his
dad. He stole three watches from me. One time he stole my bike to deliver drugs.
He took my bike to a drug house."

Another boy starts to tell his story. "There's this boy named Tyson that live
down the street from my grandma," he says. "He shot hisself in the stomach."

Cartwright, who'd been quiet up to now, picks up the plot line. "Tyson was
selling drugs," she says. "When the supplier came for the money, he didn't have
it, so rather than taking a chance that the supplier would shoot him, he shot
himself. Tyson went to this school. He was a quiet youngster, always dressed
very well."

All but three in the class can claim someone in their family who's doing drugs.

I ask them what they think about adults in general.

"Even if they do drugs, I've got respect for 'em," one of the girls says. "I
know that they have a problem. I see some boys today throwing rocks at them.
They don't got no respect. I just say, they still people, they human beings,
they have a problem and they need some help."


ON THE WAY BACK to the principal's office, I tell Cartwright how shaken I was by
the tales of horror her fourth graders told, how moved I was by their
compassion. In spite of everything, there is something still alive, deep in
their eyes. Childhood.

Cartwright nods but says nothing for a few moments. Kids are trailing her down
the hall like baby chicks. Then, in a soft voice, she relates an incident that
had happened a few months earlier. One morning on their way to school, a group
of her students had seen a man standing on a front porch holding his wife's
severed head in his hand, holding it up to show them like a trophy. The man had
killed his wife during an argument over who would take care of the kids.

"But they're still children," Cartwright says adamantly. "Still children."

And yet by fifth or sixth grade, Cartwright admits, she sees childhood beginning
to leave their eyes. And something else moves in.

Every day Cartwright tries to face the pervasive element of fear squarely, tries
to face it down. Early on, she determined that Blaine was biologically the heart
of this neighborhood, and as long as that heart beat cleanly, then the body
around it had a chance to survive. On the night after she'd arrived in the
neighborhood, someone broke into the school and stole television sets, record
players and basketballs.

"Next morning," she recalls, "I went right down to the street corner and told
these young men: 'Somebody broke in last night and here's a list of what was
stolen, and I'm the new principal, and I got a new Cadillac sitting right there
in front of the school. See it? The payment on that Cadillac is $275 a month. I
can't pay my car bill if I lose this job. How am I gonna look, first day on the
job, if I got to call the superintendent and tell him somebody broke in?
Whatever's in that building, if you want to use it, you let me know.' "

Cartwright says all the stolen property was returned the next day. "And they
have never broken into this building and taken out anything since," she says.

She points at a basketball court on the school grounds, where some young men are
out thump, thump, thumping the ball. "When I order basketballs for the school, I
throw them a couple," she says. "They borrow stuff -- record players,
microphones -- and they bring them back. I say to them and I say to my students:
'You may never own property anywhere else, but you own this school. This is
yours.' "


EVERY MORNING MADeline Cartwright arrives early at Blaine so she can answer the
office phone herself. "I read that a principal in Glassboro, N.J., improved
attendance 15 percent because he answered the phone," she says, between bites of
a takeout hoagie in her office. "So I started answering the phone. I say, 'Good
morning, this is the Blaine School, this is Madeline Cartwright.' They hang
right up. Two, three minutes later, phone rings again. 'Good morning, this is
Blaine School and still Madeline Cartwright.' Hang right up. Next time the phone
rang, I said: 'Good morning, this is Mrs. Cartwright. If you're going to take
off today, you have to talk to me. You either talk to me or you come to school,
simple as that.' "

She points the hoagie at me. "This school is the only thing these kids can
depend on. I tell these teachers, 'As old as I am, you haven't had any disease I
haven't had, so you come to school, no matter what.' Snap! Teacher broke her
leg, wanted six weeks off. No way I'm going to have that! So I said to her,
'I'll come and get you and I'll put you in a wheelchair and I'll roll you to
class.' I say: 'You can write halfway up the blackboard. Guys came back from
Vietnam who didn't have any legs and they worked every day. Same as teachers.
You've got just one broken leg and you want to stay home?'

"When I rolled that lady down that hall in a wheelchair, the word went through
the school the new principal's crazy. Best thing I ever did."

One of the most important accomplishments of Cart wright's reign at Blaine was
getting parents involved in the school. She did this through the students
themselves, enlisting them to recruit their own mothers and fathers, as well
through contacts in the community at large. It is hard for any parent to resist
her arm-twisting, or to avoid being enveloped by her warmth. At her first
parents' meeting, The Philadelphia Inquirer reported, "the parents were
spellbound and the teachers were dumbfounded by the size of the crowd, the first
sign that things were changing."

"I told them this was my first school, and I came from the same circumstances
they came from, and the sky is the limit," she recalls. "I told 'em I was there
to help them take their kids as far as they could go. I said, 'Nobody apologizes
for me being raggedy when I was a little kid, so I don't apologize for my
Cadillac.' I told them I had to have the job to keep up the payments on the
Cadillac, and I could only keep the job as long as they helped me keep it.

I tell her I'm surprised by Blaine's physical appearance inside, its clean,
freshly painted walls and waxed, shiny floors. So many poor and middle-class
schools around the nation send this message to children: you aren't worth a coat
of paint.

"When I came in, this place was black as soot," Cartwright says, pointing an
accusing finger at a wall. I told the parents: 'This place is dirty! How can
your kids go to school in a place like this?' One of the parents said, 'You must
think you're in the suburbs.' She expected her neighborhood to be dirty. I said
to her: 'The dirt in the suburbs is the same dirt that's in North Philadelphia
-- if you don't move it. And the same detergents work here. We're going to clean
this building this summer. Raise your hands if I can depend on you. Keep your
hands up! Somebody get their names!'

"After that, 18 parents showed up here in their jeans and sneakers and rubber
gloves. And we started to clean this building. We cleaned it, and cleaned it
good. I made these parents know that you don't accept anything less than that
which is right because you live in North Philadelphia.

"The problem with parents in this kind of area is they feel threatened. And also
many of us, as educators, don't realize the real worth of parents. We went
through a period in the late 60's and 70's when Federal programs demanded parent
participation. We put them on the payroll. Then we had the problem of having to
have input from parents who really were not capable of giving quality input, so
we started pushing them back. But with the right parents involved, you have a
better school, because teachers know the eye of the community is on them.

"Parents come to the yard in the morning to supervise. They help line up the
children. They help supervise the hallways. They volunteer in the classrooms.
They help fix the food, help decorate, bring in used clothes and do the wash.
Everybody is involved in the washing.

"Today my auditorium is overflowing with parents. I make the children bring
them. I say: 'You must bring your mother or father. Your parents have to know
what is going on here.' I give the students a doughnut or a pretzel the next day
if their mother came. Now pretzels cost me nine and a half cents. Very cheap.

"I'm telling you there's things you can do. I tell the children: 'All the things
that look like big problems to you are not big problems to adults. You can't
even think of a problem that I can't solve. So if you're having a problem, come
to me and I'll solve it for you.'

"And I also tell the parents: 'If you are having problems, you come to me. I can
direct you to a place to solve these problems. If you've moved and you don't
know how to get your electricity going or your telephone on, come to me.' And
they do. They come. If parents are to be interviewed for a job, they come in
here for mock interviews. Parents come in and they feel at home, that's the
first thing. We have a parents' program where we pay them to come. They work as
hall monitors, teachers aides, whatever we ask them to do. We give them $250
through a Federal program, and they come five times a week for 10 weeks, to
volunteer in the classroom. But many of them keep coming long after the 10 weeks
are over.

"My children are less abused because the parents around here know if they send
that child to school dirty, that's neglect. I'm going to clean that child up.
And I'm going to ask that mother, 'Why is this child dirty?' I'm not going to
let it go. They know that these kids tell me everything. And when these children
tell me they've been hurt, I talk to the parents. call them in. I don't go
sneaking to call the child-abuse hot line, afraid to use my name. I call the
parent and say, 'This child looks to me to be abused, so I'm going to call the
child-abuse hot line, and when they come, you'll know I sent them.'

"And if a child isn't coming to school, I'll go into a home and bring kids out.
I will! Sometimes I'm scared to go by myself, so I take a lady friend. One time
we went down and we knocked on this door, and here stood this man, and he's
talking to this little 14-year-old girl at the door. I said to the little girl,
'Where's your mother?' She said, 'I don't know.' So I said to the man, 'Who are
you? What are you saying to a 14-year-old girl?' He kind of got quiet, and I
came into the house. I didn't find the mother. I found another girl, 16, and
another man. And two little kids.

"This place was cruddy. I mean beyond anything I could ever imagine for little
children to live in. The kitchen was a hot plate sitting on a drain board. I saw
no refrigerator. There was no running water and no electricity, There were dirty
dishes, food caked in piles, the bathroom had a bedspread wrapped around the
bottom of the toilet. And the toilet was full to the brim with human waste. To
the brim. And a little girl had one foot on one side of the toilet, and one foot
on the other, and she squatted over this toilet while she used it, and it was
seeping over the sides.

"So I said to the man, 'You're gonna help. You got a snake at your house? A
plumber's snake? Can you go get it?' He said, 'You can't get no snake in there.'
I said: 'Yes, you can. I'll get it started and you'll finish it.' I took a
plastic container, maybe Reddi Wip or something, and we got buckets from the
school, and we dug this mess out of this toilet and took it to a vacant lot.
While we were in that apartment, we scrubbed the floors, took all the dirty
clothes out, all the sheets off the beds, brought them back to the school,
washed them up. And we left food for dinner, from our school lunch.

"The mother came home to a clean house and clean children. This lady had gotten
so far behind the eight ball, she didn't even know where to go to get out."

Cartwright looks out at the playground again, and at the trash-filled lots
beyond. "Sometimes, I wonder what happened to Fanny Q," she says suddenly. "Her
sister, I know, was finally locked up. But I don't know whatever happened to
Fanny Q."


THE WEEK I VISITED Blaine I also spoke with the officers of the Philadelphia
Home and School Association, a parent-teacher organization. It had occurred to
me that schools would do well to adopt what might be called "The Cartwright Do
It Now" program. School principals and teachers would be required to come up
with a laundry list of goals that could be accomplished right now, that would
not cost a lot of money, the kind of goals that Madeline Cartwright had set for
her school -- recruiting parent volunteers, making sure her students and her
school were clean, swooping down on troubled homes.

The underlying premise would be, we can't wait for a great American educational
revolution or a messiah in Washington. The clock moves too quickly in the
children's time zone. We've got to do what we can now, with the tools we have
available now.

I ask several officials of the parent-teacher organization if The Cartwright Do
It Now approach might work in their schools?

The response is silence. A long silence.

"Well, yeah, we think it could work. . . ."

But then they immediately start to talk about all the bureaucratic obstacles in
the way: "But you'd run into this problem, and then you'd run into that problem.
. . ."

Cartwright's reaction, when I describe this scene, is: "I tell my staff: 'Don't
tell me what I can't do. I can do something if I want to. It can happen. It's
like people say to me, 'You cannot wash this child's clothes.' I say: 'I have a
problem, and I have a solution. I am going to take off this child's clothes, put
'em in the washing machine and give him some clean clothes to put on. I can do
that."

This fall, Madeline Cartwright was rewarded for her years of problem-solving by
being given an even more difficult job. In September, Philadelphia school
officials reassigned her as principal of FitzSimons Middle School, seven blocks
from Blaine. Middle-school students are naturally tougher and less manageable,
and the transition, Cartwright says, has been "hard, very hard." Still,
Cartwright expresses her usual confidence that once she gets settled in she'll
be able to repeat her successes at Blaine. Her immediate goal is to rally
parental involvement in the school, which at the outset was nearly nonexistent.
"You come to FitzSimons in a year and see what it's like," she told me a few
weeks ago.

Cartwright continues to dream of "infiltrating the neighborhood with role
models." She wants the state of Pennsylvania to set up what she calls "mentor
houses" -- move salvageable families, mothers and children, into vacant houses
in better neighborhoods, and appoint, even pay, families "with the right kind of
values" to watch out for them. "I'd like to be a mentor," she says.

"There are vacant houses on my street," Cartwright had said during my visit last
year. "It's a good street I live on. I could bring some of these troubled
families into my neighborhood, and then agree to watch out for them. I could
co-sign with the mothers to get those food stamps, and we could go shop with the
food stamps, and when they get their money for their children, I could help them
budget their money, so they could pay for the electricity and the gas, and keep
those kids clean so they'd be proud of themselves. These mentors would have to
be people who are not afraid to get their hands dirty. And why not pay these
mentoring families, say, several thousand dollars a year?

"I have a little girl in mind right this minute. I think about her all the time.
I guess I'd have a stroke or something if anything happened to her. She's a very
pretty girl. And I say that because that's a disadvantage in this area. The
pretty ones are preyed upon first.

"I've talked to a lot of people about this idea of mentor houses. I talked to a
lady who takes care of old people, and she began to tell me this zoning business
you have to have, the fire regulations you have to have, but I'll work all that
out."

Cartwright escorted me out across Blaine's playground. The kids ran up, dozens
of them reaching for her, grabbing her, hugging her. I could see the basketball
players across the asphalt. They turned and watched, and one of them rolled the
ball slowly in his hands. Cartwright said she knew that a couple of them were
purse-snatchers. She insisted on walking me out to my car. She wanted to make
sure I got there safely.


I DRIVE OUT OF NORTH Philly, past vast lots where the garbage is knee-deep,
where every square foot of every flat surface is covered with graffiti, past
beautiful old buildings with windows and doors covered with plywood or steel
plates, past men urinating in the gutters; then into a more populated zone, past
a corner store called the People's Pharmacy, past signs crusted over with rust,
past a 24-hour auto-repair shop lighted up like a prison and surrounded by razor
wire.

The faces of Madeline Cartwright's fourth graders rise now through my
windshield, with the childhood still in their eyes. And then turning down Broad
Street, I see Philadelphia's City Hall, its statue of William Penn on top
silhouetted against the late afternoon sun. And I wonder, can one person alone
make a difference? Yet isn't this the way the new web begins -- with strong
individuals spinning out their strands of dreams?

Maybe Madeline Cart wright's dreams are naive, maybe not. But they do make a
kind of mathematical sense: one safe and clean school, one set of clean clothes,
one clean toilet, one safe house -- and then another safe school . . . and
another . . . and another.

"I'm tellin' you, there's things you can do!"

NAME: Madeline Cartwright

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Madeline Cartwright, principal of FitzSimons Middle School in
Philadelphia, demands "acceptable" explanations from students who are late.
Abandoned buildings, at left, are just a block and a half away.
"I'm tellin' you," says Principal Cartwright, "there's things you can do!" Left:
Laying down the law to a middle- school student who was overheard threatening
another student. Greeting mothers and fathers during a parents' night at the
school; breaking the tension with a student and his mother who had come in to
discuss the boy's poor performance; hugging students at the Blaine elementary
school; disciplining a student who was found in the hallway without a pass.
(Photographs by Chester Higgins Jr.); Cover: Madeline Cartwright, pricipal of
FitzSimons Niddle School in Philadelphia, helps a student with his schedule.
(Chester Higgins for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Publishing;
Books Go East and, Maybe, Profits Go West

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section D; Page 8; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 906 words


FARRAR, STRAUS & GIROUX has long published books by authors from the Soviet
Union and Eastern Europe. But with censorship and other barriers to book
publishing toppling in the region, the house recently added what are known as
subagents in Berlin and Belgrave, Yugoslavia.

Like many other publishers, Farrar Straus sees great potential in a region of
almost 400 million people, a new and potentially rich market, at a time when
book companies are feeling squeezed in their established markets. In addition,
as foreign publishers are increasingly drawn to the United States for growth,
their American counterparts are also aiming to become global companies.

"Many of our books are now being published in Poland, Hungary and Yugoslavia,"
said Roger W. Straus, president of the company. "And I just signed a whole lot
of Russian contracts, including three for Isaac Bashevis Singer."

Those books are being published in translation, but for the time being the
biggest opportunity for most American publishers may be in educational and
reference books in English.

Because Eastern European nations are still mired in bureaucracy and confusion
and have obsolete printing equipment, few American publishers anticipate big
profits for at least half a dozen years. But those who are looking to the East
say it is important to establish a presence as soon as possible, both to get to
know the market and to be in a position to teach American publishing methods.

Thus, Bantam Books, which last year began selling books in Hungary, shipped
English-language paperbacks to bookstores in Czechoslovakia earlier this month.
Now it has its sights set on Poland, Romania and Bulgaria.

A few months ago, Simon & Schuster signed a co-publishing agreement with
Novotrade Ltd., Hungary's leading publisher and distributor, and it is
contemplating similar agreements in other Eastern European countries. Novotrade
will distribute a wide range of English-language books. Many titles will be
translated into Hungarian and then co-published in Belgrade by Novotrade and
Simon & Schuster.

And the University of Nebraska Press has been helping to establish a publishing
program at Charles University in Prague, in part by prevailing on Apple
Computer-Europe to donate three Macintosh computers and then sending people from
Nebraska to teach how to use them.

Dan Ross, the assistant director of the Nebraska Press, said the program was
undertaken with no expectation of repayment or reward. But Nebraska is now
exploring the possibilities of co-publishing and translation rights.


Publishing executives expect the book traffic with the Soviet Union and Eastern
Europe will continue to be overwhelmingly West to East, meaning that Americans
will sell far more books to the region than they will buy from it. "My sense is
that the best books, especially the best literature, may already have come to us
from Eastern Europe," said Drenka Willen, who edits the books under the Helen
and Kurt Wolff literary imprint at Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

But two recent deals suggest that the potential exists for more books from the
East than some publishers had anticipated.

Presidio Press of Novato, Calif., which specializes in military history, has
signed contracts with high-ranking Soviet military officers for 4 books and has
options on 15 more. "To my knowledge, nothing has come out of the Soviet Union
written by their military, for consumption in the West," said Robert V. Kane,
the publisher of Presidio.

The books include "The Afghan Syndrome," which will tell the story of the
Afghanistan war from the Soviet point of view, and "Alien Wars," which will
describe Soviet military assistance to Egypt and Syria in their wars against
Israel, as well as assistance to North Korea and North Vietnam.

Norman Ross Publishing Inc., a New York publisher of research and reference
materials, announced a joint venture with the A. M. Gorky Institute of World
Literature of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. The institute will create
microfilm and microfiche masters from its own collections and from the
collections of other Soviet archives, which Ross will publish and distribute
worldwide. The two will also co-publish a series of bibliographies and reference
books.

But before American publishers begin counting their profits from Eastern Europe,
they need only recall how their high expectations for sales to China collapsed
under Beijing's repressive policies and the frustration of trying to deal with a
mammoth, stifling bureaucracy.

Nevertheless, Peter B. Kaufman, the founder of Pubwatch, a nonprofit
organization that coordinates Western help to publishers in Eastern and Central
Europe, thinks that some American publishers are still not prepared for the
frustrations they will encounter in Eastern Europe.

"There are all kinds of obstacles in dealing with countries where until recently
books were censored and the Governments had a monopoly on publishing, printing,
distribution and sales," he said.

Those obstacles include obsolete printing presses, archiac distribution systems
and what Mr. Kaufman described as "oppressive copyright laws put on the books in
the early 1950's." Moreover, few of those countries are able to pay in hard
currency.

"They're making progress on that," Mr. Kaufman said. "But while waiting to get
their money repatriated, American publishers might want to make contacts and
wave the company flag."

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Some in the Military Are Now Resisting Combat

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1102 words


The volunteer army gave many young people job skills, but the prospect of war in
the Middle East has given some of them second thoughts, and dozens -- the
numbers are disputed -- have tried to avoid their obligation by declaring
themselves conscientious objectors.

Since troops were sent to Saudi Arabia, anti-war advocates say, they have heard
from several hundred people trying to get out of combat duty or out of the
service altogether by pleading personal hardship or a moral objection to active
duty.

Last week five members of a Marine Corps Reserve company in the Bronx declared
that they were seeking discharges as conscientious objectors.

The Pentagon says fewer than 100 of 80,000 reservists and National Guard members
and more than 230,000 regular troops have tried to get out of their obligation.

Employer of Last Resort

Unlike most conscientious objectors of the Vietnam War era, who were draftees,
today's would-be objectors are in the military because they volunteered, which
weakens any claim that they are morally opposed to fighting. But some are
pressing the claim that they are hardly different from draftees, that they
volunteered for the military only because they were forced to -- that, for them,
it was the employer of last resort, the only way that they could find the money,
skills, discipline or even friendship that they needed.

The chances of getting into combat seemed so remote that they did not wrestle
with their consciences about military violence until war loomed in the Persian
Gulf, they argue.

"That does not lessen their obligation," said a public-affairs officer for the
Pentagon, Maj. Doug Hart. "That's a possibility that is obvious and clear to
these people in the training they do. That's the nature of the business."

Anti-war advocates said they had heard from a cross section of callers ranging
from young soldiers who enlisted only because they wanted pay and skills to
those who had soured on the military and those who were critical of the Bush
Administration's handling of the crisis.

Bracing for an Increase

The advocates said more people opposed to going on active duty would emerge if
the current buildup erupted into a shooting war.

Michael Marsh, a counselor at the War Resisters League, a pacifist group founded
in 1923, estimated that "several hundred people" had filed conscientious
objector claims. He based his estimate on the 30 people he was counseling and on
conversations he had had with his counterparts at similar organizations.

Before the buildup, he said, his group received about one call every two months
from someone seeking to leave the military.

Sam Lwin, a college student who is a lance corporal in the Marine Corps Reserve,
said he had sought Mr. Marsh's help when he realized that in conscience he could
not serve in the military at all. Mr. Lwin, who is assigned to the 25th Marine
Regiment at Fort Schuyler in the Bronx, which is scheduled to go to Camp Lejeune
for training today, said he joined the reserves nearly three years ago both for
the extra benefits and for a chance to repay his country.

"I thought I would serve my country to protect it from anyone invading it, but I
realized the United States Government has been invading every country on earth,"
said Mr. Lwin, a cheerful, 21-year-old man who was born to a Buddhist family in
Myanmar and says he has recently returned to his religious roots. "Violence
cannot serve as a solution to any problems."

'Difficult to Misunderstand'

Four other members of Mr. Lwin's reserve company have joined him in seeking
discharges. "I remember asking the recruiter if we would ever be shipped out to
war, and he said 'No, you can volunteer if you want,' " said Colin Bootman, a
reservist in an infantry platoon. "Stupid me, I believed him."

Capt. Jeffrey Willis, inspector-instructor with the Marine Corps Reserve at Fort
Schuyler, described the men seeking conscientious objector status as average
marines who "did what was expected of them" previously and said it was unusual
for them to want out of the military several years after they had signed up. "We
made no bones about what we do for a living and what we trained for," he said.
"It's difficult to misunderstand what the purpose of the Marine Corps is."

The president of a local chapter of New Jersey Veterans for Peace, David Cline,
said that even among soldiers on active duty, there was the worry that the
decision to send troops overseas had been neither sufficiently debated nor
justified.

"I went to Vietnam to fight for freedom and democracy," said Mr. Cline, who was
shot twice during the war. "They can't tell these kids that they're making the
world safe for feudalism and the monarchy in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait."

Screening and Interviews

Finding out where to go for advice on how to resist the call-up can be
difficult. Mr. Marsh of the War Resisters League said callers had found their
way to him by first calling churches that their parents had remembered as
centers of resistance in the 1960's, or calling the American Civil Liberties
Union, or in one case the environmental group Greenpeace.

Once contact is made with a group like his, a screening interview determines if
there are sufficient grounds to proceed with an application for conscientious
objector status. Once the application is submitted to military authorities, the
applicant must be interviewed by a psychologist, a chaplain and an investigator.
A decision takes about two months.

Not all seek discharges; some wish only to be transferred into such noncombat
roles as medics or clerks.

"There are all kinds of reasons you can be opposed to killing, but it might not
keep you from going to the desert -- it might keep you from fighting," said
Peter Zastrow, a national coordinator for Vietnam Veterans Against the War.

Different Ways to Resist

He added that those who could not claim conscientious-objector status could try
to get out of their commitment by claiming hardship as an only son or by
charging that the recruiter had made false promises during enlistment.

Mr. Zastrow, a captain with the First Air Cavalry in Vietnam in the late 1960's,
said the current generation of soldiers was reacting with greater shock to the
prospect of war.

"We're talking about kids young enough to have missed Vietnam altogether and
have never seen U.S. military involvement in anything more than a lark like
Grenada or Panama," he said.

That shock may not be enough to help them find a way out of their enlistment
agreement. "It's a binding contract," Major Hart said.

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Violence cannot serve as a solution to any problems," said Sam
Lwin, foreground, a student at the New School for Social Research who is seeking
a discharge as a lance corporal in the Marine CorpsReserve. Fellow students
stood behind him at the 25th Marine Regiment at Fort Schuyler in the Bronx.
(Susan Harris for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

ABROAD AT HOME;
Democracy in the Way?

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 736 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


As President Bush intensifies the threat of war on Iraq, we are hearing
complaints that criticism of that policy spoils its chance of success. Saddam
Hussein would take the threat more seriously, that is, if Americans would
silently support it.

The President himself is said to have complained about Senate critics of his
turn toward war. The Senate Armed Services and Foreign Relations Committees open
hearings on policy in the Persian Gulf this week, and the Administration is
unenthusiastic about that.

The case against open debate of the war policy has been made with candor by a
defense specialist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Barry R. Posen.
Writing in The Boston Globe, Professor Posen said:

"Since the President cannot want war, his purpose must be to frighten Saddam
Hussein to leave Kuwait. This is coercive diplomacy, and its success depends on
the ability of the United States to persuade Saddam that the coalition has the
capability and the will to recapture Kuwait.

"Unfortunately, the multiple voices of American democracy make this very
difficult. . . . Debate can only reduce the odds of success."

In other words, democracy is inconvenient. It is a familiar lament, heard at
many points in American history. Is it true?

President Bush's war-like rhetoric is no doubt intended to frighten Saddam
Hussein out of Kuwait without war. The democratic leaders who visited the gulf
over Thanksgiving, the Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, and Speaker
Thomas Foley, came back saying that the war talk was still just that: talk, not
a decision to attack.

But it is not only talk. Threats are empty unless there is an intention to carry
them out if talk fails.

When Mr. Bush early this month ordered up to 200,000 more Americans to the gulf,
he moved into a scenario that must involve a real possibility of war. The huge
U.S. force cannot stay in the gulf indefinitely. If "coercive diplomacy" does
not move Saddam Hussein within a few months, there will be mounting pressure to
use that force.

The President had to know that he was setting out on the path to war when he
decided to raise the troop commitment to such a high level. He had to weigh
fateful questions.

What was wrong with the previous policy of grinding Iraq down by economic
sanctions? Was there doubt that Americans, or our allies, would have the
patience for a long siege?

How would a war be fought? How many American casualties could be expected? What
vital U.S. interest would be vindicated?

What would be the consequences of a war? How stable would pro-Western Arab
governments prove to be? Might Israel be threatened?

Those and many other questions would have to be considered before any American
President set his country on the road to war in an area as tricky as the Middle
East. But we do not know what advice Mr. Bush got, or how he finally answered
the questions. He has told us nothing about the reasons that made him shift to a
policy of threatening war.

We are asked to take the President's policy on faith. We must believe, for
example, that a war with Iraq would be relatively easy -- that U.S. casualties
would be low.

But a large and growing number of Americans do not believe. They are not willing
to go to war in the Persian Gulf on the President's unexplained say-so. Women
especially have doubts: a fascinating point that is not adequately reflected in
establishment comment and television talk shows.

Is it a weakness of the system if Americans refuse to follow a President blindly
into war? I do not think so. Experience supports what Senator Bob Kerrey,
Democrat of Nebraska, who won the Medal of Honor in Vietnam, said on Sept. 19:

"Policy makers in the United States dare not delude themselves into thinking
that we do not need to debate what we are doing [in the gulf] and to state our
disagreements where they exist. A failure to do this -- a simple and blind
acceptance of everything the President as Commander in Chief does -- will lead
to bad policy and the potential loss of clear public support for what we are
doing."

Presidents have to lead. But they must suffer public debate because it tests the
wisdom of their policy. That is our constitutional system, and it has outlasted
most of the others on earth.

"Democracy is the worst form of government," Winston Churchill said, "except all
those other forms that have been tried from time to time."

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Baker Is Right About 'Jobs' . . .

BYLINE: By Robert Eisner; Robert Eisner is professor of economics at
Northwestern University.

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 445 words

DATELINE: EVANSTON, Ill.


Secretary of State James Baker has introduced a curious new rationale for our
changing Persian Gulf policies: jobs. "An economic recession worldwide, caused
by the control by one nation -- one dictator if you will -- of the West's
economic lifeline will result in the loss of jobs for American citizens," the
Secretary tells us.

Well, whatever the public relations appeal he anticipates in using this
argument, the economics are essentially wrong. Far from saving jobs, the
Administration's new "offensive option" will threatens more job losses and
deepening recession.

With the gulf crisis, as we all know, crude oil rose in price from $18 a barrel
to as high as $40 before settling at about $30 a barrel. This price rise
contributes to a recession by draining off consumer purchasing power.

The joker is that oil prices rose not so much in response to the brutal invasion
of Kuwait itself but because of the threat of general war in the region.

The invasion of Kuwait and the consequent sanctions cut off only a small portion
of the world's supply of oil, an amount that Saudi Arabia readily made up. War,
however, threatens the wholesale destruction of oil installations and a possibly
long-term interruption of oil supplies.

Dictator he certainly is, and a pretty mean one at that. But Saddam Hussin is
hardly a lunatic. He did not go for Kuwait's oil -- nor would he want Saudi
Arabia's, for that matter -- to drink it or pour it into the sea.

Any dictator controlling a significant amount of oil would want to sell it for
the best possible price. Too high a price would throw the world into recession,
cutting demand, and would spur a search for substitutes. A number of Western
analysts have calculated that the optimum price for Saddam Hussein, if he could
control the oil, would be about $25 a barrel.

Now $25 a barrel is significantly more than the $18 a barrel before the Kuwait
invasion. But it is still much less in real terms than what we were paying a
decade ago -- not the stuff of recession.

There is one saving grace to our military escalation, which is already
threatening to cost $30 billion a year. All that Government spending, which so
many want to reduce, would pour into the economy.

Between the people "employed" in the armed forces, those working in expanded
defense industries and those using wartime incomes to purchase goods from our
nonmilitary companies, the unemployment rate would decline. It is now close to 6
percent, compared with 1 percent in World War II and about 3 percent during the
Vietnam War.

If that is what Mr. Baker has in mind, he may be right after all that our policy
is aimed at saving jobs.

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Law Professors Demand War-Making Limits

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 613 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 26


A group of 11 of the country's most prominent law professors across a wide
ideological range filed a brief today urging a Federal judge to rule that
President Bush may not go to war against Iraq unless he receives the explicit
permission of Congress.

The brief was submitted as part of a suit brought last week by 45 Democratic
Congressmen, mostly liberals, who are asking District Judge Harold H. Greene to
issue an order that it would be unconstitutional for the President to initiate a
war against Iraq without Congressional approval.

The brief filed by the legal scholars may have provided an important boost to
the Congressional suit and given it new legitimacy by making the issue appear
less of a straightforward partisan challenge. The suit is scheduled to be heard
before Judge Greene on Dec. 4 in Federal District Court in Washington.

The Justice Department has argued that President Bush has fulfilled his
constitutional obligations by consulting with Congress throughout the military
buildup in the gulf.

 Sole Power to Declare War

 In their 13-page brief, the law professors contend that the Constitution
clearly and unequivocally vests Congress alone with the authority to declare
war. Moreover, they argue that Federal judges are obliged to rule on such issues
and cannot avoid them by asserting that they are political disputes between the
two other branches of government.

How much of a role Congress should have in a President's decision to use combat
troops abroad has been a vexing issue since the founding of the republic.
Article 1 of the Constitution provides that Congress shall declare war.
Historians say that Presidents have dispatched troops into combat situations 130
to 200 times while Congress has only declared war on five occasions.

Harold H. Koh, a professor at Yale Law School, who initiated the effort to
present a consensus of legal scholars on the issue, said that those signing the
brief wanted to demonstrate that "you could hold different views about politics
but share a similar view about the Constitution."

Professor Koh declined to discuss how the brief was prepared, but one of the
signers said that there was an intense amount of negotiation among the
professors, some of whom insisted they would not sign unless it included legal
scholars who are either prominently conservative or identified with a philosophy
of judicial restraint.

In that category are Philip B. Kurland of the University of Chicago; Erwin N.
Griswold, a former dean at the Harvard Law School and former Solicitor General
under President Richard M. Nixon; Gerald Gunther of Stanford, and John Hart Ely,
a former dean at Stanford Law School, who signed the brief.

 List of Signers

The other signers, besides Professor Koh are Professors Louis Henkin of Columbia
University; William Van Alstyne of Duke Law School; Laurence H. Tribe of
Harvard; Abram Chayes of Harvard, a former State Department legal adviser; Lori
Fisler Damrosch of Columbia, and Bruce Ackerman of Yale.

The brief argues that by giving Congress the power to declare war, the nation's
founders wanted to prevent an individual from rushing into war.

During the Vietnam War, courts were deeply reluctant to become involved in
similar disputes between Congress and the President. In the Vietnam War,
appellate judges cited the 1964 Gulf of Tonkin resolution as the functional
equivalent of a declaration of war; the resolution empowered President Lyndon B.
Johnson to defend American forces against Vietnamese aggression.

The courts also noted that Congress continued to finance the war, undercutting
the argument that it was carried on without consent.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

How to Let Arab States Work It Out With Iraq

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 602 words


To the Editor:

What has been peculiar about the debate on President Bush's decision to send
additional troops to the Persian Gulf to provide an "offensive capability"
(front page, Nov. 9) is that it has been (1) an argument over means rather than
goals, and (2) little attention has been given to the effectiveness of other
means.

For example, former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and former Under
Secretary George Ball on the Nov. 13 "MacNeil-Lehrer Newshour," both assumed
that the goal should be to force Iraq out of Kuwait, and devoted their arguments
to the means for accomplishing that goal.

But only a brief glance at how the situation arose shows how unrealistic such a
goal is. A few days before the Iraqi attack on Kuwait, Saddam Hussein called in
the United States Ambassador to Iraq, April C. Glaspie. He repeated his
complaints that Kuwait had violated the agreements of the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries on oil supplies and prices, and that Kuwait had
stolen Iraqi oil by tapping deposits on the Iraqi side of the border. Also
clearly on his mind were the boundaries of Kuwait, fixed by Britain in 1923 in
such a way as to deny Iraq a port on the gulf.

Ms. Glaspie, acting on instructions, replied that the United States had "no
opinion" on Arab versus Arab conflicts like Iraq's border dispute with Kuwait.
Ms. Glaspie later conceded that President Hussein undoubtedly understood this to
be a green light for settling his differences with Kuwait by force.

If President Hussein now withdraws under the threat of military action or the
actuality of sanctions, it will mean the end of his rule and most likely the end
of his life, as well.

On the question of means, Mr. Kissinger approved of President Bush's decision to
deploy more troops because it would increase the pressure on Saddam Hussein. He
then went on to say that an attack might still be necessary -- and soon. Mr.
Ball argued that the pressure should be economic sanctions, and they should be
given time, even a year or more.

If the attack that Mr. Kissinger has in mind is by air alone, the experience in
Korea and Vietnam suggests that it probably would not work. If the attack
includes a land invasion against an enemy as battle-hardened as the Iraqis, dug
in to defensive positions and equipped with chemical and biological weapons,
American casualties would be horrendous.

As for sanctions, boycotts are not like wartime blockades. With Jordan, Iran and
Yemen taking Iraq's side, a boycott is likely to leak.

In either case, in a few months the United States may well find itself standing
alone except for Israel, and possibly Britain.

The alternative is to declare that our purpose was to prevent an invasion of
Saudi Arabia and that since that purpose has been accomplished, we are turning
responsibility over to the Arabs.

The result is most likely to be a negotiated settlement that gives Iraq a slice
of Kuwait that includes a port. If the Arabs fail to rise to the crisis, Iraq
may well take Saudi Arabia and the emirates. Saddam Hussein would then control
21.5 percent of global oil production. Oil prices would rise. But the United
States would finally be forced to take the long-overdue steps to make itself
independent of Middle East oil.

More important, Egypt and the other Arab states would be thoroughly alarmed and
more likely to take responsibility for containing further Iraqi expansion.

ROGER HILSMAN
New York, Nov. 14, 1990

The writer, a Columbia University professor, held intelligence and State
Department appointments in the Kennedy Administration.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Nguyen Van Tam, Vietnamese Statesman, 97

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 22; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 96 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Nov. 27


Nguyen Van Tam, who served as Prime Minister to Emperor Bao Dai of Vietnam from
1952 to 1953, died on Friday, his family said on Monday. He was 97 years old.

The cause of death was not given for Mr. Nguyen, who lived in exile here since
1955, when the Vietnamese monarchy was abolished after the country won
independence from France the previous year.

Mr. Nguyen became Prime Minister after holding several ministerial posts
beginning in 1946. He was nicknamed the Tiger of Cai Lay for eliminating
Communist resistance groups in the Cai Lay region of the Mekong Delta.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

F.B.I. Accused Of Keeping Files On Foundation

BYLINE: By KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 604 words


The American Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit yesterday charging that the
Federal Bureau of Investigation illegally kept files on the J. Roderick
MacArthur Foundation and its president, Lance Lindblom.

The foundation, based in Niles, Ill., prides itself on its willingness to get
involved in controversial issues. It has contributed to more than 20 human
rights and civil liberties groups in this country and abroad.

The lawsuit asserted that when the foundation asked to see its file the F.B.I.
released only 18 pages, many heavily censored. The foundation's request was made
under the Federal Freedom of Information Act in December 1988.

The suit, filed in Federal District Court in Washington, seeks the release of
the unedited F.B.I. documents, destruction of the file and an admission from the
bureau that it acted unlawfully. Monetary damages, to be determined by a jury,
were also asked.

Constitutional Violations Charged

The civil liberties union contended that the bureau's action violated both the
Constitution and a provision of the Privacy Act that it said prohibited
"maintenance of Government files on First Amendment activities except in limited
circumstances." In addition, the A.C.L.U. maintained that the foundation and its
president were "entitled to release of their F.B.I. files under the Freedom of
Information Act."

In Washington an F.B.I. spokesman, Carlos Fernandez, said it would be
inappropriate for the bureau to comment on a matter before the court.

Mr. Lindblom said the files provided by the bureau were so heavily censored that
he could identify only some topics. One, he said, dealt with a trip he made to
South Korea with a dissident politician, Kim Dae Jung, now a member of South
Korea's Parliament.

Arlie W. Schardt, vice president for communication of the Council on
Foundations, which represents the leading foundations in the United States, said
he was shocked to learn that the F.B.I. had kept such a record.

'An Intimidating Discovery'

"I am sure this will cause considerable concern and alarm in foundation
circles," he said. "It is an intimidating discovery and will give pause to
grant-makers who support groups that have been critical or challenged government
policy."

Mr. Lindblom, a lawyer, has headed the philanthropy since it was created 14
years ago by J. Roderick MacArthur, son of John T. and Catherine D. MacArthur,
whose fortune from insurance and real estate established the Chicago-based
foundation bearing their name, with assets of more than $3 billion.

The foundation created by the younger Mr. MacArthur, who died in 1984, has
assets of $26 million and spends about $2 million a year.

Harvey Grossman, Mr. Lindblom's lawyer, said the F.B.I. had asserted the right
not to release information because of an executive order protecting information
related to national security and foreign relations.

The bureau came under intense scrutiny in the 1970's after revelations of
illegal surveillance efforts aimed at civil rights organizers and religious
leaders and groups protesting the Vietnam War.

In 1976, Attorney General Edward H. Levi, drew up new guidelines for the bureau,
restricting its powers to investigate dissident groups. F.B.I. agents were
permitted to begin criminal investigations only when they have substantial
reason to suspect violations of Federal law or involvement in international
terrorism.

Documents made public in January 1988 showed that the F.B.I. had conducted
extensive surveillance of hundreds of citizens and groups opposed to the Reagan
Administration's policies in Central America.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Carrier's Pilots Confidently Face War

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 984 words

DATELINE: ABOARD THE U.S.S. MIDWAY, off Saudi Arabia, Nov. 26


The F-18 Hornet fighters catapulted off the Midway's deck in a scream of engines
and a shimmering pall of jet exhaust.

Flight crews ran to and fro on this 45-year-old carrier, lining up fighters for
a takeoff assisted by a power catapult that hurtled the planes off the deck so
fast that they accelerated from zero to 150 miles per hour in two seconds.

At the last instant, the fighters shot into space, where, like supersonic
knuckleballs, they briefly wobbled and floated before suddenly roaring up into
the clear winter skies of Arabia.

The operation gave an impression of enormous raw power harnessed to hurl
warplanes into the sky from the squat platform of the Navy's smallest and oldest
aircraft carrier. During the Vietnam war, her planes flew tens of thousands of
sorties against Hanoi when she operated in the South China Sea.

'Land on a Postage Stamp'

The sleek fighters returned as furiously as they departed, slamming down at
nearly full power on just 190 feet of deck, considerably less than on longer,
wider and newer carriers. A hook trailing the aircraft snags a lateral deck
cable, jerking them to a shuddering stop and often leaving the pilot staring
over the edge of the deck into the sea far below.

"You fly through the eye of a needle and land on a postage stamp," said Lieut.
Dave Leppelmeier as he described landing on a pitching runway.

The Midway, which was commissioned in September 1945 and survived Congressional
proposals to scrap it a few years ago, is part of what will soon be the largest
deployment of American warships since World War II, according to Rear Adm.
Daniel P. March, commander of the Carrier Group Five Strike Force of the Seventh
Fleet.

There are three United States naval battle groups, each led by an aircraft
carrier, already in the region. They will be joined by three more battle groups
under orders from President Bush.

More Ships Than Used in Vietnam

In addition to a carrier, a battle group includes computerized missile-bearing
destroyers and frigates, among other ships. Admiral March estimated that there
would be well over 60 American warships in the theater within the next month,
more ships than were deployed at any one time during the Vietnam War, he said.

The ships from the United States appear to have sealed these seas to Iraqi
shipping, senior officers said.

Capt. J. W. Parker, commander of Destroyer Squadron 15, said that since Nov. 1
the Midway-led flotilla of eight ships has been intercepting about 100 boats per
day by radio to check their nationality, cargo and destination.

He said no Iraqi-flagged ship nor Iraqi-bound ship had tried to enter these
seas, which are now restricted under the United Nations embargo.

Ship Destinations Monitored

"I think Iraq has probably come to the conclusion it can't get in this way,"
Captain Parker told a group of reporters visiting the Midway today.

Captain Parker did not rule out that ships bound for Iran could unload material
to be shipped overland to Iraq. But officers said such traffic would appear to
be minimal. They added that every passing ship is watched to be sure that it
does not try to unload in either Iraq or Iraqi-occupied Kuwait.

His account would appear to indicate that the maritime embargo against Iraq,
while slow to affect the Iraqi economy, is as effective as Navy ships can make
it.

Iran Cooperating With U.S. Ships

And officers aboard the Midway said Iran appeared to be making an effort to
cooperate with Navy forces in the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman.

In what seemed to be a strong sign of neutrality in the surging military
deployment, Iranian surveillance aircraft and helicopters have taken special
care to make radio contact, identify themselves and then maintain distant
positions requested by American commanders as the Midway recently steamed
through the narrow Strait of Hormuz, the officers say.

Capt. James M. Burin, commander of the carrier's fighter air wing, said Iraqi
planes and radar made no attempt to make contact with American fighters deployed
in the exercise, indicating a continuing Iraqi policy of caution.

The Midway carries a crew of 4,300 and some 60 aircraft, including approximately
30 of the Navy's newest F-18 jet fighters. It is guarded 24 hours a day by jet
fighters, special radar and electronic-jamming planes, air surveillance aircraft
and armed helicopters, as well as by accompanying destroyers armed with missiles
and radar systems that can pick up an oncoming aircraft hundreds of miles away.

The pilots of the Midway's F-18 fighter squad said they are on full alert and
combat ready. They trade fighter radio call signs such as "Lefty," "Big Wave
Dave" and "Bones" to one another as they whip past the Midway's viewing bridge,
called "Vultures Row" by gawking sailors who sometimes watch the aerial show.

Iraq Pilots Get High Marks

"Things are changing so fast right now," said Lieut. Comdr. Jeff Ashby, one of
the Midway's F-18 pilots. "We don't know from day to day how they will go." .

Others appeared to step over the line separating confidence from cockiness.

"I just refuse to believe that a third-world person who rides a camel can be as
smart as I am," declared Lieutenant Leppelmeier, an F-18 pilot, referring to
Iraqi pilots.

Saudi pilots who have studied the Iraqi airforce speak with greater prudence.
They give Iraqi pilots high marks for having combat experience and for being
skilled with laser-guided weapons and jamming devices.

Almost all crew members interviewed said they hoped Iraq would pull out of
Kuwait and avoid a war, although all said they were ready to fight if the time
for fighting comes. A heady few, like Lieutenant Leppelmeier, said they were
looking forward to battle.

"Sure," the F-18 pilot replied when asked if he wanted to fight. "I'm 30, can't
keep a girlfriend and can't save a dime."

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Bush May Recall Congress To Consider Force in Gulf

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 943 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov 28


President Bush is considering calling Congress back into session in December to
consider the use of force in the Persian Gulf, two senior Senate Republicans
said today.

Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, who met with the President at
the White House this afternoon, said the odds were now "better than 50-50" for a
special session. Mr. Dole said the session was likely before Christmas, a view
echoed by Senator John W. Warner of Virginia, the senior Republican on the
Senate Armed Services Committee, who suggested that it could come in a week to
10 days.

Neither Senator offered details about the specific purpose of the session, but
senior Congressional officials who asked not to be identified said they expected
the President to seek Congressional adoption of a resolution similar to the one
that is scheduled to be voted on by the United Nations Security Council on
Thursday. That resolution would authorize the United States to use force to
eject Iraqi troops from Kuwait if they have not been withdrawn by Jan. 15.

 Democrats Are Surprised

Today's renewed talk of calling lawmakers back to Washington took Democratic
Congressional leaders by surprise, and senior aides to the Senate majority
leader, George Mitchell of Maine, and the House Speaker, Representative Thomas
S. Foley of Washington, said they were unaware of any notification of a special
session. The leaders have, however, been invited to the White House on Friday to
meet with Mr. Bush.

At the White House, the Presidential spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said "there
has been no decision to ask for a special session." He described the meeting
planned for Friday as "just consultation," presumably a reference to the
continuing discussions Mr. Bush has held with a group of about two dozen
Congressional leaders on gulf policy.

By considering a return of Congress to Washington as the holidays approach, the
White House is signaling its desire to build a political base for Mr. Bush's
gulf policy in advance of anymilitary move against Iraq and, specifically, to
get Democrats to shoulder part of the responsibility.

 Risks for President

But calling back Congress carries risks for Mr. Bush. Democratic leaders are
urging the Administration to delay taking military action and give economic
sanctions against Iraq time to succeed. They could use a session to try to stall
Mr. Bush or to push legislation that would restrict his actions.

Reconvening Congress would mark a reversal of position for Mr. Bush, who has
opposed earlier suggestions for a special session. But the White House was
hopeful that the expected passage of the United Nations resolution would lend
momentum to Congressional action supporting the Administration.

Both Mr. Dole and Mr. Warner were among the lawmakers who advocated a special
session two weeks ago when the idea first came up on Capitol Hill. But any
momentum for such a session appeared to collapse after both the White House and
Democratic Congressional leaders rejected the idea.

While divided about what course of action to take in the Persian Gulf,
Republicans and Democrats are generally supportive of a special session because
lawmakers want to make sure that Congress asserts its Constitutional role in the
event of a war.

But Democratic leaders generally have argued that the economic sanctions imposed
on Iraq in August should be given more time to work. The House majority leader,
Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, made that point today,
announcing his opposition to the use of American military force in the near
future.

"Before we resort to the offensive military action against Iraq, Congress and
the American people will need to be convinced that the policy of pressure,
isolation and sanctions has failed," Mr. Gephardt said in a speech this morning
to the United States Chamber of Commerce.

Mr. Gephardt said the passage of a United Nations resolution authorizing the use
of force was "not the end of the debate over the national interest, it is only
the beginning." He said that while most lawmakers supported the goals of
operations in Saudi Arabia, many were becoming concerned with the
Administration's means for achieving those goals.

"Simply put, we support a policy of patient strength, staying the course and
permitting the sanctions to work," he said.

 Dole Sees Waffling

But Mr. Dole has complained that Congress was trying to waffle on gulf policy by
paying lip service to support for the President, while criticizing him from the
sidelines.

"The President has provided the leadership, the U.N.'s about to go on record,
and every member of Congress knows full well how our constituents are speaking
out. Now it's time for Congress to get in the game," he said.

The last time a President called lawmakers back into session after adjournment
was in 1948, when President Harry S. Truman, trying to make a political point
before an election, challenged the "do nothing" 80th Congress to approve the
Republican Party platform. The lawmakers were called into session on July 26,
but did not approve the platform and adjourned a week later.

Lawmakers are mindful of the consequences of Congressional acquiesence in a
military buildup. In 1964, the Senate gave near- unanimous approval to the Gulf
of Tonkin resolution, which became President Lyndon B. Johnson's legislative
basis for conducting the Vietnam War.

"The people here clearly feel that voting on the U.N. resolution or a resolution
that says it another way amounts to Congress's decision on whether to use
force," said Mr. Gephardt. "It's a lot like a declaration of war."


LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Gifts for Reading, Not Just Giving

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1038 words


"Books Do Furnish a Room," Anthony Powell titled one of the later volumes of his
fictional epic, "Dance to the Music of Time." He meant the verb "to furnish" in
the sense of "to equip," but with the books for Christmas giving that came in
this year, one could build chairs, couches, tables, cabinets, and even
bookshelves, not to mention a coffee table or two.  The most appealing of these
gift books are described below, ranged approximately by price. There are more
entries than usual this year, because the books as a group seemed to set a
higher standard.

For fun: FIVE RINGS, SIX CRISES, SEVEN DWARFS, AND 38 WAYS TO WIN AN ARGUMENT:
Numerical Listings You Should Know or Once Knew and Probably Forgot, by John
Boswell and Dan Starer. (241 pages. Viking.  $14.95.) Anyone can identify the
Dynamic Duo, the Three Men in a Tub, or the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse. But
what about the Dave Clark Five, the six wives of Henry VIII, the Ten
Commandments, the 44 VicePresidents, or the 103 elements of the periodic table?
Win bets. Amaze your friends.

For cooks: THE WELL-TOOLED KITCHEN, by Fred Bridge and Jean F. Tibbetts.
(Illustrated. 228 pages. William Morrow & Company. $24.95.) Two experts
recommend the best of cookware, from mandolines to oval flambe pans, and gather
tips from other specialists on what to cook with them. THE TASTE OF CHINA, by
Ken Hom, photographs by Leong Ka Tai. (192 pages. Simon & Schuster. $29.95.) Mr.
Hom travels throughout China offering recipes for the various foods of the
mainland, and Mr. Leong presents such delicious photographs that you want to
read the book again an hour after you're finished.

For hedonists: CUSTOM MADE, by Sheila Buff. (191 pages. Macmillan.  $29.95.) The
best of everything, custom made, from suits to model boats to jigsaw puzzles to
limousines.  Prices not included, but then if you have to ask, you'd best stick
to looking at the pictures.

For animals lovers: THE ULTIMATE DOG BOOK, By David Taylor. (Illustrated. 240
pages. Simon & Schuster.  $29.95.) Every dog has its page, so the prospective
owner or breeder can learn the difference between a bouvier des Flandres and a
vizsla. GRIZZLY BEARS, text and photographic selection by Candace Savage,
foreword by Andy Russell. (164 pages. Sierra Club Books. $35.) Magnificent,
expressive beasts in moods surprisingly various.  Makes you understand why bears
keep showing up in children's literature.

For the doctor in the house: MAYO CLINIC FAMILY HEALTH BOOK, David E. Larson
M.D., editor in chief (1,378 pages. William Morrow & Company.  $34.95.) An
impressively comprehensive home medical reference guide that covers preventive
medicine as well as emergency first aid.

For readers: CARVER COUNTRY: The World of Raymond Carver, photographs by Bob
Adelman, Introduction by Tess Gallagher (159 pages. A Robert Stewart
Book/Charles Scribner's Sons. $35.) Stark black-and-white photos set off
excerpts from the work of the writer, who died of cancer at the age of 50. As
his widow, Tess Gallagher, writes of the hopelessness of her husband's fictional
world, "the people in Carver Country would have perished without a future tense
in the language itself." BLOOMSBURY REFLECTIONS, by Alen MacWeeney and Sue
Allison, with a foreword by Frances Spalding. (Unpaginated.  W. W. Norton .
$39.95.) In a surprisingly warm and appealing book considering the somewhat
frosty image Virginia Woolf and her set convey, daughters, sons, grandchildren,
nephews and nieces, and close friends recall the circle of artists and
intellectuals known as the Bloomsbury Group.

For game players: THE ART OF BASEBALL: The Great American Game in Painting,
Sculpture and Folk Art, by Shelly Mehlman Dinhofer.  (159 pages. Harmony Books .
$40.) Take me out to Nickolas Muray's poignant photo of Babe Ruth. Take me out
to Willard Mullin's "Brooklyn Bum." Buy me Rhoda Sherbell's sculpture of Charles
Dillon (Casey) Stengel. I don't care if I never get back. CHESS: A Celebration
of 2000 years, by Roswin Finkenzeller, Wilhelm Ziehr, and Emil M. Buhrer. (208
pages. Arcade/Little, Brown. $45.) The masters, the patzers, the pieces in a
book of astonishing visual richness, especially considering what a cerebral game
chess is supposed to be.

For war buffs: THE CIVIL WAR: An Illustrated History, by Geoffrey C. Ward with
Ken Burns and Ric Burns. (425 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $50.) Not quite as
powerful as the PBS television series to which it is the companion, but still
one of the better single volumes on the most cataclysmic event in American
history. VIETNAM: The Decisive Battles, by John Pimlott, Foreword by Shelby L.
Stanton. (200 pages. Macmillan. $39.95.) You don't think of Vietnam has having
been shaped by decisive battles, yet this book effectively evokes another
critical military nightmare from which this country is still trying to awake.

For art lovers: HIGH AND LOW, by Kirk Varnedoe and Adam Gopnik. (460 pages.
Museum of Modern Art/Harry N. Abrams. $60.) Published to accompany the recent
show on modern art and popular culture at the Modern, this volume represents the
increasingly fruitful dialogue between high art and popular culture, and where
it is heading, God only knows. WORLD IMPRESSIONISM: The International Movement,
1860-1920, edited by Norma Broude. (424 pages.  Harry N. Abrams . $75.)
Meanwhile, as this book luxuriously illustrates, Impressionism turns out to have
been not just an invention of the French, but also a worldwide movement, parts
of which may even have influenced the French.

And more for art lovers: MONET'S CATHEDRAL: Rouen 1892-94, by Joachim Pissarro.
(96 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $35.) For the first time, the complete cycle of
Monet's Rouen cathedral paintings are brought together, from dawn to dusk, from
yellow midday to mauve and lavender twilight, from Impressionism as a theory to
a new way of seeing light.  PICASSO CUBISM (1907-1917), by Josep Palau i Fabre.
(529 pages. Rizzoli .  Boxed, $250.) A brilliant, concentrated study of
Picasso's most significant years, his Cubist period, from the experiments that
led to "Les Demoiselles d'Avignon" in 1907, to the late Harlequin drawings and
paintings of 1917.

And a Merry Christmas.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Detail of a sculpture of Casey Stengel from Shelly Mehlman
Dinhofer's "Art of Baseball: The Great American Game in Painting, Sculpture and
Folk Art."


TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Don't Call Hmong Refugees Primitive

SECTION: Section A; Page 28; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 386 words


To the Editor:

A Nov. 7 news article calls the Hmong refugees from Laos "the most primitive
refugee group in America." You also refer to the Hmong as "insular" and a
"mostly illiterate tribal group." Such characterizations are disturbing to those
in and out of the Hmong community who recognize the strengths of our culture,
history and people.

We are often described as a people with no written language. We do, however,
have a written language. Many people are unaware of the rapid growth of literacy
among our people. In addition, we have an oral tradition that goes back
thousands of years, which has enabled us to maintain our ethnic integrity among
more numerous people, such as the Chinese and the Vietnamese.

Historically, Hmong [pronounced MUNG] lived in isolated mountain villages. After
World War II, however, Hmong in Laos began to leave that isolation to enter
education, politics, government and commerce. Since coming to the United States,
Hmong and other highlanders have been very successful. The number of recent
Hmong graduates in engineering, medicine, law, social work and other disciplines
is an excellent example of our accomplishments. Your article focuses on
extortion by Hmong leadership, without acknowledging the contribution of Hmong
leaders at all levels in assisting our people to build new lives in this
country. It has been a difficult challenge, since the Vietnam War physically and
emotionally devastated the Hmong, with casualties proportionately higher than
for any other group.

Evidently, we were not too primitive to fight as proxies for United States
troops in the war in Laos. More important, in the United States today the
efforts of thousands of Hmong to learn new skills and a new language continue to
lower the rate of welfare dependency. Yes, many Hmong (particularly the elderly)
dream of returning to Laos to regain what they lost for supporting United States
involvement in Southeast Asia. However, thousands of us are committed to
productive lives as citizens of the United States.

I believe that there are reasons enough to have the "primitive" label lifted
when referring to Hmong. Our progress and contributions cannot be disputed.

PAUL PAO HERR
Herndon, Va., Nov. 12, 1990

The writer is with the Hmong-Highlander Development Fund.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 30, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
Weller Takes a Stab At the Pastoral Form

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 862 words


I didn't realize I had been missing Marsha Mason until I saw her -- radiant,
good-humored, emotionally and sexually voluptuous -- in Michael Weller's "Lake
No Bottom," the new play at the Second Stage. The actress one fondly remembers
from the films "Cinderella Liberty" and "The Goodbye Girl," a two-fisted
comedienne with a desperately vulnerable undertow, has returned to the stage
with her gifts intact and matured. It seems a waste that Ms. Mason reaches Mr.
Weller one play too late. The racy, hard-nosed, flamboyantly neurotic mother
played so brilliantly by Kate Nelligan in the author's "Spoils of War" would be
a great role for this star as well.

"Lake No Bottom" is not nearly so rewarding, for the actress or for the
audience, and it is not particularly representative of Mr. Weller, whose other
works include the plays "Moonchildren" and "Loose Ends" and the screenplays for
the Milos Forman films "Hair" and "Ragtime." "Lake No Bottom" is a stab at a
pastoral play, set on a vaguely Walden-ish lake front at no tightly defined
time, by a writer whose best works have always played out before vividly drawn
and profoundly understood sociopolitical backdrops. ("Context is everything,"
goes one of Mr. Weller's lines here, but on this occasion he ignores his own
advice.) The new effort is also a get-the-critics play, and this genre, too,
proves not to be this writer's forte. A dramatist of unusual compassion who can
empathize with both camps in a broken marriage and even with both sides of the
Vietnam-era generation gap, Mr. Weller is utterly unpersuasive in affecting the
bitchy tone he does in "Lake No Bottom."

He also seems to have temporarily lost his senses of humor and dramatic
proportion. The program's advisory that "a gun will be fired during the
performance" is no put-on: the play ultimately devolves into a duel between
Rubin (Daniel Davis), a lofty literary critic who has retired to the woods to
write his magnum opus, and his overnight house guest, Will (Robert Knepper), a
former student who has hit the jackpot with his fourth novel, a Jay McInerney
excursion into chic Manhattan. Are Rubin and Will, who had always been mutual
admirers, doing battle now because Will has made it as an artist and Rubin is
jealous? Or is the real problem that Will has fooled around with Rubin's wife,
Petra, a onetime film actress played by Ms. Mason? Mr. Weller entertains both
possibilities at random intervals without investing much energy in either, and
he also leaves open the additional option that the critic is simply a murderous
psychopath.

Both men are so empty, and so incapable of loving Petra or anyone, that it is
hard to choose sides in any case. Sounding like a hammy road-company stand-in
for Frank Langella, Mr. Davis does nothing to soften Mr. Weller's stereotyped
portrait of the critic as bitter, preening windbag; the actor's mellifluous
cadences, casual rustic fashions and wavy silver hair remain immaculately in
place even when he is fighting to the death. The young novelist -- seemingly too
young to have published four books, as embodied by the otherwise credible Mr.
Knepper -- proves to be a narcissistic denizen of Elaine's who is frequently
caught in lies. Ms. Mason notwithstanding, even Petra sometimes loses her appeal
as she alternately encourages both men with apparently arbitrary abandon.

In Carole Rothman's production, the characters' mixed motives and ambiguous
loyalties, whether romantic or esthetic, never crystallize into coherence. Both
the play's narrative and its style seem unfocused and fragmented. Act I,
peppered heavily with double-entendres and the word "darling," could pass for an
arch pastiche of an adulterous Pinter love triangle; the melodramatic violence
of Act II, cleverly choreographed with the aid of Adrianne Lobel's imaginative
sets, Kevin Rigdon's lighting and Mark Bennett's sound, could be an outtake from
"Deathtrap." On the way to a fudged denouement, one also encounters a single
funny joke (Rubin threatens to relegate Will's books to the syllabic purgatory
of "suggested additional reading") and more than a few water images. (Didn't Mr.
Weller get them out of his system in "Fishing"?)

There is also one moving passage, in which a sobbing Ms. Mason, torn between
memories of an abortion and hunger for a new life, grabs greedily at Mr. Knepper
as if happiness were something that could be seized from another's arms and
thin, moonlit air. "Lake No Bottom," sad to say, never returns to the bottomless
feelings plumbed in this scene, but one remains haunted by the image of the
exposed and defenseless Ms. Mason, ready and eager to follow a playwright who
will take her into the deep.

Lake No Bottom

By Michael Weller; directed by Carole Rothman; sets, Adrianne Lobel; lighting,
Kevin Rigdon; costumes, Jess Goldstein; sound, Mark Bennett; hair design,
Antonio Soddu; production stage manager, Pamela Edington; stage manager,
Elise-Ann Konstantin. Presented by Second Stage Theater, Robyn Goodman and Ms.
Rothman, artistic directors. At 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street.

Petra . . . Marsha Mason
Will . . . Robert Knepper
Rubin . . . Daniel Davis

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Marsha Mason and Robert Knepper in Michael Weller's "Lake No
Bottom," at the Second Stage Theater. (Susan Cook/Second Stage Theater)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 30, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

ABROAD AT HOME;
War And the President

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 33; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 752 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Can President Bush take the country into war in the Persian Gulf without the
approval of Congress? The question is heading toward decisive tests, legal and
political. The answer could have profound consequences for our constitutional
system and our internal peace.

The President has moved very far toward war without asking for the consent of
Congress. After Iraq gobbled up Kuwait in August, he sent a large American armed
force to Saudi Arabia. Three weeks ago he ordered that force almost doubled, to
give it an offensive capability.

Now Mr. Bush has the authority of the United Nations Security Council to take
military action. A long and skillful diplomatic campaign by the President and
Secretary Baker ended in success yesterday when the Council authorized the use
of "all necessary means" after Jan. 15 to enforce previous resolutions on the
gulf.

But the President has undertaken only to "consult" Congress. That is very
different from what the Constitution provides: that only Congress, the House and
the Senate, shall have the power to declare war.

Legal conservatives have urged respect for the "original intention" of the
Constitution's Framers. That is often difficult to discover, but in the case of
the war clause the intention is exceptionally clear.

At the Constitutional Convention of 1787, delegates left it open to the
President to use armed forces to repel sudden attacks. But a deliberate choice
of war was to be for Congress. James Wilson of Pennsylvania, a key figure at the
Convention, said:

"It will not be in the power of a single man, or a single body of men, to
involve us in such distress; for the important power of declaring war is vested
in the legislature at large."

Presidents have used military force a great deal in recent years without any
kind of approval from Congress. There were the swift strikes on Grenada and
Panama.

But in this case there is no sudden reason for action. U.S. forces have been in
the gulf for months. The U.N. Security Council has passed a dozen resolutions.
Americans are openly debating the issue. For a President to make war without
Congressional authority under those conditions would be to plow the Constitution
under.

The constitutional issues are raised in a lawsuit by 38 members of Congress, led
by Representative Ronald V. Dellums, Democrat of California. It seeks a judicial
decision that the President must have Congress's approval to go to war in the
gulf. The Congressmen's brief is a notable compendium of constitutional and
legal materials on the issue.

Eleven distinguished law professors have filed a memorandum as friends of the
court arguing that the President may not "order U.S. armed forces to make war"
without "genuine approval by Congress."

The 11 professors cover all points of the legal spectrum. They include Erwin N.
Griswold, former dean of the Harvard Law School, who was Solicitor General in
the Nixon Administration. The breadth of representation shows how scholarly
opinion has moved against unilateral Presidential war-making.

The professors' memorandum says that Congress could give "affirmative
authorization" for war in ways other than a declaration. But it says Congress
must act formally, not through "legislative silence, stray remarks of individual
members" or other things said to amount to "acquiescence" in executive acts.
That was evidently a reference to executive claims of Congressional
"acquiescence" in the Vietnam War.

Political reality argues as compellingly as constitutional law for the President
to go to Congress. Republican as well as Democratic leaders have said flatly
that Congressional authority is required for war.

Now that the U.N. Security Council has authorized the use of force, President
Bush may go to Congress on the momentum of that vote, presenting the members
with something like a fait accompli. Will you stand in the way, he would ask, of
a policy that the world has approved?

But Americans would be doing most of the fighting and dying in an attack on
Iraq. And neither the Constitution nor the law passed when the United States
joined the United Nations allows Congress to delegate its war-making
responsibility to the Security Council.

The ultimate political reality is the growing American opposition to war now. It
cannot be brushed aside when it includes the weighty voices of James Schlesinger
and James Webb, Gen. David Jones and Adm. William Crowe. To rush to war in such
circumstances would be to risk tearing this country apart.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 1, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Leading Indicators In 4th Drop

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 817 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 30


The Government index intended to forecast the economy fell by 1.2 percent in
October, the Commerce Department reported today. The drop extended a downturn
that started this summer to the point where it now meets a rule-of-thumb test
for signaling a recession.

The October decline, combined with a revision into negative territory for July,
means that the index of leading indicators has now fallen for four straight
months. Analysts often take three straight declines to mean the economy is
turning down.

"It reinforces the view that the economy has entered at least a mild recession,"
said Darwin L. Beck, an economist for the First Boston Corporation.

 Little New Information

Since practically all the components of the index have been previously
published, today's report provided little new information and financial markets,
accurately anticipating the outcome, showed no noticeable reaction early in the
day, but rallied after President Bush offered to negotiate with Iraq.

Economists further cautioned that while the index rarely missed a recession, it
sometimes predicted recessions that did not occur. One glaring example was the
four-month drop between October 1987, when the stock market crashed, and January
1988.

On that occasion, the drop totaled 2.9 percent. The current decline, also four
months, works out to 3.1 percent.

 Longest Peacetime Expansion

Assuming that the current signal proves valid -- even the Federal Reserve's
chief, Alan Greenspan, now describes the economy as in a "meaningful downturn"
-- this would be the end of an expansion that began in late 1982, the longest
peacetime expansion on record.

If there is no recession, the economy will tie its record 1961-69 expansion,
which was spurred by spending for the Vietnam War, in October 1991.

A companion index of coincident indicators, which measure current economic
activity, fell 1 percent in October after a drop of eight-tenths of 1 percent in
September. The September decline was revised downward from an initial decline of
four-tenths of 1 percent. This was the fourth straight decline in the coincident
index, the first time this has happened since 1982.

 Lagging Indicators Ease

Meanwhile, the index of lagging indicators, those that tend to move only after
the economy has changed direction, eased three-tenths of 1 percent in October.

Eight of the 11 leading index components contributed to the decline, paced by a
drop in the University of Michigan's survey of consumer expectations. The other
negative forces, in order of impact, were a rise in the average weekly initial
claims for state unemployment insurance, a shrinkage in the length of the
average workweek, a decline in building permits, a lower M-2 money supply, a
drop in stock prices as measured by the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index, a
statistical decline in prices of materials particularly sensitive to changes in
the business cycle and a speed-up in deliveries by corporate suppliers.

Three components rose, reflecting higher new orders for consumer goods and
materials, higher contracts and orders for plant and equipment and a statistical
rise in factories' unfilled oders for durable goods.

 'Statistical' Rise Shown

Some components are calculated by the Commerce Department on a moving-average
basis over lengthy periods so they sometimes show a "statistical" rise, say,
even though the figures fall for the latest month.

An alternative predictor of the course of the economy, the ratio of the
coincident index to the lagging index, fell to 1.115 during October from 1.220
in September, a second straight decline.

A private forecasting index maintained by Safian Investment Research of White
Plains dropped 1.85 percent in October, its fifth straight decline and the
biggest since October 1987. Fifteen of its 23 components fell, seven rose and
one was unchanged.

The leading index of service sector activity compiled by the Columbia Business
School's Center for International Business Cycle Research dropped to 155.5 in
October from 156.9 in September, with its annualized growth rate turning
negative at a rate of 1.3 percent.

 'Clear, Classical Signs'

The United States Chamber of Commerce said that today's figures reflected
"clear, classical signs" of a recession. The coincident indicators, falling by
ever larger amounts, show that a recession has already begun, said William K.
MacReynolds, the chamber's forecasting director. He noted that the leading
indicators declining most in October involved the consumer, who accounts for
two-thirds of the economy.

"This all shows that the overall economy is declining rapidly, following
declines in the housing and construction industries and poor performance in the
industrial sector," he said. "Predictions that the recession will be short-lived
are based more on wishful thinking than sound economic analysis."

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Leading Indicators" shows index of 11 indicators designed to
"lead," or predict overall economic activity, May, 1989-Oct., 1990 (Source:
Commerce Dept.)

Chart: "Leading Indicators: Component Analysis" lists components of the index of
leading economic indicators and their net weighted contribution to the index's
change from September to October. (Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis) (pg. 35)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 1, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Excerpts From President's News Conference on Crisis in Gulf

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3563 words


Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference yesterday in
Washington, as recorded by The New York Times:

                     OPENING STATEMENT

I have a statement -- an opening statement -- that is a little longer than
normal and I'd ask your indulgence, and then I will be glad to respond to
questions.

We're in the gulf because the world must not and cannot reward aggression. And
we're there because our vital interests are at stake. And we're in the gulf
because of the brutality of Saddam Hussein.

We're dealing with a dangerous dictator all too willing to use force, who has
weapons of mass destruction and is seeking new ones and who desires to control
one of the world's key resources -- all at a time in history when the rules of
the post-cold-war world are being written.

 Objectives of U.S.

Our objectives remain what they were since the outset. We seek Iraq's immediate
and unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait. We seek the restoration of Kuwait's
legitimate Government. We seek the release of all hostages and the free
functioning of all embassies. And we seek the stability and security of this
critical region of the world.

We are not alone in these goals and objectives. The United Nations, invigorated
with a new sense of purpose, is in full agreement. The United Nations Security
Council has endorsed 12 resolutions to condemn Iraq's unprovoked invasion and
occupation of Kuwait, implement tough economic sanctions to stop all trade in
and out of Iraq and authorize the use of force to compel Saddam to comply.

Saddam Hussein has tried every way he knows how to make this a fight between
Iraq and the United States, and clearly he has failed.

Forces of 26 other nations are standing shoulder-to-shoulder with our troops in
the gulf. The fact is that it is not the United States against Iraq. It is Iraq
against the world. And there's never been a clearer demonstration of a world
united against appeasement and aggression.

Yesterday's United Nations Security Council resolution was historic. Once again
the Security Council has enhanced the legitimate peacekeeping function of the
United Nations. Until yesterday, Saddam may not have understood what he's up
against in terms of world opinion. And I'm hopeful that now he will realize that
he must leave Kuwait immediately.

I'm continually asked how effective are the U.N. sanctions -- those put into
effect on Aug. 6. And I don't know the answer to that question. Clearly the
sanctions are having some effect. But I can't tell you that the sanctions alone
will get the job done. And thus I welcome yesterday's United Nations action.

The fledgling democracies in Eastern Europe are being severely damaged by the
economic effects of Saddam's actions. The developing countries of Africa and in
our hemisphere are being victimized by this dictator's rape of his neighbor
Kuwait.

 Fragile Economies in Trouble

Those who feel that there is no downside to waiting months and months must
consider the devastating damage being done every day to the fragile economies of
those countries that can afford it the least.

As chairman Alan Greenspan [of the Federal Reserve Board] testified just the
other day, the increase in oil prices resulting directly from Saddam's invasion
is hurting our country too. And our economy, as I said the other day, is at best
in a serious slowdown, and if uncertainty remains in the energy markets, the
slowdown will get worse.

I've spelled out once again our reasons for sending troops to the gulf. Let me
tell you the things that concern me most:

First, I put the immorality of the invasion of Kuwait itself. No nation should
rape, pillage and brutalize its neighbor. No nation should be able to wipe a
member state of the United Nations and the Arab League off the face of the
earth.

And I'm deeply concerned about all the hostages, innocent people held against
their will in direct contravention of international law. And then there's this
cynical and brutal policy of forcing people to beg for their release, parceling
out human lives to families and traveling emissaries like so much chattel.

And I'm deeply concerned about our own Embassy in Kuwait. The flag is still
flying there. A handful of beleaguered Americans remain inside the Embassy
unable to come and go. This treatment of our Embassy violates every civilized
principle of diplomacy. And it demeans our people. It demeans our country. And I
am determined that this Embassy, as called for under Security Council Resolution
674, be fully replenished and our people free to come home. What kind of
precedent will these actions set for the future if Saddam's violation of
international law goes unchallenged?

I'm also deeply concerned about the future of Kuwait itself. The tales of rape
and assassination, of cold-blooded murder and rampant looting, are almost beyond
belief. The whole civilized world must unite and say this kind of treatmet of
people must end and those who violated the Kuwaiti people must be brought to
justice.

Potential Nuclear Threat

I'm deeply concerned about Saddam's efforts to acquire nuclear weapons. Imagine
his ability to blackmail his neighbors should he possess a nuclear device. We've
seen him use chemical weapons on his own people. We've seen him take his own
country -- one that should be wealthy and prosperous -- and turn it into a poor
country, all because of insatiable appetite for military equipment and conquest.

I've been asked why I ordered more troops to the gulf. I remain hopeful that we
can achieve a peaceful solution to this crisis, but if force is required, we and
the other 26 countries who have troops in the area will have enough power to get
the job done.

In our country, I know that there are fears about another Vietnam. Let me assure
you: should military action be required, this will not be another Vietnam; this
will not be a protracted, drawn-out war. The forces arrayed are different, the
opposition is different, the resupply of Saddam's military would be very
different, the countries united against him in the United Nations are different,
the topography of Kuwait is different and the motivation of our all-volunteer
force is superb.

I want peace. I want peace, not war. But if there must be war, we will not
permit our troops to have their hands tied behind their backs, and I pledge to
you there will not be any murky ending. If one American soldier has to go into
battle, that soldier will have enough force behind him to win, and then get out
as soon as possible, as soon as the U.N. objectives have been achieved.

I will never, ever agree to a halfway effort. Let me repeat: we have no argument
with the people of Iraq. Indeed, we've only friendship for the people there. And
further, I repeat that we have no desire to keep one single American soldier in
the gulf a single day longer than is necessary to achieve the objectives set out
above.

No one wants to see a peaceful solution to this crisis more than I do, and at
the same time, no one is more determined than I am to see Saddam's aggression
reversed.

 'Time Is Running Out'

And lastly, people now caution patience. The United States and the entire world
have been patient. I will continue to be patient. But yesterday's U.N.
resolution, the 13th by the Security Council, properly says to Saddam Hussein:
time is running out. You must leave Kuwait, and we've given you time to do just
exactly that.

Many people have talked directly to Saddam Hussein, and to his Foreign Minister,
Tariq Aziz. All have been frustrated by Iraq's ironclad insistence that it will
not leave Kuwait. However, to go the extra mile for peace, I will issue an
invitation to Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz to come to Washington, at a mutually
convenient time during the latter part of the week of Dec. 10, to meet with me.
And I'll invite ambassadors of several of our coalition partners in the gulf to
join me at that meeting.

In addition, I'm asking Secretary Jim Baker to go to Baghdad to see Saddam
Hussein, and I will suggest to Iraq's President that he receive the Secretary of
State at a mutually convenient time between Dec. 15 and Jan. 15 of next year.
Within the mandate -- within the mandate of the United Nations resolutions -- I
will be prepared, and so will Secretary Baker, to discuss all aspects of the
gulf crisis.

However, to be very clear about these efforts to exhaust all means for achieving
a political and diplomatic solution, I am not suggesting discussions that will
result in anything less than Iraq's complete withdrawal from Kuwait, restoration
of Kuwait's legitimate Government and freedom for all hostages.

Thank you very much, and I will be glad to respond to a few questions.

                             QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS


A Deadline for War?

Q. Mr. President, now that you have the clear-cut U.N. resolution on use of
force, doesn't that force you into a position -- if these talks between the
Secretary of State break down, doesn't this force you into the position of
having to use force on Jan. 15 if Saddam Hussein hasn't left, and if not, won't
we be seen as the one that blinked first?

A. No, the date was not a date at which point force had to be used.

Q. If I could just follow up with another question. Are you going to ask
Congress for approval of this resolution? Would you like to see Congress pass
the same kind of resolution as the U.N.?

A. I'd love to see Congress pass a resolution enthusiastically endorsing what
the United Nations has done, yes. We're in consultation on that and I have no
plans to call a special session. I'm not opposed to it, but we're involved in
consultations right now. I've talked to several members of Congress, I've talked
to leaders in the House, I've talked to several on the Republican side and
Democratic side in the Senate. And I want to be sure that these consultations
are complete.

Some feel a lame-duck session is not good, that the new members should have a
right to have a say. Others feel that we ought to move right now. The Congress,
as you know, in their adjournment resolution, had a provision in there that they
could come back and take this up. They are a coequal branch of government, they
can do that if they want to. But I -- we will continue our consultations. . . .

 Price of Victory

Q. Mr. President, you say you're confident that American troops will prevail
against Saddam if called upon.

A. Oh, absolutely.

Q. At what price? I mean --

A. Well, I can't give you that. I can't give you that, any figures, of course.
But I can say that the movement of this additional force safeguards the lives of
every American and every one of our allies in the gulf.

Q. Mr. President, in recent days, senior members of the Administration have
emphatically rejected the idea of any special emissaries or diplomatic envoys to
or from Iraq to discuss this, on your part. What changed your mind, sir?

A. The United Nations resolution, I think, has a good chance of making Saddam
Hussein understand what it is he's up against. I have not felt that he got the
message. I hope this will do it. But I am convinced that these two direct
meetings that I've discussed here will guarantee to all the people of the world
-- certainly to the American people -- that Saddam Hussein not misunderstand,
not misinterpret.  .  .  .

Q. You indicate that this date is not actually a deadline for the use of force,
merely a date after which force would be permissible. How do you avoid the
impression, should that day come and go without military action, that the
U.S.-led coalition has in fact blinked?

A. Well, we've got to look at events at the time. But I don't think there will
ever be a perception that the United States is going to blink in this situation.
That's why I had some of the words in this statement that I had. Yes?

 Quest for Mideast Stability

Q. Mr. President, you've just spoken about the weapons of mass destruction and
nuclear weapons, and also that one of your goals is to try to reach stability in
the region. Can you reach stability in the region with Saddam Hussein in power?

A. I think most countries, members of the United Nations, feel that there have
to be some safeguards put into effect in terms of guaranteeing the security and
stability of the gulf. And so I would think that the status quo ante will not be
enough, and I think there will be -- there are sanctions in place now, and I
think it would be very proper to discuss what those safeguards should be after
there has been a total compliance with the United Nations resolutions.  .  .  .

Q. Mr. President, I want to ask if your comments about the Kuwaiti Embassy --
whether it's fair to conclude, based on those, that you will neither close the
Embassy nor permit those Americans to be starved out?

A. I will not say exactly what I will do or exactly what I won't do. There is a
very interesting report that we got in this morning saying that some Iraqis
showed up at the Kuwaiti Embassy -- our Embassy in Kuwait -- and had delivered
fruit, vegetables and a case of Iraqi cigarettes to Embassy Kuwait. And
apparently there's going to be another delivery tomorrow, including soda pop.
And they asked what medical supplies were required. And it doesn't say that. And
the Embassy will apparently provide a list tomorrow. And the electricity is
still cut off. So this is kind of an interesting little development. But I --
somebody said to me: Well, hy, what about if there's some provocation? They
asked me in the leadership meeting. I said consider me provoked when it comes to
the United States Embassy. Consider me provoked when I see Americans without
proper food and medical equipment.

Q. May I follow up? Do you take it from that communique that you received there
that the Iraqis have the message and want to eliminate that as a potential
tripwire?

A. I don't know. It's too early -- it's the best question, right on target, one
that we were discussing inside. And I -- let's try to be optimistic and say this
is -- this could be a positive sign. But it's so far short of compliance with
international law that I can't be rejoicing. But it is a very interesting
development. . . .

 Criticism in Congress

Q. You've been getting some pretty negative comments up on the Hill at these
hearings that have been held this week. Now this morning you said this would not
be a long, protracted, Vietnam-type war. However, General Odom, the former head
of the N.S.A., testified just this morning at the Senate Armed Services that in
fact you have to be there for decades. Now presumably he means even after
military combat. We'd have to have people in place there as part of a
peacekeeping force. Do you see our commitment there extend that far?

A. No I don't.

Q. May I ask something else? Al Gore, yesterday, takes issue with your comments
and the comments of some of your aides, such as Brent Scowcroft, about Saddam
being able to churn out a nuclear weapon in a matter of months. Gore, who's had
some private briefings, apparently, from some of your people, indicates that
your Administration statements are misleading.

A. I disagree with the Senator. And if he wants to gamble on the future about
the construction of atomic weapons by Saddam Hussein, I don't. And I know what
the intelligence says. Every bit of it. And I can't share it, obviously, because
we don't comment on intelligence matters. But I am concerned. . . .

 Dependability of Allies

Q. Of those 26 nations that you list in the area, how many of those are equally
committed to offensive action other than just defensive action?

A. I can't give you the answer to that, because I don't really know. But I'd
expect that there is enthusiasm in all quarters of those countries for the U.N.
action that was taken yesterday.

Q. With all respect, shouldn't you know how many would follow your troops into
battle?

A. I know that what I said is true about the -- if we have to go into battle,
and I'm satisfied I know enough about that. I went over in detail -- as you
might well imagine a President should, because I have the responsibility as
commander in chief -- what might happen if we have to use force. I repeat, I
hope we'll never have to have one single shot fired in anger. Yes?

Q. Iraq has been constantly calling for dialogue. Aren't you concerned that
those two missions, Tariq Aziz and James Baker, will lead Saddam Hussein to
claim that the U.S. is showing signs of weakness?  .  .  .

A. No, I'm not. I'm concerned some might say this is an ultimatum, in which --
all it is is an effort to make sure that he understands the commitment of the
United States, that he understands that anything that is done must be done
inside the confines of the United Nations resolutions that have been passed,
that there will be no contingency, there can be no face-saving. This is not what
this is about. This is to be sure that he understands how strongly the President
of the United States feels about implementing to a T, without concession, the
United Nations position.

And some have told me that he's not getting the message of how determined we
are. And I can't think of any better way to do it, at this juncture, in the wake
of the U.N. resolution, than this face-to-face meeting. I'm not sure he'll agree
to it. . . .

Q. The Soviet Union did indeed vote on our side as far as the resolution,
allowing force if it's necessary. Are we going to offer the Soviet Union any
compromise on export credits? As you know, there's some concern that they think
there's a de facto grain embargo going on because we won't offer export credits
in their very needy time.

A. The matters are totally separate and unrelated, but I am concerned about
this. And I've talked about, with Mr. Gorbachev, of a willingness to entertain
proposals for food -- particularly if the reports prove to be accurate in terms
of the severe winter and the hardship that this will inflict on the Soviet
people.

 Conference on Mideast

Q. Mr. President, you -- Arab experts suggest that Saddam Hussein has hinted in
his remarks that he would like to have some sort of deal, but he wouldn't
necessarily hold to his demands. Now you're saying you're willing to meet with
him. Are you willing to offer him anything in these meetings in return for a
pullout, such as a conference on the Middle East?

A. No. Those two items are totally separate. We've made that very very clear.
And what I have said is that this will be -- these discussions will be done
within the U.N. mandate. . . .

Q. Mr. President, you mentioned the damage that higher oil prices are doing to
the world economy. Should Saudi Arabia and other producers share more of their
windfall?

A. I think they're doing a pretty good job in underwriting the costs to various
countries and helping third-party countries that are -- that have been hurt by
all of this. But I think everybody should go the extra mile to help others. . .
.

Q. . . . Should Saudi Arabia have a military draft?

A. That's for the Saudi Arabians to decide. I don't think the United States
needs one, incidentally. . . .

 Risking American Lives

Q. Mr. President, if you ultimately feel that you have to ask Americans to
support the use of force, what that, of course, means is that you have to ask
some parents to give up the lives of their children.

A. I know it.

Q. And what I was wondering was, we all know how important your children are to
you. Do you feel that this issue is important enough to you that you could
conceive of giving up one of their lives for it?

A. You know, Maureen, you've put your -- you put your finger on a very difficult
question. People say to me: How many lives? How many lives can you expend? Each
one's precious. And I don't want to reminisce, but I've been there. I know what
it's like to have fallen comrades and see young kids die in battle. And it's
only the President that should be asked to make the decision. Is it worth it?
How many lives is it worth? Is it worth it to commit one life -- put one life in
harm's way -- to achieve these objectives? And that's why I want to get a
peaceful resolution to this question. You ought to read my mail. It is so
heart-moving. Supportive and yet: "Please bring my kid home. Please bring my
husband home." And it's a tough question. But a President has to make the right
decision. And these are worldwide principles of moral importance. And I will do
my level best to bring those kids home without one single shot fired in anger.
And if a shot is fired in anger, I want to guarantee each person that their kid,
whose life is in harm's way, will have the maximum support, will have the best
chance to come home alive and will be backed up to the hilt. And that's why --
it's because of that question that weighs on my mind I added that language this
morning about how this will not be a Vietnam. They can criticize me for moving
force, and if we got one kid that's apt to be in harm's way, I want him backed
up to the hilt by American firepower and others as well. And that's why I'm
working as hard as I am, not only to hold this coalition together but to
strengthen it. . . . And if force has to be used, the best way to safeguard
lives is to see that you got the best and you're willing to use it. . . .

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush during his news conference at The White House
yesterday. With him were, from the left: Brent Scowcroft, the national security
adviser; John H. Sununu, White House chief of staff; Robert Gates, deputy chief
of the National Security Council; and Marlin Fitzwater, White House press
secretary. At rear was a Secret Service agent. (Paul Hosefros/The New York
Times)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 1, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Vietnam and Gulf Zone: Real Military Contrasts

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 997 words


In promising that any prospective war with Iraq will not be a painful and
protracted replay of the Vietnam conflict, President Bush drew the public's
attention yesterday to the sharp contrasts between today's war zone and the one
still fresh in the national memory.

But in adding the pledge that the contentious Congressional politics and "murky
ending" that characterized the Vietnam era will not undermine the current
military enterprise, the President seemed hopeful but not fully assured that the
American people were behind him.

The contrasts Mr. Bush identified are real, according to military officials.
There is no triple-canopy jungle in Kuwait and Iraq to hide the resupply of
Saddam Hussein's forces, as the Ho Chi Minh Trail and its honeycomb of
underground tunnels protected thousands of North Vietnamese soldiers who moved
tons of supplies south under frequent bombardment from the American Air Force.

There is no way to hide Iraq's supply lines, which stretch across hundreds of
miles of desert and along six-lane highways that can be bombed and cratered in
the opening hours of a war.

No Sanctuary

Likewise, there is no sanctuary from which Iraq can safely marshal the resupply
and reinforcement of the front line troops in Kuwait, as North Vietnam
resupplied itself from China and from the steady stream of Soviet and eastern
bloc shipping that arrived at its ports.

Iraq's sea access has been blocked since August and Iraq's neighbors are not its
allies. For the most part, Turkey, Iran, Syria, Jordan and Saudi Arabia are
cooperating with the international coalition arrayed against Baghdad.

Implicitly, Mr. Bush also pledged that if American forces go to war, the combat
would be as short as possible to minimize casualties, a vow that addresses the
most sensitive domestic political issue in this crisis. Mr. Hussein's forces may
fight tenaciously, but they are likely to be cut off from ammunition, food and
water after a matter of weeks, military analysts say.

A Veteran of Frustrations

In a recent interview, Mr. Bush's top field commander, Gen. H. Norman
Schwarzkopf, a veteran of Vietnam's frustrations, expressed confidence that he
would have the means to win.

"I think we have vastly superior fire power and technology," he said, "and I can
assure you that if we have to go to war, I am going to use every single thing
that is available to me to bring as much destruction to the Iraqi forces as
rapidly as I possibly can in the hopes of winning victory as quickly as
possible."

In recent weeks, General Schwarzkopf's statement has rippled through the United
States military establishment as the quintessential expression of post-Vietnam
military doctrine, one that implies taking enough forces to the battle to assure
an overwhelming victory at the least cost -- and one that implies a clear-cut
military objective and political backing at home.

The pledge to prepare for war with these full measured steps was extracted from
Mr. Bush by General Schwarzkopf's superior, Gen. Colin L. Powell, chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Administration officials say. General Powell is
another Vietnam-era commander who, like many others, helped to rebuild the
battered and demoralized armed forces into a volunteer force now facing its
greatest test.

Unresolved Political Issues

But even as Mr. Bush sought to dispel these shadows of Vietnam, his remarks at
the White House indicated that he was still wrestling with unresolved political
questions as he began to prepare the country for the possibility of war.

Though the President pledged that there "will not be any murky ending" to a
Persian Gulf conflict, the Administration has not been able to define how the
United States could disengage itself from an Iraq devastated by war or from one
where Saddam Hussein still holds sway atop a powerful military machine.

Mr. Bush denied that the United States military commitment to Persian Gulf
security might require United States forces to remain in the region for years,
but he also suggested that if Saddam Hussein remained in power, the "status quo
ante" of Mr. Hussein -- heavily armed and working on weapons of mass destruction
-- would not be acceptable.

Alliance Is Different

In addition, Mr. Bush suggested that the alliance he has forged to confront Iraq
is much different from the shaky alliance the United States had with the
government of South Vietnam. But questions have been raised in Congress about
whether Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the other regional nations threatened by Iraq's
aggression are as willing to make the same sacrifice as the United States
forces, whose presence they applaud in the region.

In Vietnam, the frequent reluctance of South Vietnam's armed forces to put
themselves at risk against the indigenous Vietcong enemy in part led to the the
creeping increases in United States troop levels.

The chief Congressional military strategist offering advice to Mr. Bush, Senator
Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, has urged Mr. Bush to give sanctions more time to
work, or, in the alternative, wage war from over the horizon with air power for
a longer period to protect American lives while bringing greater pressure to
bear on Mr. Hussein.

Significant concerns remain in the intelligence community that Mr. Hussein's
military commanders have prepared low-technology surprises for America's
high-technology weapons and battlefield tactics.

But Mr. Bush appears intent on short time frames to bring the military
brinksmanship to a head, and in doing so he was forced yesterday to confront the
ultimate question, asked often during the Vietnam era, about the human price he
was willing to pay for the liberation of Kuwait.

In responding, Mr. Bush the father deferred to Mr. Bush the President in
avoiding a direct answer on whether he would be willing to sacrifice a member of
his own family. "It's only the President that should be asked to make the
decision," he said.

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Military Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 1, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS
BUSH OFFERS TO SEND BAKER ON A PEACE MISSION TO IRAQ, BUT VOWS RESOLVE IN A WAR;

SURPRISE OVERTURE

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1565 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 30


President Bush said today that he had invited Iraq's Foreign Minister to
Washington and was ready to send Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d to Baghdad
in an attempt to find a peaceful solution to the Persian Gulf crisis. But he
warned that if war came he would "never, ever agree to any halfway effort."

The President's unexpected overture to Baghdad, announced at a White House news
conference, was welcomed by the Iraqi Ambassador to Paris, a close associate of
President Saddam Hussein. There was no immediate response from Mr. Hussein.
[Page 7.]

The President's action came only 24 hours after the United Nations Security
Council adopted a resolution authorizing member states to use force to oust
Iraqi troops from Kuwait if they are not withdrawn by Jan. 15.

In a move that seemed to be driven by diplomatic as well as domestic political
needs, Mr. Bush said he would be willing to send Mr. Baker to meet Mr. Hussein
"at a mutually acceptable time" between Dec. 15 and Jan. 15. He invited Tariq
Aziz, the Iraqi Foreign Minister, to meet him in Washington during the latter
part of the week of Dec. 10, presumably for preliminary talks. [Excerpts from
the news conference, page 6.]

'Positive Sign' From Iraqis

Mr. Bush also disclosed that Iraqis unexpectedly appeared at the besieged
American Embassy in Kuwait with fruit, vegetables and cigarettes -- a
development he called "a positive sign." He also said he saw no need for a
reinstitution of the draft, and indicated that he would not call Congress back
into session soon because he was not sure it would be willing to pass a
resolution endorsing his actions.

The President emphasized that Mr. Baker's journey "isn't a trip of concession"
and pledged that the United States would not waver from the United Nations'
repeated demands for Iraqi withdrawal, restoration of the Kuwaiti Government and
release of all hostages. He said that "the best way to get that across is
one-on-one, Baker looking him in the eye."

But he also said Mr. Baker would be willing "to discuss all aspects of the gulf
crisis." Some students of the region suggested that the mere fact that Mr. Bush
was ready to send such a high-level envoy -- not only the top American
foreign-policy official but also the President's closest political associate --
might provide a key for breaking the deadlock in the region.

Possibility for Hussein

Mr. Hussein, who has changed course suddenly in the past, might well seize upon
the trip as the facing-saving symbol that he has sought, arguing that his
invasion had accomplished a primary aim by forcing the United States to take
account of his grievances.

In addition, the President's initiative went some way toward blunting Democratic
calls on Capitol Hill for greater patience with economic sanctions, and toward
meeting Soviet and French demands for further diplomatic efforts. European
diplomats said, in fact, that they had been told that Soviet officials had
insisted on something like the initiative announced today as a condition for
their crucial backing in the Security Council on Thursday.

"Until now," said Judith Kipper, a Middle East scholar with the Brookings
Institution, "the United States has argued that any face-saving was a reward,
and hence impermissible, while the Soviets and most of the Europeans have argued
that since we can't give anything on substance, we needed to give him a symbol.
Now Bush has come around, and I think he'll have support approaching 100 percent
if this fails and he decides he has to go to war."

Fear of Another Vietnam

Finally, the Baker mission may help to convince a doubtful electorate that Mr.
Bush is not rushing heedlessly into war. He tried, at his news conference, to
assuage another fear that, according to opinion polls, grips many Americans: the
deep-seated fear of another lengthy, costly, indecisive conflict like the one in
Vietnam.

The President argued that the terrain, the enemy, the weapons and the
geopolitical situation in the gulf all differed from those in Vietnam, and he
added passionately: "This will not be another Vietnam. This will not be a
protracted, drawn-out war."

Abdul Razzak al-Hashimi, the Iraqi ambassador to Paris, gave the first official
reaction for his country to the President's surprise offers.

"This is a very important step," he said in an interview with the British
Broadcasting Corporation, "and we hope it is going to achieve what we are all
striving for -- negotiations instead of beating the drums of war. I consider it
very good news. We are not accepting negotiations with preconditions, but let's
be optimistic and see what Mr. Baker has in mind."

Support Among Lawmakers

On Capitol Hill, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and Representative
Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the majority leader, who have been two of Mr.
Bush's leading Democratic critics, both said the President had done the right
thing by "using yeterday's U.N. vote as an opportunity for diplomacy," as Mr.
Gephardt put it. Other lawmakers of both parties agreed.

"But we should be clear about one thing," Mr. Kennedy said. "The President is
going an additional mile, but going the true extra mile means giving sanctions
adequate time to work. The Jan. 15 fuse for war is still lit, and the current
peace initiative must not be allowed to divert the nation's attention from that
fact."

Although, as Mr. Bush noted, Congress has the right to call itself back into
session, much of the steam behind doing so seemed to evaporate.

Mr. Kennedy said a special session should be held next month unless Mr. Bush
promised not to go to war until Congress had had time after reassembling in
January to vote on the issue. But the Democratic leadership, which met with the
President late this afternoon, continued to resist any special session.

Role of Congress Still Debated

After a 90-minute meeting at the White House, the House Speaker, Thomas F.
Foley, Democrat of Washington, said that calling Congress back to Washington
"would not be timely," but Senator Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, the Minority
Leader, argued that Congress should act promptly.

"Apparently Congress wants to sit this one out," he said. "They don't want to do
anything. In my view that's an error."

"We don't have a consensus in Congress," said Representative William Broomfield
of Michigan, the ranking Republican on the House Foreign Affairs Committee. "I
think a narrowly drawn U.N.-type resolution would probably get through, but by a
narrow margin. So what good would it do? It would send the wrong message to
Saddam Hussein."

Others, like Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, said they
were concerned that Mr. Baker would find it hard to convince Mr. Hussein of
American determination without a Congressional resolution.

President Sounded Confident

With the United Nations resolution in hand, and with American troop strength in
the region on the way to 400,000, Mr. Bush sounded confident and resolute as he
met with reporters in the White House briefing room, despite a rising chorus of
criticism of his actions during the last three weeks.

Former Government officials have been testifying at Senate hearings this week
that the President should wait for sanctions to do their job before embarking on
offensive action, and the polls show only a bare majority of the public favoring
an early attack.

In a long opening statement, the President restated American goals and welcomed
the Security Council resolution, for which Mr. Baker lobbied frantically on four
continents. Until it was passed, Mr. Bush said, "Saddam may not have understood
what he's up against in terms of world opinion, and I am hopeful that now he
will realize that he must leave Kuwait immediately."

Confronting accusations that he is rushing into war when better alternatives
remain open, Mr. Bush declared: "I want peace. I want peace, not war, but if
there must be war, we will not permit our troops to have their hands tied behind
their backs, and I pledge to you that there will not be any murky ending. If one
American soldier has to go into battle, that soldier will have enough force
behind him to win."

Wants to 'De-Isolate' Hussein

By agreeing to receive Mr. Aziz in the Oval Office -- a visit sure to be
exploited to the full for propaganda purposes by Baghdad -- Mr. Bush opens
himself to the charge that he is retreating from his refusal to negotiate. But
he said he felt it was necessary to do everything possible to make sure that Mr.
Hussein understood reality -- "in a sense, to de-isolate him."

"I don't think there will ever be a perception that the United States is going
to blink in this situation," the President said when asked whether the Jan. 15
deadline did not, in effect, force the United States to launch an attack once it
had expired.

"I think yesterday's U.N. resolution was a step toward peace, not a step toward
war," he said at another point, "because I believe that when Saddam Hussein
finally gets the message and understands what he's up against in terms of world
opinion and other thins, that he will do in Kuwait what he did in Iran," where
he eventually withdrew his troops from enemy soil.

But Mr. Bush also commented, in apparent contradiction to that remark, "I'm not
all that hopeful that we'll get big results out of all of this."

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush at news conference at the White House. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg. 1); Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d,
right, talking with Vice President Dan Quayle during a meeting with
Congressional leaders. Across the table were, from left, Senators George J.
Mitchell, majority leader; Bob Dole, minority leader; Alan K. Simpson; Claiborne
Pell; and Jesse Helms. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg. 7)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 1, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

About New York;
Angel of Death Feels Old Winds Stir His Wings

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 760 words


One day a month during the time Donald A. Gould was assigned to Fort Hamilton in
Brooklyn, December 1968 to September 1969, he drew the same odious assignment.
He had to tell relatives that a soldier was dead or missing in action. Three
visits a day was the routine.

The subject came up over lunch the other day when discussion turned to the
Persian Gulf buildup. Mr. Gould, a 43-year-old sports broadcaster on Channel 4,
WNBC-TV, could still recite the words: "The President of the United States and
the Secretary of Defense have asked me to inform you that your loved
one . . . "

No specific instructions after that. Improvise.

A bitter, bitter memory. "I've got to say it's the hardest thing I ever had to
do," Mr. Gould said. "What you're really doing is breaking somebody's heart.
Doing it three times in a day is a little much."

There was the winter afternoon he had to go to Mineola, L.I., to visit a wife.
He remembers sitting in an Army car waiting for her to return. "It was a very
gray day," he said, almost as if part of him was still trapped there. "It looked
like the world was ending."

He remembers horror on the woman's face when she saw the olive drab car. "I
think she knew I wasn't there to tell her I served with her husband and wanted
to say hello."

Mr. Gould asked if they could talk inside. He closed the door and faced her. He
told her. She took a swing and hit him in the face. He held her wrists as she
cried and cried.

In the late spring of 1969, Mr. Gould went to a second-floor apartment in
Harlem. He went alone, not standard procedure, and doesn't remember why.
Messengers of doom usually traveled in pairs to the neighborhoods whose young
died so disproportionately.

Mr. Gould understood the resentment. "Almost every black kid who was of age was
in the Army," he said.

A father and grandfather were in a front room. In a back room, Mr. Gould could
hear the voices of a woman and a man. He said those in front had "quizzical
looks." He clarified: "They were heart-breaking looks, if you know what I mean."

So Mr. Gould recited his dreadful line, telling them their son was missing in
action. He took a deep breath, and spit out the rest: "He is presumed dead." The
woman, listening from the other room, wailed plaintively.  The man, the
soldier's younger brother, ran out. He stopped abruptly and slammed his fist
through a wall. "I'm glad that wasn't my head," Mr. Gould couldn't help
thinking.

What happened next staggered the young lieutenant. The father put a hand on his
shoulder and said he knew how hard it was to deliver such news. "Here's a guy
who just lost his son and he's concerned about my well-being," Mr. Gould said.

In World War II, loved ones first got word by telegram. In Korea and Vietnam, it
was done personally. It is still personal, as kin of the 49 service people who
have died during this mobilization know all too well. Forty-six have died in
accidents, two from illness, one by suicide.

Mr. Gould has his opinions about Saddam Hussein and geopolitics, but admits his
views on football are more in demand. What is gripping is the way his own war
experience pervades his life. Wars are forever.

He narrowly escaped being sent to Fort Bragg to learn how to jump out of
airplanes by asking one last time if he could please go elsewhere. Fear of
heights figured in. "I don't like being in second-floor apartments, to be honest
with you."

By luck, there was a place at Fort Hamilton. He could be near his family, as
well as have an intriguing job -- protocol officer. He greeted dignitaries. Once
the Brazilian War College. Once Vice President Spiro Agnew. "Heady stuff for a
21-year-old."

But like other junior officers, Mr. Gould had to pull his shift notifying next
of kin. He thought it ironic that officers training to be chaplains were exempt
from the grim duty. "Typical Army," he said. "A baker winds up digging ditches
and a ditch digger bakes bread."

Then he had to tell his parents he was going to Vietnam. He delayed for weeks.
He had spent too much off-duty time seeing them stare at a TV, thinking of their
oldest son there.

The younger Mr. Gould served as a company commander near the Demilitarized Zone.
Fighting was brutal, and events have come to jumble together. He and his brother
survived. An unfuzzy memory remains of staying up to hear his beloved Mets win
the World Series.

One duty had a certain familiarity. He had to write kin of three soldiers
describing how they died.

No complaints. "It was easier than the other job."


LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Donald A. Gould (The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 1, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1153 words



International 3-9

President Bush invited Tariq Aziz, Iraq's Foreign Minister, to Washington and
said he was ready to send Secretary of State Baker to Baghdad in an attempt to
find a peaceful solution to the gulf crisis. Page 1

Iraqi officials reacted with surprise and enthusiasm to Mr. Bush's offer to hold
talks in an effort to avoid war, although there was no immediate response from
President Hussein. 7

The price of oil fell $4.06 a barrel, to $28.85, after Mr. Bush's surprise peace
overture. Experts said that with the threat of war temporarily removed the price
would sink lower. 1

Dow Jones average rises 40.84, to 2,559.65, after news 33

Military analysis: The Vietnam war remains so fresh in the national memory that
Mr. Bush seemed compelled to underline the contrasts between it and the current
military operation. 8

Pentagon says the U.S. will send 300 more planes to the gulf 8

American troops in the desert applaud the U.N.'s vote 8

The American Embassy in Kuwait received small amounts of fruit, vegetables and
cigarettes from Iraqis, who said they would come back with more food and medical
supplies, Mr. Bush said. 1

Bush, meeting foreign minister, lauds China's support in crisis 8

Gulf nations will give the Soviet Union $3 billion in loans 8

Germany's election lacks suspense. Polls unanimously show that the ruling
coalition, led by Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic party, will be
returned to office. 1

German voters focus on close race for Mayor of Berlin 9

The surprise presidential candidate in Poland, Stanislaw Tyminski, has appealed
to workers by extolling entrepreneurialism, tax cuts, and small businesses,
while promising to preserve social programs. 9

U.S. trade delegation divided by conflicting views 33

Cuba has begun an austerity plan, sending hundreds of city dwellers to work on
farms in an effort to increase food production and lessen the country's reliance
on imports. 3

Twelve white men in South Africa were arrested in connection with an assault
last Saturday on several hundred black children at a picnic in a newly
desegregated park. 3

Embassies plan to evacuate if rebels in Chad advance 5

Trivandrum Journal: The Hindu right's call alarms India 4

National 10-14, 26

Treasury Secretary Nicolas Brady said the Bush Administration would support a
broad restructuring of the banking and securities industries that would permit
banks and securities firms to merge. 1

Dennis DeConcini was singled out by a savings and loan regulator as the only one
among five Senators who behaved with "impropriety" at a meeting with regulators.
10

Government economic index falls 1.2 percent in October 33

The new tax on gasoline takes effect today, increasing the cost of gasoline at
the pump by a nickel a gallon. The tax, part of the deficit-cutting plan passed
by Congress, will add about $5 billion a year to the Treasury. 11

A predication of a major earthquake along the New Madrid Fault in Missouri has
lured scores of journalists and sent many residents scurrying in the opposite
direction. 1

The school decentralization program in Chicago was struck down by the Illinois
Supreme Court, which ruledthat the effort to give parents more control was
unconstitutional. 10

President Bush vetoed a budget bill for the nation's intelligence agencies,
saying a provision within it would have violated his authority to conduct
foreign policy. 10

Newt Gingrich assails Richard Darman 11

Gov. Bob Martinez's nomination as head of the nation's drug policy was
criticized by Democrats. Their comments suggest they would use his confirmation
hearings to attack White House antidrug efforts. 10

A faith healing case in Lousiana that ended in a mistrial may be retried. A jury
failed to decide whether a mother who relied on prayer to cure her 5-year-old
son of leukemia had killed him by neglect. 14

A man accused by his daughter of killing her 8-year-old playmate 21 years ago
was convicted. The daughter said she had repressed all memory of the crime until
last year. 26

 Regional 27-29

A plan to clean Long Island Sound was agreed on by Federal, New York and
Connecticut officials. The plan, which could cost more than $6 billion, would
upgrade sewage plants to remove more pollutants. 1

Mussel found in the Hudson is not a zebra mussel 28

The Daily News may deploy hawkers in subway and commuter rail stations operated
by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, a Federal judge ruled. 27

The hawkers are the foot soldiers in The News's fight for circulation. A force
of 1,109 -- primarily homeless people -- have sold 150,000 copies a day, a
spokesman said. 27

A compromise police hiring plan was offered by the City Council leadership. The
plan would scale back thenumber of new police officers Mayor Dinkins proposes,
and do it over six years, not four, to save money. 28

Kahane suspect kept address book of pro-Israeli officials 29

The school-based management idea at the center of the plan to overhaul New York
City's schools involves parents who may not know a lot about education but who
do know a lot about children's needs. 27

New Jersey's death penalty law has yet to result in an execution. The Supreme
Court has overturned 25 death sentences, prompting the Attorney General to say
it appears intent on preventing any executions. 27

Neediest Cases 28

Business Digest 33

 Sports

 Baseball: Spira charges revised 46

Basketball: Bucks beat Knicks 45

Bird hits a milestone in Celtics' victory 46

St. John's tops Niagara 47

Column: Berkow on Tom Watson 45

Football: Discipline for Bavaro undecided 45

Quarterback makes an impression 46

Hockey: Flyers top Rangers 45

Devils and Islanders tie 46

Tennis: Agassi wins Davis Cup match 45


 Obituaries 31


 Norman Cousins, author

Harry M. Caudill, a lawyer, professor and writer

John P. Hubbard, a physician and an educator

 Consumer's World 50

 Veterans' charity under fire

Labeling drugs for the elderly

Coping with tipping in lean times

Christmas trees by mail

Guidepost

Arts/Entertainment

 A Bolshoi is born in Texas 15

Heroic tenor wins prize 15

Theater: "The Lunatic, the Lover and the Poet" 16

Music: New York Philharmonic and Charles Dutoit 18

Susannah McCorkle 15

Dance: "The Cage" by New York City Ballet 16

Surveying 125 years of The Nation 17

 Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

 Editorials 24

Bush's extra mile for peace

Election reform, Cuomo-style

Tark the Shark, gliding away

Odd behavior in Noriega case

Letters 24

Flora Lewis: For a sober balance 25

Leonard Michaels: This space is for real 25

Liu Binyan: Stop stroking Beijing's butchers 25

John Cronin: Legally blind on the Hudson 25

David Barr: What is AIDS? Think again 25

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 1, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Veterans' Charity Criticized on Finances

BYLINE: By BARRY MEIER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 50; Column 3; Style Desk; Consumer's World Page

LENGTH: 1141 words


A nationwide charity that was formed to give hobby and craft kits to disabled
veterans is being criticized by a charities rating group that says it is
spending too much money on raising funds.

The National Charity Information Bureau, an independent rating group in New
York, is also questioning whether the charity, Help Hospitalized Veterans Inc.
of San Diego, is adequately disclosing that it gives money to related groups
that advocate, among other things, the mandatory drug testing of high school
students and workers.

Help Hospitalized Veterans has begun a highly publicized campaign for funds to
buy snacks for American troops in the Persian Gulf. Advertisements are appearing
in newspapers and magazines across the country.

At issue in the charity information bureau's inquiry are questions that relate
to all charities: how much of the donated money makes its way to the intended
beneficaries, and whether funds claimed as educational expenditures serve a
strictly informational purpose.

Help Hospitalized Veterans has never been accused of failing to deliver promised
goods. George Brown, a spokesman for the Federal Department of Veterans Affairs,
said the craft and model kits the charity provided were welcomed by many
long-term patients.

Raised $10 Million in 1988

Established in 1971, Help Hospitalized Veterans collected more than $10 million
last year to buy the kits and distribute them to patients in veterans' and
military hospitals.

Roger Chapin, the president and founder of the charity, said yesterday that he
had just learned of the information bureau's questions. He said he hoped to
resolve any problems soon in talks with bureau officials. But he said, "We are
doing what we think is right, and we give our donors fair value for their
donations."

The Council of Better Business Bureaus, which also rates charities, said it was
doing a routine annual review of Help Hospitalized Veterans, but added that the
group had met all its standards in a 1989 evaluation.

Of the 300 charities studied by the National Charity Information Bureau, about
80 percent meet all the group's standards and 90 percent meet its standard that
at least 60 percent of revenue go to programs. The Council of Better Business
Bureaus reviews about 400 charities annually; about 70 percent meet all its
guidelines, and more than 90 percent meet its guideline that 50 percent of total
income be spent on programs, said Bennett Weiner, a vice president of the
council.

In 1988, the charity information bureau criticized Help Hospitalized Veterans,
saying that in its fiscal year 1987, the charity spent about 45 percent of its
total revenue on fund raising and management.

"They did not meet that standard in 1988," said Kenneth Albrecht, the bureau's
president. "Based on our review, it appears that they will not meet that and
other standards in 1990."

In its report for the fiscal year ended in July, Help Hospitalized Veterans said
it spent about $3.5 million, or 35 percent of its donations, on kits for
veterans. The charity also reported spending nearly $2 million, or about 19
percent of its total revenue, on public education campaigns.

Holeri Faruolo, a research assistant for the charity information bureau,
asserted that the charity was attributing too much of the cost of its
fund-raising campaign to education.

Charities are allowed to list some solicitation costs as program expenses if
they include educational material. But they are increasingly being criticized by
those why say they attribute too much of their fund-raising cost to education.

Mr. Chapin said he was not aware of any problems in his charity's financial
statements, which have audited by an independent accountant.

Mr. Albrecht said he was concerned that recent donors to the organization were
not aware that 10 percent of all donated funds go to Citizens for a Drug Free
America Inc. and Project Drug Free. Those groups, founded in the late 1980's,
share some board members with Help Hospitalized Veterans, and Mr. Chapin is
their paid director.

Mr. Albrecht said his group's conclusions were preliminary but added that they
were "quite unlikely" to change. He said the information bureau expected to
publish its final report early next year, after Mr. Chapin's group had a chance
to respond formally. The charity information bureau says that its own funds come
from individuals, foundations, corporations and chambers of commerce.

In its mail solicitation, Help Hospitalized Veterans mentions in small type that
it plans to use "a small portion of our organization's resources to combat the
frightening scourge of drugs on our land." It says this is because of drug
problems among hospitalized veterans.

But the group does not specifically state that the funds, which came to about $1
million last year, go to two closely related organizations. In separate
fund-raising materials, Citizens for a Drug Free America said it was lobbying
for tougher drug laws, including mandatory drug testing for students and workers
in private business, education campaigns and the creation of a toll-free phone
number that individuals could call to give the police tips about drug dealers.

Mr. Chapin said he believed that Help Hospitalized Veterans' disclosures on its
drug-related activities was adequate, but added that he would be willing to
change any statements if information bureau officials objected to them. "We are
very proud of what we are doing, and there is no intention to hide it," he said.


Gifts of Cookies and Chips

Mr. Weiner of the Better Business Council said the disclosures by the veterans'
group about its drug-related activities were under study as part of a routine
annual review.

Mr. Chapin said the group had already raised more than $2.9 million to send gift
boxes of snacks to military personnel in the Persian Gulf. The boxes, called
"G.I. Christmas Gift Pacs," contain things like cookies, raisins and potato
chips.

He said any excess revenue raised in the promotion would be used to buy more
snack packages or would be donated to a charity like the U.S.O. He emphasized
that those funds would not be used in any regular programs of Help Hospitalized
Veterans, like its drug-fighting activities.

Mr. Chapin also directed a charity program in the late 1960's that sent some
600,000 packages of candy, nail clippers and gun-cleaning fluid to American
troops in Vietnam. And he headed an unsuccessful charity effort to raise funds
to provide vacations for former prisoners of war returning from Southeast Asia.

Mr. Albrecht said his group was not criticizing the Help Hospitalized Veterans
campaign to send snacks to soldiers in the Persian Gulf. Mr. Chapin said that
his group would conduct a separate audit of the Persian Gulf project when it was
completed and make the results public.


LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Headings from two fund-raising letters sent by Help Hospitalized
Veterans, at center and bottom, and from a related group at top.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 1, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
125 Years of Surprises in The Nation

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 994 words



The Nation, 1865-1990
Selections From the Independent Magazine of Politics and Culture.
Edited by Katrina vanden Heuvel.
Illustrated. 534 pages. Thunder's Mouth Press . $21.95.

Writing from Berlin in September 1931, before an international disarmament
conference in Geneva, the scientist-philosopher Albert Einstein made a plea for
peace -- and a prediction:

"It seems to me that today the responsible leaders of the several peoples have,
in the main, the honest will to abolish war. The opposition to this
unquestionably necessary advance lies in the unhappy traditions of the people
which are passed on like an inherited disease from generation to generation
because of our faulty educational machines. Of course, the main supports of this
tradition are military training and its glorification, and not less important,
the press which is so dependent upon the military and the larger industries.
Without disarmament there can be no lasting peace. On the contrary, the
continuation of military armaments in their present extent will with certainty
lead to new catastrophes."

Writing a satirical piece called "Einstein in Hollywood" in August 1938, the
playwright and director George S. Kaufman took off from a news item claiming
that Warner Brothers had invited Sigmund Freud to be a consultant on the new
Bette Davis movie, "Dark Victory." He then imagined this headline over another
exclusive by the Hearst gossip columnist Louella Parsons:

"Warner Bros. to Film Theory of Relativity"

Mr. Kaufman began: "Einstein's arrival in Hollywood, of course, was the signal
for a gay round of dinners and cocktail parties. The Basil Rathbones, who had
given a party in Freud's honor to which everyone came as his favorite neurosis,
gave one for Einstein in which the guests were got up as their favorite numbers.
Needless to say, there were some pretty hot numbers." The piece went on to say
that Professor Einstein was assigned an office in the writers' building on the
Warner lot and given two scenarists, Sol and Al, to help him lick the script.
Eventually, all shared screen credit for "Gold Diggers at College," starring
Joan Blondell, "based on the Theory of Relativity, by Albert Einstein."


Both articles appeared in The Nation and are part of a new collection, "The
Nation, 1865-1990."

This eclectic and readable selection from the magazine's first 125 years is
filled with such unexpected bylines and delightful surprises. The articles,
editorials, reporting, reviews and poetry have been chosen by Katrina vanden
Heuvel, a Nation editor at large, for what she considers to be their "critical
spirit" about the magazine's steadfast concerns: civil rights and liberties,
opposition to racism, the struggle against corruption, abuse of power and
militarism.

A number of the magazine's controversial stands, with opinions ranging from
liberal to radical, are here. That is the magazine's heritage from its founders.
It was established a few months after the Civil War and continues to campaign
idealistically, if often futilely, for the country's and the world's
reconstruction.

Still, it's hard to imagine a more influential article in recent decades than
"The Safe Car You Can't Buy" by Ralph Nader in 1959. That article and his 1965
book, "Unsafe at Any Speed," exposed poor automobile safety standards, annoyed
but aroused the Detroit car makers and enlivened the consumer movement. The
final article in the book, Richard J. Barnet on "Bush's Splendid Little War,"
appeared in January 1990. It criticized the President for the military adventure
in Panama and can be read profitably today in light of the American troops in
Saudi Arabia.


It is tempting to turn to the poetry section first because "The Nation,
1865-1990" includes many of the major 20th-century poets, among them William
Butler Yeats, W. H. Auden, Wallace Stevens, Federico Garcia Lorca, Robert Frost,
Carl Sandburg, Robert Lowell, Pablo Neruda and Octavio Paz. Several of the
strongest poems in the book, like Denise Levertov's "What Were They Like?" and
Robert Bly's "Johnson's Cabinet Watched by Ants," were written for the campus
and community read-in campaigns against the Vietnam War.

If only "The Nation, 1865-1990" had an illustration section, too. The book
includes a measly five drawings. The brilliant examples by the artists who are
represented -- Ben Shahn on Sacco and Vanzetti, David Levine's portrait of I. F.
Stone, Robert Grossman on the cold War, Edward Sorel's Presidential beasties and
Fritz Eichenberg's antiwar woodcuts -- make the reader yearn for more work by
the magazine's contributing artists.

At the heart of "The Nation, 1865-1990," of course, are its dozens of serious
essays -- reportorial, critical, crusading. This is not to overlook the book's
essayists, who leaven the hard stuff with humor -- Robert C. Benchley, James
Thurber, Calvin Trillin and Molly Ivins.


The collection turns out to be a name-dropper of writers who received the Nobel
Prize -- or might have: Henry James on Saratoga's social life; Sinclair Lewis on
Minnesota as a Norse state; Willa Cather explaining Nebraska's settlers; John
Dos Passos on the transformation of the American Legion; Bertrand Russell
expounding on what it means to be modern minded; Thomas Mann coming out in favor
of the Loyalists during the Spanish Civil War; Hannah Arendt on French
existentialism; Jean-Paul Sartre, on Americans and their myths, and the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. on the state of civil rights in the United States.

All told, "The Nation, 1865-1990" is not a history of The Nation, with its
alarums and excursions, but a selective history of the main concerns of these
times expressed through the heartfelt opinions of the people who wrote for it.
If there is a unifying theme running through these provocative pieces it is, as
E. L. Doctorow puts it in an introduction, "the articulation of conscience, or
ethical perception."

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Katrina vanden Heuvel (Maude Clay/Thunder's Mouth Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 1, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Bennett's Drug Czar Legacy Is All Negative;
Washington Plan?

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 297 words


To the Editor:

Your Nov. 11 editorial in praise of William J. Bennett was simply underwhelming.
Mr. Bennett did what a wag once suggested we do about the Vietnam War: "Declare
a victory and go home."

He quit, you write, just when there appear "glimmers of hope that the nation's
crack epidemic may have peaked." Surely, to say that drug addiction and abuse
came to their highest point during William Bennett's watch is nothing for him to
brag about.

But, you imply, with more wish fulfillment than credible scientific evidence,
after this "peak" we'll see a decline, for which there are those "glimmers of
hope."

A more sober evaluation of Mr. Bennett's 19-month reign gives less cause to
cheer. Some basic questions are still to be answered:

When he took office, Mr. Bennett was quoted as designating the District of
Columbia as "the first high-intensity drug-trafficking area" in the country, and
he proposed a "landmark plan" (chiefly relying on more prisons). As he leaves,
one might ask whatever happened to that plan? Or is Washington still a
"high-intensity drug-trafficking area"?

How much more do we know now, after Mr. Bennett's 19 months, about the cause of
drug abuse? What research has been conducted and with what results? How much
more do we know about treatment methods? The "solid intellectual base" you refer
to is less than visible.

As to those "encouraging statistics," still with us are drug-related crime,
violence and turf wars in the inner cities, and overwhelmed and underfunded
treatment centers.

Officeholders come and go (and make hay for future careers), but drug despair,
drug violence, drug crime and drug misery stay with us, impervious to
grandstanding and politics.

MEYER RANGELL
San Miguel de Allende, Mexico
Nov. 14, 1990

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Editors' Choice: The Best Books of 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2527 words



BITING AT THE GRAVE
The Irish Hunger Strikes and the Politics of Despair.
By Padraig O'Malley.

THE COMPLETE POEMS OF ANNA AKHMATOVA
Edited by Roberta Reeder.
Translated by Judith Hemschemeyer.

FRIEND OF MY YOUTH
By Alice Munro.

LAWRENCE OF ARABIA
The Authorized Biography of T.E. Lawrence.
By Jeremy Wilson.

LONDON FRIEND
By Martin Amis.

MY SON'S STORY
By Nadine Gordimer.

OMEROS
By Derek Walcott.

POSSESSION
A Romance.
By A. S. Byatt.

RABBIT AT REST
By John Updike.

THE SEARCH FOR MODERN CHINA
By Jonathan D. Spence.

SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR
A Biography.
By Deirdre Bair.

THE THINGS THEY CARRIED
By Tim O'Brien.

TROPICAL GANGSTERS
By Robert Klitgaard.

VLADIMIR NABOKOV
The Russian Years.
By Brian Boyd.

AFTER 10 weekly sessions of sometimes illuminating argument the editors of The
Book Review chose 14 books as the best of 1990, from a list of 46 they initially
had nominated.

Compared with the 1989 list, in which most of the fiction was visionary if not
downright fantastic and most of the nonfiction was about war and revolution, it
is quite dignified. There is scarcely an angelic irruption into the ordinary
fabric of life or a satanic worldwide conspiracy in the lot.

Two of the selections are books of poetry -- Derek Walcott's 325-page epic
"Omeros" and "The Complete Poems of Anna Akhmatova," a two-volume edition in
both Russian and English that is the first full compilation of her work in
either language.

The six other volumes of fiction include two of stories, by Tim O'Brien and
Alice Munro, and four novels, by A. S. Byatt, John Updike, Nadine Gordimer and
Martin Amis.

Among the nonfiction works are three biographies -- of Simone de Beauvoir by
Deirdre Bair, of Vladimir Nabokov by Brian Boyd and of T. E. Lawrence by Jeremy
Wilson; Robert Klitgaard's account of the failure of outside experts to reform,
or even affect, the economy of an impoverished African nation; a history of
China during the last 400 years by Jonathan D. Spence, and Padraig O'Malley's
meditative history of the 1980-81 hunger strikes in which 10 Irish Republican
Army members died.

Diaries and collections of letters are excluded from nomination, not out of
disdain but because we assume the writers of them -- well, most of them -- do
not intend them to become books. This year there was a fine volume of Florence
Nightingale's letters, and reviews of letters written by Tennessee Williams,
Katherine Anne Porter and Francois Truffaut occupied the front page.

The best books of the year are chosen from among those reviewed since last
year's Christmas issue. The descriptions of them given below are drawn from the
reviews. The best books are not included in the list of notable books which
begins on page 48.

BITING AT THE GRAVE
The Irish Hunger Strikes and the Politics of Despair.
By Padraig O'Malley.
Beacon Press.

Ten Irish Republican Army members in a Northern Ireland prison -- including
Bobby Sands, who was elected to the British Parliament in the midst of his
ordeal -- died in hunger strikes in 1980-81. Their macabre enthusiasm for the
ancient art of dying for Ireland produced incalculable results that continue to
ripple through British and Irish politics and life. In an eloquent and haunting
book, Padraig O'Malley, who was born in Dublin and now teaches in Boston, makes
the fanaticism of these men and their supporters, the obdurate and morally
discredited tactics of the British Government and the hopeless combat of the
Protestant and Roman Catholic factions in the Northern Ireland struggle
explicable, and exposes the politics behind it.

THE COMPLETE POEMS OF ANNA AKHMATOVA
Edited by Roberta Reeder.
Translated by Judith Hemschemeyer.
Zephyr Press.

Anna Akhmatova -- the high priestess of Russian poetry -- saw her husband shot,
her son imprisoned twice by Stalin, her work banned in the 1930's and late 40's,
and she knew few peaceful moments before her death in 1966 at the age of 76. To
her the role of the poet was to remember and bear witness. Conscience,
repentance, suffering have an effortless place in her great poetry and testify
to the purgation she underwent in her work. Sonorous, calm, deliberate in
movement, her Russian has no English equivalent, but in this admirably
restrained and accurate translation, sense and message strike with all the
weight of the original. To render the entire corpus of such a poet into
proportioned, forceful English is a remarkable achievement, and so are these two
beautifully made volumes.

FRIEND OF MY YOUTH
By Alice Munro.
Alfred A. Knopf.

The stories of Alice Munro -- a hugely gifted chronicler of the lives of people
of habitual spiritual frugality in Ontario -- have made her one of the world's
great totemic writers. In this, her sixth collection of stories, the country has
darkened and the principal characters are older than those in previous books;
they are now baffled and bitter survivors of seismic cultural upheavals. But
these troubled men and women are compulsively curious and the lucky have moments
of near epiphany that sparkle through life's malevolence. Each story is a marvel
of construction, with parallel narratives of inquiry and introspection. Ms.
Munro, who has deepened the channels of realism, is a writer of extraordinarily
rich texture; her imagery stuns or wounds and her sentences stick to the rough
surfaces of our world.

LAWRENCE OF ARABIA
The Authorized Biography of T. E. Lawrence.
By Jeremy Wilson.
Atheneum.

A cube of reading matter may be inhibiting, but this vast biography of one of
the most enigmatic figures in modern times will endure beside T. E. Lawrence's
own book "The Seven Pillars of Wisdom" as Lawrence's monument, and future books
about the great soldier and adventurer will be merely commentaries on it. Jeremy
Wilson does not spoil a splendid story by academic dryness, but he has acquired
some of Lawrence's austerity. He is a skilled analyst of human nature and he
uses the enormous Lawrence archive made available to him to sweep away many of
the Lawrence myths, leaving the man himself perhaps even more mysterious than he
seemed before. It is a wholly convincing performance and only a sour critic
would find fault with its police-court clarity.

LONDON FIELDS
By Martin Amis.
Harmony Books.

Martin Amis has taken the apocalyptic genre into sinister byways in this bitter
tragicomedy of life in a world going noisily to hell. His dark vision of life
has always been relentless, but this novel, a virtuoso depiction of a wild and
lustful society in a dying world, is a large book of comic and satirical
invention. It offends every imaginable sensibility. Mr. Amis's mordant satire
turns his characters into caricatures, but those caricatures have a vitality and
erotic intensity seldom found in modern fiction. "London Fields" is not a safe
book; it is moved not by plot but by the density of its language and its
language is demonically alive.

MY SON'S STORY
By Nadine Gordimer.
Farrar, Straus & Giroux.

In this unnerving tour de force, a "coloured" boy in South Africa stumbles into
the secret life of his father, a leader of the movement to end apartheid. He is
stunned by the casualness of the infidelity and by the expectation that he will
become a conspirator of silence. His perplexity gives way to a sardonic voice
that keeps reminding us that this novel is meant to look with nuanced force at
moral complexity, ambiguity and hypocrisy. But Nadine Gordimer, who has a keen
eye for the exceedingly precarious moral situation of everyone in her violently
unjust country, has an uncanny ability to portray each of her characters with
sympathy and subtlety. She can expose the evil of the world without damning the
people caught in it, people we come to value as we know them.

OMEROS
By Derek Walcott.
Farrar, Straus & Giroux.

The title of Derek Walcott's 325-page poem is the Greek name of the epic poet
Homer, but it is the blind, homeless old poet himself rather than Homeric heroes
who inspires this enthralling story in verse. Mr. Walcott's vividly realized
characters are the ordinary people of the Caribbean islands. Their story is as
rich as that of any epic and, as it unfolds, it encompasses the whole world and
all our histories; their experiences become timeless, universal. No poet rivals
Mr. Walcott in humor, emotional depth, lavish inventiveness in language or in
the ability to express the thoughts of his characters and compel the reader to
follow the swift mutations of ideas and images in their minds. This wonderful
story moves in a spiral, replicating human thought, and in the end,
surprisingly, it makes us realize that history, all of it, belongs to us.

POSSESSION
A Romance.
By A. S. Byatt.
Random House.

A plenitude of Dickensian surprises awaits the reader at the end of this novel
about competing academics who come into comically mortal combat when one of them
discovers that two Victorian poets, a man and a woman, whom they all guard
jealously as their idols and the sources of their incomes, had more than a
passing interest in each other. A. S. Byatt is a gifted observer of details and
she uses them brilliantly in this very Victorian "romance" of a detective story
that satirizes academia but also becomes a concoction in the manner of Jorge
Luis Borges. She creates characters who might have stepped out of Dickens or P.
G. Wodehouse directly into a post-modernist novel and, along the way, writes
fine Victorian verse and prose, and opens every narrative device of fiction to
inspection without ever ceasing to delight.

RABBIT AT REST
By John Updike.
Alfred A. Knopf.

With this, the most brooding, most demanding and most concentrated of all of
John Updike's longer novels, the Rabbit quartet, and Rabbit, come to an end. Its
final word, spoken by Rabbit himself, is "Enough." Navigating the stumble toward
death of this antihero, one can only think of Schopenhauer's definition of
walking as "arrested falling." Inevitably, this novel will make one reflect also
on the previous three and what becomes most clear is that the being which most
illuminates all four books is not Rabbit or any other character but the world
through which he moves on his long decline, meticulously recorded by one of the
most gifted American realists. The Rabbit novels, for all their grittiness, make
up Mr. Updike's surpassingly eloquent valentine to his country.

THE SEARCH FOR MODERN CHINA
By Jonathan D. Spence.
W. W. Norton & Company.

The central theme in this volume -- a comprehensive explanation of four
centuries from the decline of the Ming dynasty to the death of the democracy
movement in June 1989 -- is China's troubled search for identity in the modern
world. The significance of that struggle is not limited to China. Jonathan D.
Spence uses fiction and poetry to breathe life into historical processes, folk
songs to galvanize entire peasant movements and diplomatic correspondence to
reveal the complexity of official thinking about China's destiny. He reveals the
inner lives of historical characters and shows, rather than merely tells, the
continuity of Chinese history, the links between the Manchu emperors and Mao
Zedong and between the protesters of Tiananmen Square and intellectual rebels of
the long past. This superb history will challenge and enrich Western thinking
about contemporary China.

SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR
A Biography.
By Deirdre Bair.
Summit Books.

During the last six years of Simone de Beauvoir's life, Deirdre Bair spent a
great deal of time with her, armed with tape recorder and note pad. Her
demystifying biography of the serious, frumpy mother of feminism, the Mother
Courage of existentialism and left-wing politics in France, the epitome of
bourgeois rebelliousness, leaves de Beauvoir better understood than her own
works do. And it is reassuring to find out at last the extent to which de
Beauvoir lived a life independent of Jean Paul Sartre and how she achieved for
herself the intellectual and erotic freedom she claimed all women ought to have.
Ms. Bair addresses her subject from a strongly American point of view and while
her references to French intellectual history are not always insightful, her
tone of wonderment comes at the right points in the narrative.

THE THINGS THEY CARRIED
By Tim O'Brien.
Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin Company.

This collection of interrelated and coherent stories about Vietnam belongs high
on the list of best fiction about any war. The narration passes through the
stories from character to character, including one named Tim O'Brien. They
contradict one another about incidents, undermine one another's versions. Thus
Mr. O'Brien gets beyond literal descriptions of what these men went through. He
makes sense of war's unreality -- and of why he has further distorted that
unreality in his fiction -- by exploring the workings of imagination, by probing
his memory of the terror and fearlessly confronting the way he has dealt with it
as a soldier and a writer. He not only crystallizes the Vietnam experience for
everyone; he exposes the nature of all war stories.

TROPICAL GANGSTERS
By Robert Klitgaard.
Basic Books.

Robert Klitgaard, an administrator for two and a half years of a World Bank
project to reform the economy of tiny, impoverished Equatorial Guinea,
understands that transferring skills is more important than transmitting cash,
and that neither givers nor recipients of aid programs know how to do it. His
style is more that of a novelist or travel writer than of an economist, and his
tale of lethargy and corruption among the Equatorial Guineans and indifference
and frustration among foreign experts has the twists and surprises of fiction.
But it is not made up. A reader learns much from it about why our approaches to
the third world are often mischievous failures. In the end it even leads one to
question the wisdom of the whole process of what we call development.

VLADIMIR NABOKOV
The Russian Years.
By Brian Boyd.
Princeton University Press.

Nabokov's life reads like a work by a very imaginative creator. In this first
volume of his biography, Brian Boyd gives us a definitive life of the writer and
a superbly documented chronicle of his time -- from the brilliant last years of
the czars through the 1917 Revolution and the decades of exile in Europe before
Nabokov sailed for American in 1940. Mr. Boyd's great gift for drawing life and
literature together makes his book especially rewarding for people who do not
read Russian, for during his first 20 years of exile Nabokov wrote 8 novels, 50
stories, 4 plays, 100 poems and much more that is still untranslated. And he is
especially good on the central theme of so much of Nabokov's work, his
relationship with his father, the dedicated liberal political leader. The
assassination of his father in Berlin in 1922 produced a trauma that
reverberates through most of Nabokov's writing; Mr. Boyd allows us to feel its
full resonance.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION;
Peter Pan, Garfield and Bart - All Have Asian Roots

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 35; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1778 words

DATELINE: HONGKONG


In a gray concrete building on a dusty side street in the southern China town of
Shenzhen, a young Chinese woman sits at a metal desk, carefully painting in a
sketch of the cheerful Disney character Baloo the Bear. The woman, who speaks no
English and has never traveled beyond the bustling border town only 45 minutes
by train from Hong Kong, is at work on an episode of the Disney television
series "Tale Spin" that will be seen just weeks later, half a world away, by
millions of young Americans watching their afternoon cartoon programs.

She is but one of hundreds of such Asian artisans. In response to the growing
popularity of animated fare, American producers have been relying more and more
on overseas studios to help them turn out high-quality, reasonably priced
television and full-length feature cartoons. Today, much of that animation work
is being done in Asia. Japan, Taiwan, Korea, the Philippines and now China are
all home to studios that are frantically scrambling to satisfy the craving of
American audiences for animated cartoons.

In the early 1970's, Hollywood producers, looking for ways to cut rising labor
costs, began sending some of their animation work to Mexico, Australia, Canada
and Spain. By the early 80's, these producers were turning more and more to the
Far East, where the Japanese, with their own flourishing animation industry, had
a pool of skilled workers as well as a string of subcontractors -- some in
Taiwan and Korea -- set up to handle the work.

"The primary reason people sent work abroad was to save money," says Milt
Vallas, vice president of Pacific Rim Productions Inc. "But by going overseas,
by locating cheaper labor sources, they were able to put more into shows, making
them more complicated than ever, with more movement, better backgrounds, more
special effects."

The lower labor costs mean substantial savings on the total expense of a
production: a half-hour cartoon produced in Asia costs from $100,000 to
$150,000. If that episode were produced entirely in the United States, the price
would roughly double.

The Chinese woman sits at one of 200 desks lined up under a bank of bright
fluorescent lights in the painting section of the Pacific Rim studio. The
two-year-old facility is spread out over three warehouselike floors, where 450
Chinese and a handful of Westerners are working on projects that include
ABC-TV's new Saturday-morning cartoon series "The Wizard of Oz"; "Peter Pan and
the Pirates," Fox's new weekday cartoon series, and "An American Tail Part II,"
a sequel to the 1986 animated movie produced by Steven Spielberg and scheduled
for theatrical release next fall.

Although there are similar studios in Ireland, France, Australia and even
Poland, Mr. Vallas estimates that more than 60 percent of the animating of
America's Saturday-morning cartoon series is done in Asia.  Even Fox's
phenomenally successful prime-time show "The Simpsons" is produced in Asia, at
the Akom Studio in Seoul. The five-year-old outfit, which employs approximately
500 people, is also busy with several other American cartoon shows, including
CBS's Saturday-morning series "Muppet Babies."

A top-quality cartoon generally involves hundreds of artists and requires
approximately 18,000 separate cels or drawings, each of which must be copied,
painted and photographed. For a full-length feature like Disney's 1989 movie
"The Little Mermaid," animators turned out close to 100,000 cels.

In the Wang Film Production Company in Taipei, more than 1,000 people are at
work on at least half a dozen animated series, including such Saturday-morning
staples as CBS's "Garfield" and "Bill and Ted's Excellent Adventures"; Fox's
"Bobby's World," produced by Film Roman; NBC's "Rick Moranis in Gravedale High,"
produced by Hanna-Barbera, and the syndicated weekday show "Tiny Toons,"
produced by Warner Brothers.

"This is a peak for sure," says Robert A. Marples, a production supervisor for
Hanna-Barbera, who has been with the company for 22 years and is in Taipei
overseeing two current cartoon productions. "Anyone in animation now is up to
their ears in work."

Today, there are about a dozen studios in Asia that can produce an entire
cartoon, including the drawing of the characters and the background scenery.
Still, virtually all of the pre-production work for Asian projects is done in
America or Europe, where the scripts are written, the characters are designed
and sample background drawings are made to illustrate the look of the cartoon.

While some Asian studios can produce whole projects, they also work on bits and
pieces. Pacific Rim, for example, does all the production work on "Peter Pan and
the Pirates" and "The Wizard of Oz," including the animation drawings. But for
Disney's "Tale Spin," the animation drawings are done in France and then shipped
to Pacific Rim for painting and other follow-up work.

The managers of these overseas operations are reluctant to discuss specific
salaries, but one animation executive says that "a rule of thumb is that an
Asian makes in a month what an American would make in a week." In Hollywood, an
apprentice animator earns roughly $750 a week; an experienced one makes $1,500
to $2,000.

"Some people credit the movie 'Roger Rabbit' with generating a new interest in
animation," says Mr. Vallas, who frequently travels between Los Angeles and
China. "And after that, Disney's 'Duck Tales' broke new ground by giving us a
high-quality animated series for television."

That series, he believes, "bridged the gap between high-quality, full-length
feature animation and television animation. Now, there is a huge demand for
high-quality animated TV shows." The success of "The Simpsons" is also likely to
foster other animated shows in prime time, he adds.

The animation process is tedious, time-consuming and sometimes nerve-wracking.
"We are literally working on shows that will be on the air within weeks," says
Randall M. Chaffee, a third-generation animator who is the executive producer
and manager of Pacific Rim. "If you miss a deadline, there is a huge fine to
pay, from $100,000 to $200,000."

All this foreign contracting means that every instruction must be carefully
translated. But even meticulous translations can leave room for
misunderstandings when the people drawing and coloring the cartoons have minimal
knowledge of American humor, culture and slang.

Mr. Chaffee recalls a mix-up that occurred last year when Pacific Rim was
working on an episode of the syndicated cartoon "Maxie" that involved a football
game.

"The Chinese don't play football," he says, "so they didn't know that at the
line of scrimmage the two teams need to have on uniforms of different colors,
and all members of a team must consistently wear the same color. Our people had
the players wearing blue, red, yellow. In one scene, the quarterback passed the
ball to his receiver. But he was wearing a red uniform and the receiver had a
blue uniform, so to Americans it looked like an interception."

The football, Mr. Chaffee adds, was not pigskin brown but "a bright Day-Glo
orange. They had never seen a football, after all."

Such slip-ups are caught by the Western supervisors, he says, and don't make it
onto the air.

Sometimes, directions come in the form of American slang that gets translated
too literally. "There was a cartoon with 'Transformer' characters having this
raging laser battle," recalls Mr. Vallas, "and as the bad guys were being
routed, the layout artist wrote, 'Enemy is now out to lunch.' The Japanese
animator drew the scenes and suddenly, in the middle of this pitched battle, he
had all these fighting guys sit down and start to eat."

Still, when they appear on television, series produced in studios scattered
around the world look familiar and seamless.

"One day you might see a 'Peter Pan' made in Shenzhen and the next day a 'Peter
Pan' made in Manila," says Mr. Vallas.

While labor unions in America are still highly sensitive about the loss of
production jobs, several producers contend that the availability of cheaper
labor in Asia has helped spur an interest in animated shows that has doubled
back to the United States, creating a fresh demand for the skilled writers,
animators and layout artists there.

"In the U.S.," says Mr. Vallas, "it's even to the point where people who had
left the business or retired are coming back."

Mr. Vallas, who has worked in the technical end of animation, was with the
prolific Hanna-Barbera studio for years. Later, he opened his own small Los
Angeles company that did subcontracting jobs for the larger studios, "until they
began sending their work to Asia, about five or six years ago. Then all my work
dried up."

He and his partners subsequently set up their own studios in Shenzhen and
Manila, with an office in Hong Kong to help oversee and coordinate the two.

With costs rising in Japan, Taiwan and Korea, Mr. Vallas predicts that the next
studios will be opening in Thailand and Indonesia. And, he adds, "in a few
years, even Vietnam could be turning out American cartoons."


TURTLES WITH BROGUES?



On two floors of a large office building in the center of Dublin, 120 Irish
animators, painters and cameramen are producing one of the most popular TV
cartoon series in America: "Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles." The studio,
Murakami-Wolf Dublin, is barely two years old; it was started by Jimmy T.
Murakami and Fred Wolf, both of whom had had extensive experience in American
animation. It was Mr. Wolf who developed the Turtle cartoon from the comic
strip, originally producing the episodes in California and subcontracting some
work in South Korea.

Although the shows are still developed in Los Angeles, the production details --
the animation, painting and camera work -- are handled in Dublin. In a recent
telephone interview, Mr. Murakami said he was attracted to Ireland because of
Government incentives and grants to foreign companies that create jobs.

"There are three animation studios in Dublin now," he added. "But the other two,
Emerald City and Sullivan-Bluth, produce mainly feature-length animated films."

Although Mr. Murakami thinks that Dublin is a fine place to locate a studio,
citing particularly the number of talented, English-speaking workers, he said he
doubted that other studios would open there. "While the people are hard-working
and have a good attitude -- they are not always asking when their next break
will be -- their wages are not that much lower than an American's. I think
people looking to save money and stay close to Europe will be moving to Eastern
Europe soon."

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Li Yan Gang, an animator in the Chinese town of Shenzhen, paints
backgrounds for Fox's new "Peter Pan." (Lindy Kerr for The New York Times ) (pg.
35); Chinese animators working on ABC's "Wizard of Oz." (Lindy Kerr for The New
York Times ) (pg. 36)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

RECORDINGS VIEW;
Kronos on a Shaman's Journey

BYLINE: By TOM MANOFF; Tom Manoff, a composer, reviews music for "All Things
Considered" on National Public Radio. He is writing a book about the
relationship between music and mythology.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1586 words


At 2 in the afternoon, The Kronos Quartet's "Black Angels" (Elektra Nonesuch 9
79242-2) was just another CD on my desk, next up for review on National Public
Radio. By the following morning, when I finally decided to sleep, this
extraordinary album had led me for 20 straight hours to a state of frenetic
grace. "Black Angels" resonates with a theme that has haunted me for years: the
ways in which technology enables us to experience music, culture and time from a
vantage point that is radically new. More than merely superb performances of
great music, this remarkable release is a dramatic conception that probes many
levels of artistic and philosophical response.

On one level, "Black Angels" is a cycle of individual works, which, through
brilliant use of modern recording technology, skillfully manipulates the
listener's perception of time. This shifting sense of time is a structural
component of the disk's form -- if a CD can be said to have a form. Obviously
the individual works by different composers have forms. But can the relationship
among these works be considered a form in the traditional sense of the word?
Here is another level that fascinates.

"Black Angels" begins with the horror of Vietnam, as imagined by George Crumb.
His "Black Angels: Thirteen Images From the Dark Land" (1970) not only provides
the album's name, it introduces its primary theme: protest against war. The work
was "conceived as a kind of parable on our troubled contemporary world,"
according to the composer's liner note, and "portrays a voyage of the soul."

Mr. Crumb's music can succeed only if the performers are totally committed and
comfortable with his style -- a style nearly visual in its use of texture, and
bordering on ritual in the demands made on the players. Kronos has a special
genius for bringing such music to life -- in this case, a world in which a
violin suddenly sounds like a wooden flute, and what is chanted, plucked and
struck is as important as what is bowed.

The music that follows Mr. Crumb's disturbing vision, "Spem in Alium," a motet
by the 16th-century English composer Thomas Tallis, provides both relief and
reflection. Hearing Kronos play music from the Renaissance is, at first, a
surprise. But this performance is uniquely modern. "Spem in Alium" is famous not
only for its glorious polyphony but also because it was written for 40 different
voices. The Kronos realization is a technological creation. Through overdubbing
-- a recording process by which one player can perform many times on the same
piece -- 4 musicians have become 40. The past, in a sense, has been reinvented
by its future.

The juxtaposition of the first two pieces on this CD creates a dramatic
structure more profound than simply "good programming." Great music is heard in
a "form" that makes its impact even greater. And the perception that the normal
boundaries of time have been dissolved is crucial to that impact.

That masterpieces of music transcend time is one reason we proclaim them
masterpieces. And the way Kronos has reaffirmed this fact caused me to reflect
on the historical dependency between great music and technology. Beethoven's
Ninth Symphony, Mozart's "Magic Flute" and Bach's tiny (by comparison) F-minor
Three-Part Invention are all "timeless" masterpieces. Yet without the invention
of a revolutionary technology, notation, these pieces could not have been
composed, much less immortalized. Like the invention of writing, notated music
expanded the esthetic domain of the human mind.

Bach, fond of study but not of travel, absorbed current musical traditions from
France and Italy by acquiring scores. Through notation he also knew music from a
past era. His admiration for Palestrina is an important example. The line of
contrapuntal craft that ran through Palestrina to Bach later influenced Mozart
and Beethoven. Notation not only allowed music to cross space and time, it
created a self-enriching tradition in which music of the past nourished music of
the future. And to this day a novice pianist can open the pages to Bach's
Three-Part Inventions in Leipzig, Bangkok or Boise.

In these same cities another technology offers access to the complete Western
tradition, from Gregorian chant to Elliott Carter. The local record store
carries not only classical music but also other vibrant styles, like folk and
jazz. From anywhere on the globe, modern recording technology makes possible
musical-cultural journeys similar in a sense to the now familiar "shaman's
journey": an ancient and archetypal religious experience known to
anthropologists through the study of primitive hunter cultures in which a holy
man or woman can "fly" to any place and any time.

Playing a quintet with the American composer Charles Ives (1874-1954), the liner
notes suggest, has always been an impossible dream for the Kronos players. But
on this CD, again through overdubbing, they accompany Ives as he plays and sings
his song "They Are There." Kronos chimes in with a scratchy recording the
composer made before the players were born.

Studio technology has provided a theater for Kronos to dream, in a world where
time has no boundaries. Following that dream, this listener entered a state of
mind perhaps best described by Joseph Campbell in his portrayal of a primitive
ritual in New Guinea: the participants were "lifted even out of temporality and
translated into the no-place, no-time, no-when, no-where of the Mythological
Age, which is here and now."

The demarcation between mythology and music is in some ways artificial. No one
would question, for example, that Wagner's opera "Tristan" is simultaneously
myth and music; its libretto retells an ancient legend of the universal
love-death genre -- the same genre, by the way, that Joseph Campbell reported in
New Guinea. What then is the Prelude to "Tristan" -- merely music? What is the
chanting of the tribal ritual in New Guinea -- only myth? What is the chanting
in Mr. Crumb's quartet? Furthermore, how shall we classify dance, common to
tribal rite and opera? The ballet "Swan Lake" is certainly dance; is it not also
myth?

Ethnological evidence suggests that one of the most important and ancient modes
for the experience and preservation of mythology was (and in some cultures still
is) chant and song. Appropriately, this primal mode of human expression provides
a central moment in the structure of the Kronos CD: the powerful "Doom: A Sigh,"
by the Hungarian composer Istvan Marta combines string quartet with a tape of a
peasant woman singing an ancient lament. Mr. Marta recorded the lament -- and
other songs, another of which is incorporated into "Doom" -- in 1973 in the
village of Trunk, Romania. Sixteen years later, he used this "rudimentary" (his
word) tape as a primary element in the string quartet.

Imagine the journey. From a sung tradition that reaches back into prehistory,
through analog tape to Mr. Marta's notated composition, the lament becomes part
of a Kronos performance in a studio using the newest technology. Finally,
digitally encoded on CD, this sad utterance is returned to the world.

Many classical musicians feel uncomfortable in recording studios, but Kronos and
its visionary producer, Judith Sherman (a modern shaman in her own right),
approach studio technology as an instrument, a vital component in artistic
creation. "Black Angels" could not have been conceived without it.

Digital sound is certainly not without fault, most notably a lack of warmth. But
"Black Angels" is among the best and warmest-sounding CD's I have heard. The
closing performance of the cycle -- a powerful and moving account of
Shostakovich's Eighth Quartet -- demonstrates how good digital sound can be.

The Shostakovich also demonstrates the uniqueness of "Black Angels." Choose only
this work, which the composer dedicated "to the victims of fascism and war," and
hear a masterpiece that is musically and emotionally complete. Listen to the
work sequentially on the CD, and it functions as part of the longer "form," a
final gesture whose traditional style leads the listener home. That the
Shostakovich has dual identities is natural, whether you call it music or myth.
Either term defines a world of multiple meanings.

Limiting the definition of myth merely to stories with a message is
short-sighted. More broadly, myth is entry into an arena of heightened
experience. And such journeys can begin with many arts, be they sung or told,
played or danced, painted or recorded.

All great myths create personal reverberations in their participants. For this
participant, "Black Angels" reawakened a sense of tragedy about music, culture
and time that technology created but cannot solve.

The paradox is this: With capabilities already developed beyond those now in
use, digital technology is on the brink of fulfilling its mythical promise --
near perfect sound reproduction. But as technological perfection beckons, the
musical perfection in most need of it is virtually gone. Mass media have all but
obliterated the folk music of the world. The existing recordings of ancient
traditions are priceless, irreplaceable treasures. They are also electronic
coffins for the few fragments of a rich and glorious past we will never know.
One of those fragments is heard on "Black Angels."

Great art often satisfies while raising questions. Great questions rarely have
definitive answers. This is the domain of mythology. "Black Angels" is more than
music. "Black Angels" is contemporary myth.


LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Kronos Quartet: from left, Hank Dutt, violist; Joan
Jeanrenaud, cellist; John Sherba, second violinist, and David Harrington, first
violinist Elecktra Nonesuch) (pg. 29); John Sherba, Hank Dutt, Joan Jeanrenaud
and David Harrington, members of the Kronos Quartet-- studio technology
approached as an instrument, a vital component in artistic creation (Blake
Little/Elektra Nonesuch) (pg. 38)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

BYLINE: Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 12; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1096 words



MARIONETTES AT PLAY

Clowns, ballerinas, soldiers, mice, jack-in-the-boxes, rocking horses and other
inhabitants of "The Toy Shop" come to life in a National Marionette Theater
production to be seen in at the Old State House in Hartford from Thursday
through Dec. 23. Free performances are scheduled at 10:30 and 11:30 A.M. and
12:30 P.M. Tuesday through Friday, and 12:30, 1:30 and 2:30 P.M. on Saturday and
Sunday.

The three-foot marionettes are manipulated by David Syrotiak Jr., his brother
Peter and other members of the family troupe, to music from "La Boutique
Fantasque," a Ballet Russe work first performed in 1919. The Syriotaks work in
view of the audience on a 12- by 8-foot platform, obscured by black clothing and
a black background.

"The show is choreographed like a ballet," said David Syriotak. "There is no
dialogue."

Each year, the puppeteers build about 20 marionettes for new productions, adding
to their stock of 400 characters and logging 40,000 miles touring the country.
The company is headquartered in the Colt building in Hartford, where artists'
studios have replaced the firearms manufacturing.

In 1976, the National Marionette Theater was the first American company to
receive an award for excellence from the Union de la Marionnette, a European
association formed in the 1950's.

The Old State House, at 800 Main Street in downtown Hartford, also has another
attraction on display through Jan. 6: a collection of antique toy trains and
dolls as well as handmade contemporary dolls. A craft exhibition and sale
continues through Dec. 24. The exhibits may be seen Monday through Saturday from
10 A.M. to 5 P.M., Sunday from noon to 5 P.M. Admission is free. Call 522-6766
for more information.

BETHLEHEM POSTMARKS

Once again, it is time to visit the post office in Bethlehem, to get a postmark
stamped by hand on greeting cards. The Litchfield County community will hold its
annual holiday festival beginning on Friday at 5 P.M. with a tree lighting, the
arrival of Santa Claus and a concert at the center of town, where Routes 61 and
132 meet.

St. Nicholas will return at 10 A.M. on Saturday for a day of music, hayrides and
postmark stamping at the post office. Visitors may also view the historical
display at the Old Bethlehem Museum and shop at the establishments of 75 vendors
of toys, wreaths, jewelry, candy, dolls and doll houses, spices, stained glass
and other gift items. Free shuttle buses will be available at the parking area
of the Bethlehem Fairgrounds on Route 61.

60's COUNTERCULTURE

"Berkeley in the Sixties," a film by Mark Kitchell that won the 1990
Distinguished Documentary Achievement Award last month in Los Angeles, will be
shown at the SoNo Cinema, 15 Washington Street in Norwalk, Friday through Dec.
10 at 7:30 P.M., with matinees at 3 P.M. on Saturday and Sunday.

Beginning with a demonstration against the House Un-American Activities
Committee in 1960, the film chronicles the turbulent decade through archival
footage, contemporary interviews and a soundtrack of Jimi Hendrix, the Band, and
dozens more performers whose music inspired some listeners and inflamed others.

Film clips show the Grateful Dead, Bobby Seale, Joan Baez, Gov. Ronald Reagan,
the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Allen Ginsburg, Huey Newton; police
officers, troops and anonymous participants in the confrontations over the
Vietnam War, the women's movement, the Black Panthers and the emerging
counterculture, woven into this provocative record of an era.

LUTE AND STRAWFIDDLE

Music of Spain, France, Italy and Germany from the late Middle Ages through the
Renaissance will be performed in New Haven at the Yale Collection of Musical
Instruments today at 3 P.M. by the four members of Calliope. Based in Manhattan
and named for the mother of Orpheus, the musicians are experts on the viol,
sackbut, recorder, crumhorn, cornetto, gemshorn, pipe-and-tabor, lute, shawm,
strawfiddle and hurdy-gurdy, all of which will be strummed, blown, sawed and
plucked during today's concert.

Calliope won a Naumberg Chamber Music Award in 1975 and has toured throughout
the United States, Canada and Mexico. The group records on the Nonesuch label.

The concert will take place in the second-floor gallery at 15 Hillhouse Avenue,
amid a display of antique keyboard instruments. Admission is $10, students and
the elderly $5. Call 432-0825 for reservations.

ELVES AT WORK

Art-Place, the artists' cooperative in Southport's westbound railroad station,
opens an exhibition called "Elfworks" today from 4 to 6 P.M., accompanied by a
concert of English madrigals performed by the Weston High School Madrigal
Singers.

Oils, pastels, watercolors, prints, sculpture and hand-crafted jewelry have been
selected with an eye toward smallness as well as quality and originality. One of
the artists will wrap works purchased as gifts, without charge.

The exhibit will remain through Dec. 30 and may be seen Wednesday through Sunday
from noon to 4:30 P.M. Call 255-9847 for more information.

COMPUTER PAINTINGS

Many of the oil and computer paintings by Sharon Steuer that were featured in
the October issue of American Artist Magazine may be seen Monday through Dec. 28
at the Small Space Gallery of the Arts Council of Greater New Haven, 70 Audubon
Street.

After studying traditional art at Hampshire College in Massachusetts, the
Portland School of Art in Maine, and the Yale School of Art, where she worked on
printmaking with Gabor Peterdi, Ms. Steuer worked for a computer-software
company, where she produced animated illustrations for children that evolved
into the first painting program for the IBM personal computer.

Gallery hours are Monday through Friday from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. A reception will
be held for the artist on Friday from 5 to 7 P.M. Call 772-2788 for more
information.

POETRY READING

Mark Strand, 1990-91 poet laureate at the Library of Congress, will read from
his work at the Westport Library this afternoon at 3. Mr. Strand succeeds Robert
Penn Warren, Richard Wilbur and Howard Nemerov as the fourth poet laureate to be
selected by the Library of Congress.

A distinguished professor of English at the University of Utah, he has taught at
several colleges and universities, and won many poetry awards, including that of
the National Institute of Arts and Letters. He has done more than 300 readings
in Europe, Australia and the United States.

The library is at Bernhard Plaza, just off the Post Road in downtown Westport.
Admission is free.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Looking Ahead

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 122 words



MONDAY: GATT talks in Brussels to conclude the Uruguay Round, through Dec. 7. *
Construction spending for October. * Purchasing managers' survey for November.

TUESDAY: Oral arguments scheduled in New York on temporary order barring Donald
Trump from selling his houses. * November auto sales. * October new home sales.

WEDNESDAY: Factory orders for October. * Third-quarter labor productivity and
costs. * The Center for Financial Engineering in Development hosts a conference
in Washington on the prospects for American business in Vietnam.

THURSDAY: Major retailers report November sales.

FRIDAY: Unemployment for November. * Consumer credit for October. * Annual
meeting of Carter Hawley Hale.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Wall Street;
Taking the Measure of Recession '90

BYLINE: By Diana B. Henriques

SECTION: Section 3; Page 15; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1006 words


TO many Wall Street sages, the most dangerous phrase in the language is: "It's
different this time." The economic landscape is littered with corporate corpses
whose last words were, "Sure, junk bonds haven't had a good name, but it's
different this time." Or, "A debt-heavy balance sheet used to be dangerous, but
it's less risky now."

Of course, some things really do change -- and change so profoundly, with such
intriguing implications for the market, that Wall Street ignores the alteration
at its own risk. One such change has been occurring over the past four years,
according to a forthcoming study by Mickey Levy, chief economist at CRT
Government Securities in New York, an affiliate of the Chicago Research and
Trading Group. And this change, a sharp shift in how and where America makes its
money, suggests to Mr. Levy that Wall Street needs to re-examine some of its
assumptions about what the coming recession will look like, and which stocks
will perform best while it lasts.

The markets have been preoccupied with the overall state of the economy for
months, and last week that concern developed into obsessionary overdrive.
President Bush, still loath to say the R-word, conceded a "serious slowdown" has
occurred. Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, spoke out loud
of "a meaningful downturn." And the Commerce Department reported that its index
of leading economic indicators fell in October for the fourth month in a row,
signaling to many that the recession is here.

Like most private economists, Mr. Levy expects a recession. But he does not
think it will bear much resemblance to other recent downturns. Typically, the
postwar downturns have been "V-shaped recessions," Mr. Levy said, with the Fed
slamming on the brakes to tame an overheated economy and then hitting the gas
pedal just as abruptly after the recession develops. "Thus, the entrance into
and exit from recent recessions were quite dramatic," Mr. Levy said. "But this
time is distinctively different."

Ah, the fateful phrase. But Mr. Levy is not deterred: "Look, it is simply common
experience. We may all look back from some point in the future and say, 'Gee,
1990 -- the gross national product was growing, but it still felt like a
recession. The Fed tightened gradually, and we have had this gradual slowdown.'
" Indeed, the gradual onset of this recession distinguishes it from every other
postwar downturn except for 1969, according to Mr. Levy. "And 1969 is not really
comparable because you had the Vietnam War build-up, with defense spending as a
much higher percent of G.N.P. than today, despite the situation in the Middle
East."

Similarly, barring any aggressive stimulation from the Fed, the rebound from
this recession is likely to be more anemic than in the past, and to come only
after some protracted period of "flatness," Mr. Levy said.

What does this matter of timing mean to Wall Street? Well, the abrupt nature of
past recessions helped dictate which industries felt the most pain, in Mr.
Levy's view. Any sudden plunge into recession will typically leave manufacturers
with unsold products in the warehouse. They cope with this inventory backlog by
quickly scaling back production, producing layoffs and reduced business for
their suppliers and distributors. That is one reason why service firms,
unburdened by unsold inventory, have tended to outperform manufacturers during
past recessions.

But this time around, manufacturers have not accumulated the inventories that
haunted them in the past -- perhaps because of changed production practices that
emphasize lower inventories, or perhaps just because the gradual slowdown gave
companies the chance to adjust more gracefully.

At the same time, the weaker dollar has produced a dramatic but
little-appreciated boom in exports, which have grown from less than 11 percent
of G.N.P. in 1986 to nearly 15 percent this year. Further, there has been a
sharp rise in the share of G.N.P. made up of spending on durable goods, which
economists define as products with a life of at least three years and which
shoppers define as big-ticket items -- cars, say, or sectional sofas. Both
developments benefit manufacturers more than their service-sector brethren.

Since each percentage-point share of the G.N.P. is worth about $41.5 billion,
these shifts represent the movement of a gigantic amount of money from one
corner of the economy to another, and from one set of corporations to another.
Consequently, Mr. Levy argues, the nation's manufacturing sector simply may not
experience the levels of recessionary pain this time around that it has felt in
the past.

The other side of this encouraging coin, unfortunately, may be that those who
work in the traditionally "recession-proof" regions of the nation's economy --
its banks and financial service companies, its real estate firms and its
department stores -- are likely to suffer in this recession as never before in
postwar history.

Here, too, the changing mix of the nation's economic production is significant.
As exports have grown in economic importance, spending on nondurable goods --
the stuff that department store sales are made of -- has shrunk as a share of
G.N.P., as has spending on residential property.

The service-sector equivalent of a warehouse full of unsold goods is an office
full of idle people, Mr. Levy points out. "Thus, somewhat analogous to the
liquidation of excessive inventories in the manufacturing industries in prior
recessions," he explained, "this economic correction will involve the
liquidation of excesses of human capital in these major service-producing
industries."

The silver lining in all this, Mr. Levy adds, is that "a slow and gradual
recession is much healthier over the long run." It permits the core rate of
inflation to come down, and puts the subsequent recovery on a stronger footing.
But if Mr. Levy's analysis is right, the path to that recovery winds through
some unfamiliar terrain, and some people will not survive the trip.


LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: the contribution to the gross national product by four major
sectors: durables, nondurables, services and exports, 1980, 1986 and 1990
(Source: CRT Government Securities)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

A Serial-Murder Trial, On TV, Grips Rochester

BYLINE: By LISA W. FODERARO, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 46; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1164 words

DATELINE: ROCHESTER, Nov. 30


Ordinarily, Mary Colangelo, a retired legal secretary, indulges her fascination
with the dark side through such mild television shows as "Murder, She Wrote" and
"Perry Mason."

But for the last 10 weeks she has savored the real thing, watching hour upon
hour, day after day, the serial-murder trial of Arthur J. Shawcross, who says he
killed 10 women in Monroe County, most of them prostitutes, by either
strangling, suffocating or beating them, but who has pleaded not guilty by
reason of insanity.

A cable television station, WGRC, is broadcasting the trial in its entirety, and
Mrs. Colangelo has watched and even recorded each objection and every piece of
testimony. "When this is over, I'll feel lost," she said. "I'll have to replay
the tapes."

Like a moth drawn to a flame, Rochester, a city of 241,000 people, has been both
repulsed and riveted by the proceedings in the teak-paneled, second-floor
courtroom in the Monroe County Public Safety Building.

There, lawyers, expert witnesses and Mr. Shawcross himself, who was videotaped
purportedly under hypnosis, have talked of mutilation, cannibalism,
reincarnation, child sexual abuse, atrocities in Vietnam and a mother's
spiritual possession of her son at the moment of murder, in the spirit of Alfred
Hitchcock's "Psycho."

The Talk of Rochester

The trial, one of the longest and most expensive in Monroe County's history, has
become a collective topic of conversation. "The gavel-to-gavel coverage on
television has fueled its notoriety to the nth degree," said the District
Attorney, Howard R. Relin.

Apart from its grisly details, the trial has taken on a carnival atmosphere.
High school students on class trips arrive almost daily. Prosecution "groupies"
abound; at Thanksgiving, one trialgoer, Marilyn Sheridan, 30, baked cranberry
bread for the soft-spoken assistant district attorney arguing the case, Charles
J. Siragusa.

"He's a Rocky Balboa of the courtroom," she said. "He punches with his mouth."

The day after Halloween, the jurors all wore matching bow ties. One Monday, five
of them wore Notre Dame football jerseys because the County Court judge, Donald
J. Wisner, had recessed early the Friday before to attend a game at the
university, his alma mater.

"The jury has been attentive and able to keep their sense of humor up," Judge
Wisner said in chambers.

Keeping Still

Through it all, Mr. Shawcross, 45, beefy and graying, has sat absolutely still
in the courtroom, his shoulders sloped and his head down, rather like a
bench-bound white plaster figure by George Segal. But lack of charisma did not
stop him from receiving 10 write-in votes for governor this month.

Over the nearly two years that women's bodies showed up along the banks of the
Genesee River, and in creeks, gorges and remote wooded areas off country roads,
Rochester residents reacted with mounting anxiety and horror. But once the
police made the arrest this year, the attention turned to the bizarre person who
had been terrorizing them.

Mr. Shawcross, who confessed in 1972 to strangling an 8-year-old girl and a
10-year-old boy in Watertown, and then served 15 years of a 25-year manslaughter
sentence, was arrested here in January after confessing that he killed 11 women
over 21 months. At the time of his arrest, he told the police where two of the
bodies were.

The 11th murder charge will be heard next year in neighboring Wayne County,
where a body was found. In each killing Mr. Shawcross is charged with
second-degree murder, and each count carries a maximum sentence of 25 years to
life in prison on conviction.

While maintaining a job, a marriage, an affair and a fishing hobby, Mr.
Shawcross visited prostitutes. In his confession he said he had killed one after
she bit him, another for being too loud during intercourse, another for trying
to steal his wallet and a fourth for calling him a "wimp."

No Excuse, Prosecutors Say

Prosecutors say Mr. Shawcross suffers from an anti-social personality disorder
that does not excuse him from criminal behavior. They say he formed a conscious
objective to kill, knew his conduct was wrong and acted without extreme
emotional disturbance.

But Mr. Shawcross's lawyers say he suffers from a multiple-personality disorder,
brain damage and post-traumatic stress syndrome. The defense's expert witness,
Dr. Dorothy Otnow Lewis, purportedly hypnotized Mr. Shawcross while being
videotaped, inspiring what was said to be a re-enactment of a sexual abuse scene
from his childhood in which his mother sodomized him with a broom handle.

The videotaped images of Mr. Shawcross writhing and screaming during that
session jarred viewers, but many now seem to agree with the prosecution that he
was acting. "The guy's trying to look like he's nuts," said Jacob Hutchinson, a
49-year-old county laborer who has followed the trial.

At another point under the purported hypnosis, Mr. Shawcross took on one of his
supposed multiple personalities, Ariemes, a reincarnated cannibal from
13th-century England who, Mr. Shawcross maintained, taught him to eat flesh. Mr.
Shawcross said he ate parts of two of the women he killed, a claim the
prosecution rejects, although two bodies of two victims were mutilated.

Tales of Cannibalism

Although he was an Army clerk in a noncombat role in Vietnam, Mr. Shawcross has
also said that he cannibalized two Vietnamese women there as well as the
10-year-old boy he killed in Watertown. And speaking as his mother, Bessie, in a
falsetto voice while reportedly hypnotized, Mr. Shawcross suggested that she had
seized control of him during each of the murders.

"This is not psychiatry," the prosecution's forensic expert, Dr. Park Deitz,
said of the hypnosis. "It is a performance elicited by Dr. Lewis."

Dr. Lewis, a New York University psychiatrist, elicited attention herself during
her testimony this month because of her frazzled demeanor, her inability to
answer in either a yes or a no, her lengthy digressions on Freud and her
disheveled file of notes.

"I can't chew gum and walk at the same time," she said during one search through
her file while on the witness stand.

Shawcross trivia gleaned from news reports and police accounts have also become
currency here.

The only president Mr. Shawcross ever voted for was Richard M. Nixon. Mr.
Shawcross drove the naked corpse of one woman he had killed around Rochester
propped up in the front passenger seat of a rented blue Dodge Omni. He warned
his wife, Rose, and mistress, Clara, of the killer on the loose. And between
attacks he visited Dunkin Donuts -- a gathering place for police officers -- to
inquire about the investigation.

As the trial winds down, many here are trying to grasp Mr. Shawcross's state of
mind during the attacks."Anyone who kills is sick, but I don't think he was
insane at the time of the murders," Ms. Sheridan said on leaving the courtroom.
"I just think he's got bad blood in his veins."

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An article last Sunday about the trial of Arthur J. Shawcross, an accused serial
killer in Rochester, N.Y., referred incompletely in some editions to a cable
television station that is broadcasting the trial in its entirety. It is WGRC.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
Bush Stands Warned

BYLINE: Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 766 words


The good news for President Bush last week was that the U.N. Security Council
approved his resolution authorizing force against Iraq after Jan. 15. The bad
news was that Congressional leaders opposed a special session to consider the
same question.

The bad news is more significant. The Security Council cannot remove from
Congress its constitutional power to declare war; nor can the U.N. provide an
adequate substitute for some form of Congressional authorization for war.
Speaker Thomas Foley and the House Republican leader, Robert Michel, advised the
President against calling a special session to seek such authorization, for the
good reason that he might not win it.

Of course Mr. Bush, if he chose, could launch a war without going to Congress at
all, under color of the Security Council and citing his vast power as Commander
in Chief. He also could point out that President Truman did not have
Congressional authorization when he sent troops to fight in Korea in 1950.

One of the many lessons of Vietnam, however, was that in a democracy, even the
Commander in Chief should be wary of carrying on a "policy war" that he or she
may think justified or desirable, if the public is not solidly behind the
policy. The Truman precedent, moreover, is weak.

Truman acted to repel an armed cross-border invasion actually taking place; he
opposed what was believed at the time -- though erroneously -- to be an
aggression inspired by the Soviet Union, at the time the feared enemy in a
developing cold war; and the pre-World War II failures to halt Hitler's
aggressions were still, in 1950, a vivid memory supporting resistance in Korea.

Even so, support for Truman's "police action" faded rather quickly. Nor does any
of the above apply to the present situation. Mr. Bush not only would have to
begin the hostilities, and against an opponent who is neither Stalin nor Hitler,
despite White House rhetoric, and certainly not Communist. The President also
would be abandoning his own nonviolent blockade-and-embargo policy -- which has
won worldwide support and appears to be working rather well.

There are good reasons, however, for Mr. Bush to heed the Foley-Michel warning
against going to Capitol Hill.  In 1964, President Johnson could win from
Congress a resolution that authorized taking action in Indochina because U.S.
ships were thought to have been attacked in the Gulf of Tonkin.  Few realized
then that he would use that resolution as authorization for one of the biggest
wars in U.S. history -- a war neither Congress nor the public would long
support. Partly for that reason, it became a losing war.

Sour memories of the Tonkin Gulf resolution make it unlikely -- in the absence
of clear public support -- that Congress again will vote a President anything he
might interpret as a blank check for war, which is what Mr. Bush probably would
seek. If he fails to win that kind of Congressional approval -- or even if he
wins it only by a narrow margin in a bitter debate -- it will be a graphic
demonstration that the nation is by no means unified in support of such a war.
For if Congress does not always do what the voters want, it almost never does
what they clearly do not want.

That would return Mr. Bush to the alternative of launching a policy war on
Presidential initiative, without strong public or Congressional backing. In that
event, as Mr. Bush and Saddam Hussein must be well aware, the well-remembered
homefront opposition to the Vietnam war suggests what could and probably would
happen again.

Even if Congress confounded such expectations and voted strong support for war
in the Middle East, would that send a useful signal? As Mr. Bush apparently
wishes, it might cause Mr. Hussein to conclude that war is inevitable if he
doesn't pull out of Kuwait.  But if he did draw that conclusion, would a warlike
leader therefore be more likely to surrender, as the President and the U.N.
demand? Or, as with the proverbial "cornered rat," would he be more determined
than ever to stand and fight?

That would not necessarily be suicidal. Mr. Hussein already depicts himself as
an Arab David fighting the Western Goliath; if he responded to U.S. assault by
attacking Israel, he might well be able to win the support of the Arab world and
leave Mr. Bush bereft of effective Arab support. High U.S. casualties could
quickly erode what homefront backing the President had.

Congress is more likely, however, to apply the brakes to the President's rush to
war. Which may be why Mr. Bush is sending James Baker to talk things over with
Saddam Hussein.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Bush Has Made the Right Moves, So Far

BYLINE: By Caspar W. Weinberger; Caspar W. Weinberger was Ronald Reagan's
Secretary of Defense.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 916 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


I believe President Bush is doing what has to be done in the Persian Gulf and is
doing it very well. That was clearly the majority view of the nation immediately
after Saddam Hussein's conquest of Kuwait, but since then there has been
disarray and confusion.

In sending James Baker to Baghdad and inviting Iraq's Foreign Minister to
Washington, Mr. Bush has struck the right note. It is well that he warned Mr.
Hussein not to misread our motives. The trips must not be viewed as involving
standard negotiations in which both sides give a little to achieve an agreement.
The only peace acceptable is a peace under which Mr. Hussein gives up what he
has stolen, makes reparations for his theft and is left without the ability to
steal again.

Before Mr. Bush's announcement, he had encountered increasing opposition and
questions, claims that our goals are not clear, contentions that Kuwait and
Saudi Arabia are not worthy of being defended, and cries for a negotiated peace.
There have even been demonstrations by a few moth-eaten relics of the Vietnam
peace movement, which despite their small size have been given undue prominence
on TV news.

There are Americans who not only support our being in the gulf but want us to
attack immediately. There are still others who think the embargo will not work
but content themselves with saying that and with professing "profound pessimism"
or some equally helpful analysis.

There really is and should be no confusion about why Mr. Bush sent the troops to
the gulf. We are there to prevent a particularly brutal aggression that, if
successful, would have badly crippled a large part of the world and left us
subject to continual blackmail by one of the world's most miserable leaders.
President Bush's Thanksgiving speech to our troops in Saudi Arabia made that
crystal clear.

That we have not always acted with such dispatch and effectiveness every time
some aggression has occurred is beside the point, and hardly an argument for not
trying to establish the rule of law globally now.

To say we are in the gulf only because of oil is to trivialize the great role we
are playing. Of course oil is important to our civilization -- just how
important we'd easily know if Saddam Hussein had been allowed to carry out his
plan to march through Saudi Arabia and take the United Arab Emirates, thereby
securing control of at least 70 percent of the world's known oil reserves.

The troops know why they are in the gulf even if many opponents profess to be
"unclear" and "puzzled." The troops appreciate that aggressors cannot be allowed
to keep what they steal. By protecting the world from continual blackmail and
relieving it of the incalculable cost of clawing Mr. Hussein out of Saudi Arabia
and the emirates, we achieve complementary goals: preventing aggression from
succeeding and from undermining the quality of life Americans and millions of
others enjoy.

As for the specious argument that we should not oppose Iraqi aggression because
Kuwait and Saudi Arabia are not as pure as some would like, let's remember when
we heard a similar argument: "We should not support the Shah of Iran because his
Government has done repressive things." But that overlooked the alternative: the
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeni. So, are we going to let Mr. Hussein keep Kuwait
because Kuwait is not everything its critic want?

What is this negotiated peace so many want? Some advocates tip their hands when
they talk of Iraq's "historical claims" to Kuwait. But no one can contend that
Kuwait invaded Iraq. If some country's claims on another justify a brutal
invasion, freedom and the rule of law are dead.  What kind of negotiated
settlement can we reach with a mass murderer who suppressed Iraqi Kurds seeking
some small measure of freedom? What would be the terms of such a compromise or
negotiations?

Would we let him keep half of Kuwait? Or "to save Saddam's face," which seems to
be the goal of some who talk compromise, would we let him retire gracefully from
Kuwait, welcome his generosity, express gratitude for the return of hostages --
and watch him repeat the whole murderous scenario when he chooses?

None of this is to say that we should commit our forces to combat now. I believe
the economic sanctions, enforced by a tight air and sea blockade and supported
by some 21 other countries, including every major Arab country, is succeeding.
It will bring Iraq to its knees if we and our allies have the patience to keep
it tightly in place, and the willingness to wait until its full effect is felt.

Of course we must keep our own military strength, joined by more than 130,000
allied troops, in place and ready to be used if necessary. The objections to
President Bush's recent strengthening of our force make little sense: If we are
in the gulf because we have to be, every military consideration dictates that we
should be there with overwhelming power.

I do object, however, to the policy of no rotation for our troops. It would help
morale if they were rotated home after some months' service in the harsh desert.
This could be done without any loss in strength, and without sending any signal
to Saddam Hussein other than that we have the best interests of our troops in
mind.

I hope this great opportunity to enforce the rule of law globally is not watered
down, compromised and weakened. We must preserve the military option. But let us
see if patience and strength will give us victory without committing troops to
combat.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Notable Paperbacks

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 78; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1860 words


This list of paperbacks is a selection from the New & Noteworthy column since
the June Summer Reading issue. It includes novels, stories, biography, memoirs,
history, essays and science.

AFFLICTION, by Russell Banks. (Harper Perennial, $9.95.) A town policeman in New
Hampshire becomes obsessed with a conspiracy theory about a hunting accident.

THE AMBITION AND THE POWER, by John M. Barry. (Penguin, $12.95.) A look behind
the case of Jim Wright, the Speaker of the House who was forced from office in
1989.

AMONG SCHOOLCHILDREN, by Tracy Kidder. (Avon, $9.95.) A journalist plays
fly-on-the-wall inside a fifth-grade classroom.

THE ANTIPEOPLE, by Sony Labou Tansi. Translated by J. A. Underwood. (Marion
Boyars, $9.95.) In Zaire, a student leaves a suicide note implying that her
principal is the father of her child.

BAUMGARTNER'S BOMBAY, by Anita Desai. (Penguin, $7.95.) A reclusive German Jew
and his lonely exile in Bombay.

THE BRIDESMAID, by Ruth Rendell. (Mysterious Press, $4.95.) A young Londoner's
ideal woman proposes that they seal their love by each committing a murder.

A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME: From the Big Bang to Black Holes, by Stephen W.
Hawking. (Bantam, $9.95.) A physicist ponders why we and the universe exist.

THE BROKEN CORD, by Michael Dorris. (Harper Perennial, $9.95.) The novelist
tells about the agonies of raising an adopted child damaged by a mother who
drank during pregnancy.

BUFFALO AFTERNOON, by Susan Fromberg Schaeffer. (Ivy, $5.95.) Fresh out of
reform school, Pete Bravado tries to escape Brooklyn for Vietnam.

A CASUAL BRUTALITY, by Neil Bissoondath. (Ivy, $4.95.) A man returning home to
the Caribbean finds that a high school classmate has joined a local death squad.

DISAPPEARING ACTS, by Terry McMillan. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $8.95.) A
young black songwriter falls in love with the high school dropout who is
renovating her apartment building.

EDEN CLOSE, by Anita Shreve. (Signet, $4.95.) A New York City advertising man
finds romance with a blind woman in his rural hometown.

THE END OF NATURE, by Bill McKibben. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $9.95.) Is nature
headed for a time when it is no longer independent of humanity?

THE ENIGMA OF JAPANESE POWER: People and Politics in a Stateless Nation, by
Karel van Wolferen. (Vintage, $14.95.) Japan is not a democracy, a Dutch
journalist argues, but a dictatorship in disguise.

FAILURE TO ZIGZAG, by Jane Vandenburgh. (Avon, $8.95.) Charlotte, the
protagonist of this novel, learns about life from a mother who is alcoholic and
schizophrenic.

FARM: A Year in the Life of an American Farmer, by Richard Rhodes.
(Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $9.95.) A year with a Missouri farming family.

FEAR OF FALLING: The Inner Life of the Middle Class, by Barbara Ehrenreich.
(Harper Perennial, $9.95.) A journalist argues that an insecure middle class
perpetuated the myth that liberal permissiveness was unraveling the country's
moral fiber.

FEDERICO GARCIA LORCA: A Life, by Ian Gibson. (Pantheon, $15.95.) A biography by
the world authority on the mystic Andalusian poet.

FIRE ON THE RIM: A Firefighter's Season at the Grand Canyon, by Stephen J. Pyne.
(Ballantine, $4.95.) Meditations on the most awesome of nature's wonders, the
runaway chemical reaction called fire.

FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM, by Thomas L. Friedman. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) A
New York Times correspondent's experiences in the Middle East.

GEORGIA O'KEEFFE: A Life, by Roxana Robinson. (Edward Burlingame/Harper
Perennial, $12.95.) Our reviewer called this a "long and thorough" biography
that "does much to give body to the O'Keeffe myth."

THE GOOD TIMES, by Russell Baker. (Plume, $8.95.) The New York Times columnist
tells how he made his way from the Baltimore police beat to the Washington press
corps.

GREAT PLAINS, by Ian Frazier. (Penguin, $9.95.) Why the Great Plains are not so
boring as they seem.

HIGHER GROUND: A Novel in Three Parts, by Caryl Phillips. (Penguin, $7.95.) In
one-third of this triptych about oppression, an African acts as a go-between for
slave traders.

THE HISTORY OF LUMINOUS MOTION, by Scott Bradfield. (Vintage, $8.95.) A
precocious and possibly psychotic 8-year-old boy is on the lam with his
manic-depressive mother.

IN SOUTHERN LIGHT: Trekking Through Zaire and the Amazon, by Alex Shoumatoff.
(Vintage, $9.95.) A search on two continents for Amazons and pygmies.

IN THE NAME OF God: The Khomeini Decade, by Robin Wright. (Touchstone/Simon &
Schuster, $10.95.) The method behind the madness of the Khomeini regime.

IN THE NIGHT CAFE, by Joyce Johnson. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $7.95.) In
the early 1960's, 26-year-old Joanna Gold falls for a New York City painter who
does everything to excess.

IN THE PALOMAR ARMS, by Hilma Wolitzer. (Ivy, $3.95.) Stuck in an affair with a
married man, Daphne seeks wisdom and solace among the residents of a nursing
home.

INCLINE OUR HEARTS, by A. N. Wilson. (Penguin, $7.95.) A tale about an orphan's
travails at an English boarding school.

AN INVISIBLE SPECTATOR: A Biography of Paul Bowles, by Christopher
Sawyer-Laucanno. (Ecco, $14.95.) How a dentist's son from Queens became an
acclaimed writer and the patron saint of the Beat generation.

ITALIAN DAYS, by Barbara Grizzuti Harrison. (Ticknor & Fields, $12.95.) In an
attempt to understand the transplanted culture of her childhood in Brooklyn, a
writer takes an extensive tour of Italy.

IT'S ALWAYS SOMETHING, by Gilda Radner. (Avon, $4.95.) Cancer, it seems, was
just about the only thing that Gilda Radner's laughter could not overcome.

THE JEWS IN AMERICA. Four Centuries of an Uneasy Encounter: A History, by Arthur
Hertzberg. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $12.95.) The author concludes that the
Jewish community in America is in need of a spiritual revival.

KEEP THE CHANGE, by Thomas McGuane. (Vintage, $9.95.) A failed painter steals
his girlfriend's pink convertible and heads back to his ranch in Montana.

LEAVING BROOKLYN, by Lynne Sharon Schwartz. (Penguin, $7.95.) An ophthalmologist
initiates a 15-year-old girl into the mysteries of sex.

LIAR'S POKER: Rising Through the Wreckage on Wall Street, by Michael Lewis.
(Penguin, $4.95.) An inside look at the fulfillments of bond trading.

LIPSTICK TRACES: A Secret History of the Twentieth Century, by Greil Marcus.
(Harvard University, $14.95.) A cultural history of society's anarchic fringe.

THE MAMBO KINGS PLAY SONGS OF LOVE, by Oscar Hijuelos. (Harper Perennial,
$9.95.) In this novel, two New York City mambo musicians are discovered by Desi
Arnaz.

MILE ZERO, by Thomas Sanchez. (Vintage Contemporaries, $10.95.) A novel about a
burned-out case from the 60's, languishing in Key West.

MONKEY BAY, by Elaine Ford. (Penguin, $7.95.) In a dreary little town on the
coast of Maine, Hannah Pratt decides to seduce her mother's boyfriend.

THE MOST BEAUTIFUL HOUSE IN THE WORLD, by Witold Rybczynski. (Penguin, $8.95.) A
lyrical celebration of the building of a perfect home.

MY CENTURY: The Odyssey of a Polish Intellectual, by Aleksander Wat. Edited and
translated by Richard Lourie. (Norton, $12.95.) The perilous life of a Polish
intellectual.

NEW YORK 1913: The Armory Show and the Paterson Strike Pageant, by Martin Green.
(Collier/Macmillan, $14.95.) The parallel tales of two revolutions, one artistic
and the other political.

NICE WORK, by David Lodge. (Penguin, $7.95.) A feminist literary critic falls
for a real live member of the British managerial class.

NOW, WHERE WERE WE? by Roy Blount Jr. (Ballantine, $8.95.) Among the pieces in
this collection is a deconstructionist parody of the beginning of "Gone With the
Wind."

OLDEST LIVING CONFEDERATE WIDOW TELLS ALL, by Allan Gurganus. (Ivy, $6.95.) An
epic monologue about the child bride of a Civil War captain.

POLAR STAR, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Ballantine, $5.95.) The hero of "Gorky Park"
flees from a mental hospital to Siberia.

POODLE SPRINGS, by Raymond Chandler and Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $4.95.) A
mystery writer completes an abandoned Chandler manuscript.

THE REMAINS OF THE DAY, by Kazuo Ishiguro. (Vintage, $9.95.) Stevens, the
perfect English butler, sadly comes to realize how much of his life has been a
carefully crafted lie.

THE RUSSIA HOUSE, by John le Carre. (Bantam, $5.95.) "An exciting spy story,
which is at the same time a lively international comedy of manners," our
reviewer said.

SEE UNDER: LOVE, by David Grossman. Translated by Betsy Rosenberg. (Washington
Square/Pocket Books, $9.95.) A story about a 9-year-old Israeli boy learning
about the Holocaust.

A SERIOUS CHARACTER: The Life of Ezra Pound, by Humphrey Carpenter. (Delta,
$19.95.) The best biography of the poet, our review said.

SOLDIER'S JOY, by Madison Smartt Bell. (Penguin, $8.95.) A novel about a
bluegrass musician's brush with the Ku Klux Klan.

SOME CAN WHISTLE, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket Books, $5.95.) Late in life a rich,
successful Danny Deck gets a surprise visit from the 22-year-old daughter he has
never seen.

SOUL/MATE, by Rosamond Smith. (Onyx, $4.95.) In another thriller written under a
pen name by Joyce Carol Oates, a psychopathic killer will stop at nothing to win
the heart of an art historian.

SPARTINA, by John Casey. (Avon, $8.95.) "Just possibly the best American novel
about going fishing since 'The Old Man and the Sea,' maybe even 'Moby-Dick,' "
our reviewer said.

STRANGERS FROM A DIFFERENT SHORE: A History of Asian Americans, by Ronald
Takaki. (Penguin, $11.95.) A panoramic look at the struggles of Asians to be
accepted in America.

THIS BOY'S LIFE: A Memoir, by Tobias Wolff. (Harper Perennial, $8.95.) A
writer's account of a bizarre family life.

TO ASMARA, by Thomas Keneally. (Warner, $10.95.) Our reviewer compared this
novel of the Eritrean revolt in Ethiopia to "For Whom the Bell Tolls."

TOURS OF THE BLACK CLOCK, by Steve Erickson. (Avon, $8.95.) A novel about a
Pennsylvania boy who writes pornographic fantasies for Hitler.

THE TRULY DISADVANTAGED: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public Policy, by
William Julius Wilson. (University of Chicago, $12.95.) A sociologist seeks the
roots of the underclass.

WASTED, by Linda Wolfe. (Pocket Books, $4.95.) The true story of the jaded Upper
East Side subculture of Jennifer Levin and Robert E. Chambers Jr.

WHAT MAD PURSUIT: A Personal View of Scientific Discovery, by Francis Crick.
(Basic Books, $8.95.) Francis Crick tells his side of the double helix story.

THE WIDOWS' ADVENTURES, by Charles Dickinson. (Avon, $8.95.) Two elderly sisters
drive across the United States to visit ungrateful relatives.

WONDERFUL LIFE: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History, by Stephen Jay
Gould. (Norton, $10.95.) The author argues that mankind is the result of a
series of unlikely accidents.

THE YEAR OF THE ZINC PENNY, by Rick DeMarinis. (Harper Perennial, $8.95.) In
1943, the year pennies were made of zinc, a boy escapes life's unpleasantries by
imagining that he is a fighter pilot.

YOU GOTTA HAVE WA, by Robert Whiting. (Vintage, $10.95.) An American journalist
finds that in Japan baseball is taken with a seriousness that might astound even
the most avid American fan.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 16, 1990, Sunday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, the listing of notable books on Dec. 2 omitted
three entries. They are printed in this section today, on page 80.


TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Notable Books of the Year

SECTION: Section 7; Page 48; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 12886 words


This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas issue of
December 1989. It suggests only high points in the main fields of reader
interest, and it does not include the titles chosen by the editors of The Book
Review as the Best Books of 1990. Books are arranged alphabetically under
subject headings. Quoted comments are from The Book Review.


Autobiography and Biography

AGAINST THE GRAIN: An Autobiography. By Boris Yeltsin. (Summit, $19.95.) This
provocative book gives voice to the Russian-style populism and antiparty
insurgency of its author, the most visible leader of the opposition to Mikhail
S. Gorbachev.

AMELIA EARHART: A Biography. By Doris L. Rich. (Smithsonian Institution,
$19.95.) THE SOUND OF WINGS: The Life of Amelia Earhart. By Mary S. Lovell. (St.
Martin's, $22.95.) Two biographies of the famous American pilot (and feminist)
who vanished in the South Pacific in 1937. The authors agree on the important
facts; Ms. Lovell is more skeptical about her flying skills than Ms. Rich, and
thinks better of her husband and publicist, G. P. Putnam.

AMERICAN CASSANDRA: The Life of Dorothy Thompson. By Peter Kurth. (Little,
Brown, $24.95.) A skillful exploration of the life and personality of the
formidable foreign correspondent.

AS I SAW IT. By Dean Rusk as told to Richard Rusk. (Norton, $29.95.) A joint
memoir, written with his son, presents the once inscrutable and remote former
Secretary of State as eloquent, funny, moving, devilish and even earthy.

AS THOUSANDS CHEER: The Life of Irving Berlin. By Laurence Bergreen. (Viking,
$24.95.) A vivid and impressive portrait of the phenomenon who was part
songwriter and part industry, set against the panorama of 80 years of American
show business.

BECOMING A POET: Elizabeth Bishop With Marianne Moore and Robert Lowell. By
David Kalstone. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.50.) The fullest account so far of
Bishop's life, David Kalstone's presentation approaches her creative activity
through her close friendships with two other major poets.

BENEDICT ARNOLD: Patriot and Traitor. By Willard Sterne Randall. (Morrow,
$27.95.) This industriously researched biography turns up much evidence that
Arnold, though brave and talented, shouldn't have been trusted in the first
place.

BORIS PASTERNAK: A Literary Biography. Volume One: 1890-1928. By Christopher
Barnes. (Cambridge University, $69.50.) A painstakingly researched, elegantly
produced book that renders the full texture of Pasternak's insecure, displaced
existence.

THE BOY-MAN: The Life of Lord Baden-Powell. By Tim Jeal. (Morrow, $24.95.) A
monumental (670 pages) biography of the founder of Scouting, doing full justice
to the complexities of the man and the contradictions in the movement he
fathered.

CAPTAIN SIR RICHARD FRANCIS BURTON: The Secret Agent Who Made the Pilgrimage to
Mecca, Discovered the Kama Sutra, and Brought the Arabian Nights to the West. By
Edward Rice. (Scribners, $35.) This life of the 19th-century explorer and sage
is a first-class account of a strange and remarkable career.

THE COLONEL: The Life and Wars of Henry Stimson, 1867-1950. By Godfrey Hodgson.
(Knopf, $24.95.) A lucid, penetrating biography of the statesman, a pragmatic
idealist who served Presidents from Theodore Roosevelt to Harry S. Truman.

C. S. LEWIS: A Biography. By A. N. Wilson. (Norton, $22.50.) A skilled novelist
and biographer (of Tolstoy) brilliantly and sympathetically demythologizes one
of the most tendentiously written-about British authors of the 20th century.

DADDY, WE HARDLY KNEW YOU. By Germaine Greer. (Knopf, $19.95.) Ms. Greer's
enormous digressions and rambles are as entertaining as the principal action in
this account of her quest to learn the origins of her own father, a man who, she
finds, never knew his birth name or parents and lied about what little he knew.

DANGEROUS CAPABILITIES: Paul Nitze and the Cold War. By David Callahan. (Edward
Burlingame/HarperCollins, $24.95.) An industriously researched life of Mr. Nitze
as the ultimate insider's insider, a systematic international pessimist who
served under six Presidents, starting with Franklin D. Roosevelt.

DARKNESS VISIBLE: A Memoir of Madness. By William Styron. (Random House,
$15.95.) A short, intensely described account of the depression that struck Mr.
Styron in 1985 and of his agonized recovery from what he calls "a howling
tempest in the brain."

DE GAULLE: The Rebel, 1890-1944. By Jean Lacouture. (Norton, $29.95.) The
biographer of Ho Chi Minh and Andre Malraux wins again with the first volume of
his splendid life of Charles de Gaulle, which takes destiny's favorite Frenchman
from his birth to his triumphant entry into Paris in August 1944.

DIARY OF AN EROTIC LIFE. By Frank Wedekind. (Blackwell, $24.95.) This sharply
observed, outspoken diary was meant by the playwright both as a sourcebook for
plays and as autotherapy.

THE DIARY OF H. L. MENCKEN. Edited by Charles A. Fecher. (Knopf, $30.) The good
Mencken -- a great writer, editor and friend -- and the bad Mencken --
anti-Semite, racist and crank -- revealed in a compulsively readable diary, kept
from 1930 to 1948.

THE EARLY ARRIVAL OF DREAMS: A Year in China. By Rosemary Mahoney. (Fawcett
Columbine, $18.95.) A memoir by a teacher that indicts the works of the Chinese
establishment all the more effectively because of its tenderness and generosity.

ETCHINGS IN AN HOURGLASS. By Kate Simon. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The third and
last of Kate Simon's autobiographical books dips at anecdotal hazard into the
places and events -- a lot of them sexual -- of a gallant, independent and
hard-won life.

EVERY GOOD-BYE AIN'T GONE: Family Portraits and Personal Escapades. By Itabari
Njeri. (Times Books/Random House, $17.95.) An impassioned, skillful, frankly
subjective attempt to explore and expose the depth of a black American family
heritage.

FREEDOM IN EXILE: The Autobiography of the Dalai Lama. (Cornelia & Michael
Bessie/HarperCollins, $22.95.) Forthrightly political and spiritual, the 14th
Dalai Lama's reflective account argues for nonviolence, environmentalism and a
free Tibet.

GUILTY OF EVERYTHING: The Autobiography of Herbert Huncke. (Paragon House,
$19.95.) The very survival of this prototypical beatnik and hipster to age 75 is
amazing, and so is his record of horrific misadventures and unlikely
acquaintances.

A HIGHER KIND OF LOYALTY: A Memoir by China's Foremost Journalist. By Liu
Binyan. (Pantheon, $22.95.) Repeatedly Mr. Liu wrote the truth; repeatedly he
was punished for it, but never gave up faith in the party until Tiananmen
Square. Strange and sad.

HOLDING ON TO THE AIR: An Autobiography. By Suzanne Farrell with Toni Bentley.
(Summit, $19.95.) The great ballerina's generous and unpretentious memoir shows
us first a girl coping with conspicuous success, then a young woman bewildered
by George Balanchine's affections, finally a triumphant maturity.

A HOLE IN THE WORLD: An American Boyhood. by Richard Rhodes. (Simon & Schuster,
$19.95.) Mr. Rhodes's own passage through abuse and deprivation to redemption: a
harrowing tale.

THE HOUSE OF BARRYMORE. By Margot Peters. (Knopf, $29.95.) An excellent history
of the prominent American theatrical family, considerable warts and all. For
better or worse, the Barrymores have found their chronicler.

HOW I BECAME HETTIE JONES. By Hettie Jones. (Dutton, $18.95.) The memoir of a
young Jewish woman of the Beat Generation, who loved -- and lost -- the poet and
black nationalist LeRoi Jones, is a valuable social document.

IN ALL HIS GLORY. The Life of William S. Paley: The Legendary Tycoon and His
Brilliant Circle. By Sally Bedell Smith. (Simon & Schuster, $29.95.) Ms. Smith's
thorough reporting displays both the greatness and the smallness of the
generous, energetic but insecure and sometimes untrustworthy genius who created
CBS.

THE LABYRINTH OF EXILE: A Life of Theodor Herzl. By Ernst Pawel. (Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, $30.) Zionism's founder subtly rendered in the round, with both his
grandeur and his pettiness.

A LIFE ON THE ROAD. By Charles Kuralt. (Putnam, $19.95.) A professional memoir
by a gifted man who has delighted television viewers by exploiting a permanent
stranger's sense of place.

LOVE AND OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASES: A Memoir. By Molly Haskell. (Morrow,
$18.95.) A film critic's psychological journey through the terrifying sickness
and near death of her husband, Andrew Sarris, also a distinguished film critic.

LUCIUS D. CLAY: An American Life. By Jean Edward Smith. (Holt, $35.) A masterly
biography of the brilliant political general who headed the American occupation
of Germany after World War II, presided over the Berlin airlift and created West
Germany.

MEANS OF ASCENT: The Years of Lyndon Johnson. By Robert A. Caro. (Knopf,
$24.95.) The second volume of a projected four, Mr. Caro's account of Johnson's
life from 1941 to 1948 -- especially the "stolen election" that put him in the
Senate -- is the work of an indefatigable researcher and master narrator.

MEMOIRS. By Andrei Sakharov. (Knopf, $29.95.) Not so much a reflection on his
life as an annotated record of it, this account tells how an essentially shy and
securely privileged Soviet scholar became an unbreakable witness for
intellectual freedom.

MIDSTREAM. By Le Anne Schreiber. (Viking, $18.95.) A dauntless and moving memoir
by a former Times editor who became a freelance writer while her mother died
cruelly of cancer.

RANDALL JARRELL: A Literary Life. By William H. Pritchard. (Michael di
Capua/Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.) One of the most literary lives ever lived,
Jarrell's was short on event but plentiful in wit, pathos and brilliance, as
this careful biography shows.

REBUILDING THE HOUSE. By Laurie Graham. (Viking, $17.95.) An affecting record of
life reconstructed after the death of the elder partner in a remarkably happy
transgenerational marriage.

RICHARD NIXON AND HIS AMERICA. By Herbert S. Parmet. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A
thorough and thoughtful biography of both the 37th President and the society in
which he came to power.

RIVER OF TRAPS: A Village Life. By William deBuys and Alex Harris. (University
of New Mexico, $19.95.) A man's life in a unique American culture, that of the
Hispanos of northern New Mexico, honestly rendered by a writer and a
photographer.

ROBERT GRAVES: The Years With Laura, 1926-1940. By Richard Perceval Graves.
(Viking, $24.95.) An authoritative and lively account, by his nephew, of
Graves's voluntary surrender of his life and work to the obscure American poet
Laura Riding.

SLIM: Memories of a Rich and Imperfect Life. By Slim Keith with Annette Tapert.
(Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) A high-powered, experienced wife (of a film
director, an impresario, a British banker) tells what fun charm, brains and
beauty were to have.

STALIN'S APOLOGIST: Walter Duranty, The New York Times's Man in Moscow. By S. J.
Taylor. (Oxford University, $24.95.) A beautifully researched life of the
high-living, cynical journalist who helped cover up Stalin's atrocities in the
1930's.

TAKING HEART. By A. C. Greene. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) A veteran essayist
and commentator examines the experiences of the first patient in a new
heart-transplant center -- himself.

THEODORE DREISER: An American Journey 1908-1945. By Richard Lingeman. (Putnam,
$39.95.) The second volume of Mr. Lingeman's massive biography documents the
most troubled life led by any important modern American writer.

THE TIME OF MY LIFE. By Denis Healey. (Norton, $29.95.) A large, literate, witty
man, Mr. Healey turns his experiences in British ministries into a wise and
informative memoir.

VAN GOGH: His Life and His Art. By David Sweetman. (Crown, $30.) An engaging
biography, published in the centenary year of the artist's death, that undoes
some of the obscuring myths about van Gogh and illuminates the social and
artistic world he lived in.

WHAT I SAW AT THE REVOLUTION: A Political Life in the Reagan Era. By Peggy
Noonan. (Random House, $19.95.) Ronald Reagan's speechwriter, an articulate true
believer in her President's greatness, transforms what she beheld in Washington
into fine, sometimes brusque and rough-cut social comedy.

WHAT WE HAD. By James Chace. (Summit, $17.95.) This memoir of childhood and
youth by a former editor of Foreign Affairs and The Times Book Review focuses
lyrically on a town (Fall River, Mass.) and a family both in decline in the
1930's and 40's.

WRESTLING WITH THE ANGEL: A Memoir of My Triumph Over Illness. By Max Lerner.
(Norton, $18.95.) The experiences of a New York intellectual, now in his 80's,
with three mortal diseases, which he has so far beaten with luck, pluck and
modern medicine.

Children



ANTARCTICA. Written and illustrated by Helen Cowcher. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$13.95.) The message of this visually dazzling book is clear: penguins have
natural predators, and man, though different from the others, is part of that
continuum. (Ages 5 to 8)

BASEBALL IN APRIL: And Other Stories. By Gary Soto. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$14.95.) These short stories deal sensitively with Mexican-American boys and
girls becoming teen-agers in contemporary California neighborhoods. (Ages 12 and
up)

BEACH BALL. Written and illustrated by Peter Sis. (Greenwillow, $12.95.) Mary
goes running after a beach ball and on the sand encounters concepts like color,
number and shape. The intricate illustrations are ingenious and appealing to
older children and Waldo fans. (Ages 2 to 5)

THE BUCK STOPS HERE: The Presidents of the United States. Written and
illustrated by Alice Provensen. (HarperCollins, $17.95.) A craftily designed,
lavishly illustrated, panoramic introduction to the history of the American
Presidency, subtly subversive in the amount of information it can imaginatively
convey. (All ages)

THE FOSSIL FACTORY: A Kid's Guide to Digging Up Dinosaurs, Exploring Evolution,
and Finding Fossils. By Niles, Douglas and Gregory Eldredge. Illustrated by True
Kelley and Steve Lindblom. (Addison-Wesley, Paper, $8.95.) There is much more
than meets the eye in this clearly written, cheerily illustrated paperback that
gently introduces some of the great discoveries in astrophysics, plate
tectonics, natural selection and evolution, among other subjects. Even the
appendixes are useful. (Ages 7 to 12)

GALIMOTO. By Karen Lynn Williams. Illustrated by Catherine Stock. (Lothrop, Lee
& Shepard, $13.95.) A little boy in a village on the shores of Lake Malawi
spends a day making a galimoto -- a toy car -- from various wires he gathers.
The watercolor art broadens the scope of this engaging story. (Ages 5 to 9)

JACK. By A. M. Homes. (Macmillan, $13.95.) Jack is a likable guy, a good kid
caught in circumstances too much for him. His parents have separated; his spacey
mother ducks reality; his father's roommate, Bob, turns out to be his lover. By
the end of the book, Jack has grown convincingly. (Ages 14 and up)

JULY. Written and illustrated by James Stevenson. (Greenwillow, $12.95.) These
childhood recollections incorporate soft-spoken pictures, touched with amusing
grace and completely in harmony with the story they serve. (Ages 5 and up)

TEHANU: The Last Book of Earthsea. By Ursula K. LeGuin. (Jean Karl/Atheneum,
$15.95.) This sequel to the prize-winning Earthsea fantasy trilogy explores the
necessary and life-giving contributions of female magic, which is sometimes
disguised as domesticity. There are dragons, of course, but also a poignant
consideration of aging, among other adult themes. (Ages 12 and up)

WAR BOY: A Country Childhood. Written and illustrated by Michael Foreman.
(Arcade Publishing, $16.95.) The author grew up during World War II in
Pakefield, an English town not far from German air bases, and one of his
earliest memories is of a bomb coming through the roof. The prose is square-cut,
almost clinical; the illustrations show us what is truly remembered. (Ages 8 and
up)

 Crime



BONES AND SILENCE. By Reginald Hill. (Delacorte, $17.95.) The 10th entry in an
outstanding procedural series set in Yorkshire. No other genre author writes
with such understanding of silently unhappy women as does Mr. Hill in his tender
portraits.

BREAK AND ENTER. By Colin Harrison. (Crown, $17.95.) In this intensely felt
first novel, Mr. Harrison heroically balances the philosophical drama of a man's
crisis of faith with the puzzle-narrative of a legal whodunit.

DARK OBSESSION: A True Story of Incest and Justice. By Shelley Sessions with
Peter Meyer. (Putnam, $21.95.) The finely detailed and thoroughly shocking
narrative, both personal and social, of a Texas teen-ager who found all too
little family or institutional support in trying to escape from an incestuous
step father.

DEVICES AND DESIRES. By P. D. James. (Knopf, $19.95.) This absorbing novel, the
11th by the British writer, places the detective Adam Dalgliesh on the trail of
a serial killer.

DEVIL IN A BLUE DRESS. By Walter Mosley. (Norton, $18.95.) Easy Rawlins is a
black World War II veteran who turns private eye in a jazzy novel that takes
place in the Los Angeles of 1948. Mr. Mosley writes in a talking-blues style
that is its own kind of music.

AN EASY THING. By Paco Ignacio Taibo 2d. (Viking, $16.95.) Mr. Taibo composes a
dense and disquieting picture of pervasive political chaos and social cynicism
in a novel about a moody Mexico City gumshoe.

THE END OF LIEUTENANT BORUVKA. By Josef Skvorecky. (Norton, $18.95.) Five
stories, camouflaged as police thrillers, about a good man's melancholy
trajectory through the corrupt and corrupting world of post-Dubcek, pre-Havel
Prague.

A FAINT COLD FEAR. By Robert Daley. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A New York City
police official takes on an international drug cartel in an intelligent,
engaging novel that is popular entertainment of a high order.

GALLOWGLASS. By Barbara Vine. (Harmony, $19.95.) Miss Vine's most penetrating
foray yet into the dark mysteries of the heart's obsessions, examining love in
many guises, chiefly pathological.

GET SHORTY. By Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $18.95.) In Mr. Leonard's new punchy
thriller, a crook from Miami changes his life -- or reveals it -- when he goes
to Hollywood, where life isn't life unless it's the basis of a major motion
picture.

GROOTKA. By Jon A. Jackson. (Foul Play/Countryman, $19.95.) A dark and moody
police procedural featuring a scrappy Detroit detective named Fang Mulheisen.
Mr. Jackson stands right up there with the best chroniclers of urban crime.

A MORNING FOR FLAMINGOS. By James Lee Burke. (Little, Brown, $18.95.) Lush
descriptions and the idiosyncratic freshness of the characters' language mark
this novel about a Cajun detective who sets up a sting operation for the Feds.

MURPHY'S FAULT. By Steven Womack. (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $17.95.) New
Orleans is the setting for this tough and articulate first novel about greedy
politicians and their dirty deals.

NEMESIS. By Rosamond Smith. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $18.95.) Joyce Carol
Oates's third mesmerizing Rosamond Smith mystery concerns a homosexual rape, the
murder of a mediocre composer (but much worse man) and its solution by a
pianist.

OCTOPUS: The Long Reach of the International Sicilian Mafia. By Claire Sterling.
(Norton, $19.95.) Ms. Sterling's Palermo-based bosses are credited with the
creation of a multinational empire whose principal target has long been the
United States.

SKELETON-IN-WAITING. By Peter Dickinson. (Pantheon, $16.95.) Spunky, clever
Princess Louise is on the case in the author's second nifty thriller about an
imaginary British royal family.

STILL AMONG THE LIVING. By Zachary Klein. (HarperCollins, $18.95.) Matthew
Jacob, a private eye from Boston with a fondness for illegal substances, makes
his debut in a novel that offers rich characterizations.

THE WESTIES: Inside the Hell's Kitchen Irish Mob. By T. J. English. (Putnam,
$21.95.) The last incarnation and, apparently, final collapse of Manhattan's
long-running West Side gang under the twin assaults of Federal crime fighters
and gentrification.




Current Affairs and Social Commentary

ALMOST A REVOLUTION. By Shen Tong with Marianne Yen. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.)
An earnest account of the making of an activist of the democracy movement and an
insider's record of the day-to-day events of the spring of 1989 and the June
crackdown.

BARBARIANS AT THE GATE: The Fall of RJR Nabisco. By Bryan Burrough and John
Helyar. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) A vivid and compelling account of the 1988 sale
of RJR Nabisco for $25 billion.

BEIRUT FRAGMENTS: A War Memoir. By Jean Said Makdisi. (Persea, $19.95.) A woman
who stuck with her city in the worst of times speaks eloquently against the
indifference that has written off Beirut as just a specially nasty foreign
place.

BIRTH POWER: The Case for Surrogacy. By Carmel Shalev. (Yale University,
$19.95.) A liberal feminist lawyer argues forcibly that women should have the
legal right to sell their reproductive services (and the obligation to fulfill
their contracts).

BURNING DOWN THE HOUSE: How Greed, Deceit, and Bitter Revenge Destroyed E. F.
Hutton. By James Sterngold. (Summit, $19.95.) The corruption and ruin of an
old-line firm, chronicled by a reporter who covered the scandal for The New York
Times.

THE BURNING SEASON: The Murder of Chico Mendes and the Fight for the Amazon Rain
Forest. By Andrew Revkin. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Mr. Revkin explores the
life and death of a Brazilian rubber tapper and union leader within the wider
context of the ecological threat posed by the clearing of the forests.

THE COMING GLOBAL BOOM: How to Benefit Now From Tomorrow's Dynamic World
Economy. By Charles R. Morris. (Bantam, $19.95.) An entrepreneur and former
banker argues ingeniously that boom is right around the corner, and that scary
things like Japan and deficits are either neutral or good for us.

THE CONTENT OF OUR CHARACTER: A New Vision of Race in America. By Shelby Steele.
(St. Martin's, $15.95.) Mr. Steele, a professor of English in California, argues
from his own experience that many blacks are suffering from "race fatigue" and
ought to rid themselves of self-identification as victims.

CUBA: A Journey. By Jacobo Timerman. Translated by Toby Talbot. (Knopf, $18.95.)
The author's fierce, intelligent account of a visit to Cuba in 1987 portrays an
island in shambles, a nation suffocated and demoralized after three decades of
revolution.

DEVIL'S NIGHT: And Other True Tales of Detroit. By Ze'ev Chafets. (Random House,
$19.95.) Detroit as now it is, a fallen city trying to climb back again,
captured in vignettes and interviews by a suburban Detroiter who later
immigrated to Israel.

DISTURBING THE PEACE: A Conversation With Karel Hvizdala. By Vaclav Havel.
(Knopf, $19.95.) Autobiography, political philosophy, history and esthetics, all
displaying the qualities that projected the author into the presidency of
Czechoslovakia.

DIVORCING THE DICTATOR: America's Bungled Affair With Noriega. By Frederick
Kempe. (Putnam, $24.95.) OUR MAN IN PANAMA: How General Noriega Used the United
States -- and Made Millions in Drugs and Arms. By John Dinges. (Random House,
$21.95.) Much in these two accounts by professional journalists has been known
to our Government all along but kept secret. Both books are excellent guides
through the undergrowth of America's affair with the Panamanian dictator.

THE END OF THE LINE: The Failure of Communism in the Soviet Union and China. By
Christopher S. Wren. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) Anecdote, analysis and lots of
life in both countries, delivered by a correspondent of The New York Times.

THE EXPERIENCE OF PLACE. By Tony Hiss. (Knopf, $19.95.) This unusual and
fascinating book recommends a consciously intensified use of our underlying
awareness of what surrounds us to make us comprehend more fully who we are and
where.

FADE OUT: The Calamitous Final Days of MGM. By Peter Bart. (Morrow, $19.95.) How
a corporate raider bought a going movie company and bled it dry; a cautionary
tale of the 1980's.

THE FALL OF PAN AM 103: Inside the Lockerbie Investigation. By Steven Emerson
and Brian Duffy. (Putnam, $21.95.) Two professional journalists have constructed
a surpassing account of the 1988 bombing, rich both in drama and in anecdotal
details.

FLASHBACKS: On Returning to Vietnam. By Morley Safer. (Random House, $18.95.) A
postwar reinterpretation of the country by a CBS correspondent whose reporting
on the war was among the best broadcast journalism of the 1960's.

FRUIT TRAMPS: A Family of Migrant Farmworkers. By Herman LeRoy Emmet.
(University of New Mexico, Cloth, $45; Paper, $24.95.) In this study of a
migrant family, words and pictures echo and drive each other to portray a life
of deprivation and triumph.

GORBACHEV: Heretic in the Kremlin. By Dusko Doder and Louise Branson. (Viking,
$24.95.) A narrative interpretation that does not pretend to yield a final
reading of the Soviet leader but provides a guide to the roller-coaster
volatility of the last five years.

GRATITUDE: Reflections on What We Owe to Our Country. By William F. Buckley Jr.
(Random House, $16.95.) Mr. Buckley proposes legislation summoning young
Americans to 12 months of somewhat voluntary low-paid, low-grade public
employment.

INTIFADA: The Palestinian Uprising -- Israel's Third Front. By Ze'ev Schiff and
Ehud Ya'ari. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) A reporters' book that focuses on
long-term trends and inquires what is distinctive or continuous about the
Palestinian uprising.

JUSTICE NOT VENGEANCE. By Simon Wiesenthal. (Grove Weidenfeld, $22.50.) Did
Josef Mengele really drown in Brazil in 1979, or may the physician-murderer of
Auschwitz still be alive? The man who brought Adolf Eichmann to judgment
reflects on this and other cases from a life spent tracking Nazis.

A LAW UNTO ITSELF: Power, Politics, and the IRS. By David Burnham. (Random
House, $22.50.) An absorbing, critical, well-argued inquiry into our tax agency,
by a former Times reporter.

LOOKING FOR A SHIP. By John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) The usual
-- that is to say, terrific -- McPhee treatment, in which the author surrenders
to his subject and conquers it; in this case, the merchant marine of the United
States.

A MIRACLE, A UNIVERSE: Settling Accounts With Torturers. By Lawrence Weschler.
(Pantheon, $22.95.) A disturbing account of the uneasy compromises between new
civilian governments and the brutal military regimes they succeeded in Latin
America.

ON THE LAW OF NATIONS. By Daniel Patrick Moynihan. (Harvard University, $22.50.)
After a convincing demonstration that past American leaders have honored the
ideals of international law, the Senator from New York argues that recent
Presidents are content just to throw America's weight around.

ONE, BY ONE, BY ONE: Facing the Holocaust. By Judith Miller. (Simon & Schuster,
$21.95.) A correspondent for The Times examines the ways five European countries
and the United States have distorted and manipulated the memory of the
Holocaust.

AN OPEN ADOPTION. By Lincoln Caplan. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) Part
research paper, part thriller, this case study broadens to examine a form of
placement in which biological and adoptive parents are well known to one
another.

OUTRAGE: The Story Behind the Tawana Brawley Hoax. By Robert D. McFadden, Ralph
Blumenthal, M. A. Farber, E. R. Shipp, Charles Strum and Craig Wolff. (Bantam,
$21.95.) The tale, meticulously recounted by six reporters and editors of The
New York Times, of a racially divisive hoax -- the purported rape of a young
black woman by white men in a village north of New York.

PLEDGING ALLEGIANCE: The Last Campaign of the Cold War. By Sidney Blumenthal.
(HarperCollins, $22.95.) This absorbing history of the 1988 Presidential
election exposes a political process that is vacuous and out of touch with the
major questions.

THE POLITICS OF RICH AND POOR: Wealth and the American Electorate in the Reagan
Aftermath. By Kevin Phillips. (Random House, $19.95.) The redistribution of
wealth toward the rich in the last 20 years was a Republican policy objective,
not just an accident, Mr. Phillips contends, and a populist reaction is likely.

THE PRIVATIZATION DECISION: Public Ends, Private Means. By John D. Donahue.
(Basic Books, $22.95.) What government activities should be contracted out? This
thoughtful book shuns global answers and explores how to examine individual
cases.

SADDAM HUSSEIN AND THE CRISIS IN THE GULF. By Judith Miller and Laurie Mylroie.
(Times Books/Random House, paper, $5.95.) A scary, persuasive reading of the
Iraqi leader's career, by a New York Times correspondent and a Harvard scholar.

SLOW BURN: The Rise and Bitter Fall of American Intelligence in Vietnam. By
Orrin DeForest and David Chanoff. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) Mr. DeForest, the
principal author, is an angry C.I.A. veteran, offering a sad tale of obduracy
and incompetence.

SMALL VICTORIES: The Real World of a Teacher, Her Students, and Their High
School. By Samuel G. Freedman. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) In a sad account of
social neglect and failure, a former New York Times reporter spends a year at a
battered inner-city high school and chronicles the heroic and often fruitless
efforts of students and teachers to make learning possible.

SOVIET WOMEN: Walking the Tightrope. By Francine du Plessix Gray. (Doubleday,
$19.95.) Brilliant, sympathetic portraits of overworked, frustrated women whose
men have neither the authority of patriarchs nor the utility of househusbands.

TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE: The Outlandish Story of Wedtech. By James Traub.
(Doubleday, $21.95.) This account of a Bronx-based scam that cost taxpayers and
investors about $300 million is elegant, funny and frequently exciting -- though
its subject, the total failure of a corruptible system, isn't even slightly
amusing.

TRIBES WITH FLAGS: A Dangerous Passage Through the Chaos of the Middle East. By
Charles Glass. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.95.) An unfunny thing happened to this ABC
correspondent in Beirut: he got kidnapped. But he escaped, and his story,
despite its basic sadness, is entertaining, often even cheerful.

THE UNDESERVING POOR: From the War on Poverty to the War on Welfare. By Michael
B. Katz. (Pantheon, Cloth, $22.95; Paper, $14.95.) A searching, unsettling
history of Government policies toward poor people, with provocative solutions
for what to do next.

WHAT LISA KNEW: The Truth and Lies of the Steinberg Case. By Joyce Johnson.
(Putnam, $22.95.) A painful, fascinating effort by a skilled novelist to both
narrate and understand (but not to excuse) the events and personalities that led
to the horrendous child-abuse case of Lisa Steinberg, dead at 6 in November 1987
in New York.

THE WORST YEARS OF OUR LIVES: Irreverent Notes From a Decade of Greed. By
Barbara Ehrenreich. (Pantheon, $19.95.) Fifty essays -- elegant, trenchant,
angry and funny -- that sum up the author's view of the 80's and aim to make us
think (and wince).

Essays, Criticism and Letters

THE BOY WHO WOULD BE A HELICOPTER. By Vivian Gussin Paley. (Harvard University,
$19.95.) An original essay on the practice of teaching young children, using
their own stories as a vehicle of instruction, by a University of Chicago master
teacher.

CARNAL ACTS: Essays. By Nancy Mairs. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The author, who
has multiple sclerosis, looks her disability straight in the eye, learning who
she is and what has formed her.

FIVE O'CLOCK ANGEL: Letters of Tennessee Williams to Maria St. Just, 1948-1982.
(Knopf, $24.95.) Williams's letters to the Russian-born Englishwoman Maria St.
Just reveal a cheerful, tender, civilized man far different from what has become
the drugged, drunken, despondent received version of the playwright.

FRANCOIS TRUFFAUT: CORRESPONDENCE 1945-1984. Edited by Gilles Jacob and Claude
de Givray. (Noonday/Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Cloth, $50; Paper, $19.95.) A
hefty, well-annotated collection of the great French director's almost
compulsive correspondence -- often joking, always self-revealing.

HENRY JAMES AND EDITH WHARTON. Letters: 1900-1915. Edited by Lyall H. Powers.
(Scribners, $29.95.) The delightful record of a friendship between two very high
literary pinnacles.

LETTERS OF KATHERINE ANNE PORTER. Edited by Isabel Bayley. (Atlantic Monthly,
$29.95.) Letters of astonishing clarity, keenness and vigor showing the author
of "Pale Horse, Pale Rider" as an astute critic of life and a solid help to her
friends.

LETTERS TO FREYA: 1939-1945. By Helmuth James von Moltke. Edited by Beate Ruhm
von Oppen. (Knopf, $24.95.) Moving and eloquent letters to his wife by a German
count, a Nazi resister who was executed by the Reich in 1945.

LYDIA AND MAYNARD: The Letters of Lydia Lopokova and John Maynard Keynes. Edited
by Polly Hill and Richard Keynes. (Scribners, $24.95.) Out of the tangled
thickets of Bloomsbury come these tender and dazzling love letters between the
commanding economist and the Ballets Russes dancer.

NOTES OF A HANGING JUDGE: Essays and Reviews, 1979-1989. By Stanley Crouch.
(Oxford University, $22.95.) A bold and pitiless critic focuses his wrath
chiefly on other African-American intellectuals and spokesmen whom he finds
short on seriousness.

A PRESENT OF THINGS PAST: Selected Essays. By Theodore Draper. (Hill & Wang,
$25.) Informed, argumentative observations by the hardest-headed of liberals,
taking on cold-war bungling, American Communism and journalistic ethics.

RACE AND HISTORY: Selected Essays, 1938-1988. By John Hope Franklin. (Louisiana
State University, $29.95.) A collection of essays that provides both a
meditation on history and a record of its author's extraordinary life as a black
man and as a historian.

SEXUAL PERSONAE: Art and Decadence From Nefertiti to Emily Dickinson. By Camille
Paglia. (Yale University, $35.) A critical study of sexuality in Western art
that is also a scorched-earth attack on the underlying assumptions of liberalism
and feminism.

SOME FREAKS. By David Mamet. (Viking, $16.95.) Reminiscences and ruminations
from left to right and back by a considerable playwright who is happy to exhibit
his inconsistencies.

Fiction

ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. By John Metcalf. (St. Martin's, $15.95.) Two novellas and
three short stories whose heroes long for lust but instead get wives, children,
bills and crushed hopes; the truth, according to this Canadian writer, is simply
no fun.

ADVANCE, RETREAT: Selected Short Stories. By Richard Rive. (St. Martin's,
$16.95.) Humane, observant stories from three decades by the late South African
writer, one of the first to explore the meaning of mixed race in a rigid,
dualistic society.

AFTERLIFE. By Paul Monette. (Crown, $19.95.) A gallant, painful novel that
concerns three "AIDS widowers" trying to reconstruct lives tenuously held in the
wake of their lovers' deaths.

AGE OF IRON. By J. M. Coetzee. (Random House, $18.95.) Mr. Coetzee's superb new
novel lays bare the effects of apartheid on the psyches of both the oppressor
and the oppressed.

ANIMAL DREAMS. By Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $21.95.) Social and
political issues crowd around the narrator of this novel, but her commitment to
saving her hometown manages to integrate them all into a plausible hopefulness.

AT THE GATES OF THE ANIMAL KINGDOM. By Amy Hempel. (Knopf, $17.95.) Tiny stories
and lots of them, bringing an almost miraculous exactitude of observation and
execution to bear on men and women stuck in various poses of comedy and loss.

BABY OF THE FAMILY. By Tina McElroy Ansa. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $18.95.)
This genial first novel renders the life of a black Georgia family of the 1950's
in rich detail; but humdrum it's not, for the protagonist is a little girl who
talks with ghosts.

BARKING MAN: And Other Stories. By Madison Smartt Bell. (Ticknor & Fields,
$19.95.) In a shifty, dangerous world, Mr. Bell's humane and mature stories
require -- and get -- frequent small acts of heroism from their characters, even
against heavy odds.

BECAUSE IT IS BITTER, AND BECAUSE IT IS MY HEART. By Joyce Carol Oates. (William
Abrahams/Dutton, $19.95.) That heart is dark, ignorant and isolated for the
arriviste heroine of Ms. Oates's novel, who lives with responsibility for a
homicide.

BLUE TAXIS: Stories About Africa. By Eileen Drew. (Milkweed, Paper, $9.95.) The
narrators of these deft, direct tales are mostly expatriate Americans whose
ambivalent relationships to third-world surroundings make political problems
deeply personal.

BODY. By Harry Crews. (Poseidon, $18.95.) Muscle, nerve, fervor and suspense are
amply displayed (so is skin) as Mr. Crews's hungry heroine campaigns to win a
major bodybuilding contest.

BOHIN MANOR. By Tadeusz Konwicki. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.95.) This
beautiful, grave novel connects the 19th and 20th centuries, the historic point
of view and the personal voice.

THE BOMB. By Makoto Oda. (Kodansha, $18.95.) This unsettling novel concerns a
cast of everyday people, some living in Hiroshima, others at White Sands, N.M.,
during World War II.

THE BOOK OF EVIDENCE. By John Banville. (Scribners, $17.95.) In this persuasive
novel we meet a first-person narrator who is a murderer and an existential
philosopher of exceptional depravity.

THE BURDEN OF PROOF. By Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.95.) A lawyer
investigates his wife's mysterious death -- a purported suicide -- even as he
defends his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law from Federal authorities.

THE CARNAL PRAYER MAT. By Li Yu. (Available Press/Ballantine, paper, $8.95.) The
first complete English version of a Chinese erotic classic of the 17th century,
fiercely comic and satirical, currently prohibited in the country of origin.

CHEKHOV'S SISTER. By W. D. Wetherell. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) Mr. Wetherell's
elegant, subtle novel, which takes place in Yalta in 1941, is about people who
refuse to be humiliated or become losers.

THE CLONING OF JOANNA MAY. By Fay Weldon. (Viking, $18.95.) After the
protagonist of this energetic, intelligent satirical fantasy learns that her
domineering husband had her cloned 30 years ago, all five Joannas band together
to readjust their lives.

COLLECTED STORIES OF WALLACE STEGNER. (Random House, $21.95.) This gathering
yields an overview of the author's progress and that of his medium: big,
wholehearted tales that proceed with a characteristic sauntering ease.

DECEPTION. By Philip Roth. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) A swift, elegant,
disturbing novel, composed of fragments of talk (much of it about sex) between a
woman and a man named Philip, whose relation to the real-life Philip Roth is as
problematical as ever.

DOGEATERS. By Jessica Hagedorn. (Pantheon, $19.95.) A fast, frequently
hair-raising first novel, full of images and fantasies reflecting the author's
Philippine background, that maps the ruin at the heart of Philippine society in
the last four decades.

EAST IS EAST. By T. Coraghessan Boyle. (Viking, $19.95.) An absorbing tragedy,
full of laughter to the end, about a Japanese seaman who leads a life of
unintentional crime in America.

ENTERED FROM THE SUN. By George Garrett. (Doubleday, $19.95.) Christopher
Marlowe suffers terminal violence in this tale of Elizabethan intrigue,
betrayal, ambition, murder and the like, which ends the cycle begun by "Death of
the Fox" (1971).

FAMILY PICTURES. By Sue Miller. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) A virtuoso realistic
novel about the family and the perspectives within it, spacious and
encompassing, that explores what it means to make a home, live at home and learn
what home is.

FERRIS BEACH. By Jill McCorkle. (Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill, $18.95.) Ms.
McCorkle's ambitious novel (her fourth) concerns the coming of age of a North
Carolina teen-ager who falls in love with the illusory glamour of faraway Ferris
Beach.

THE FIREMAN'S WIFE: And Other Stories. By Richard Bausch. (Linden/Simon &
Schuster, $18.95.) Thinking people living ordinary lives, the characters in Mr.
Bausch's impressive second collection of stories seek redemption through
understanding.

FIRST HUBBY. By Roy Blount Jr. (Villard, $18.95.) A novel of official and
unofficial Washington in 1993, narrated by Guy Fox, husband of the first female
President and, like Mr. Blount, a reconstructed Southerner and light-heavyweight
humorist.

THE FOLKS THAT LIVE ON THE HILL. By Kingsley Amis. (Summit, $18.95.) The comic
novelist serves up a cast of assorted suburban Londoners in various shades of
distress, with much of the noisy fun softened by a note of rueful melancholy.

FLOATING IN MY MOTHER'S PALM. By Ursula Hegi. (Poseidon, $17.95.) A deft,
convincing little memoirlike novel about a girl growing up in Dusseldorf in the
1950's, a child's phantasmagoria of love versus loneliness, wholeness versus
amputation.

THE FUGITIVE. By Pramoedya Ananta Toer. (Morrow, $16.95.) Written while its
Indonesian author was imprisoned at the end of World War II, this suspenseful
novel of his country's occupation by the Japanese weaves a web of motivation,
character and emotion.

THE FULL CATASTROPHE. By David Carkeet. (Linden/Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) With
humor and insight, Mr. Carkeet's fourth novel addresses the commonest of social
diseases -- a failing marriage -- with the least likely of therapies: a live-in
linguist.

GOODNIGHT! By Abram Tertz (Andrei Sinyavsky). (Viking, $22.95.) A novel in the
form of a chatty memoir whose charm lies more in details than exposition, even
if the details concern the pre-Gorbachev bad old days of the author-narrator's
imprisonment.

THE HEALER. By Aharon Appelfeld. (Grove Weidenfeld, $16.95.) Mr. Appelfeld's
eighth novel to be translated into English takes place in the Carpathians before
World War II; it concerns a disease that won't be healed and a salvation that
can't be achieved.

HEMINGWAY'S SUITCASE. By MacDonald Harris. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) Big
chunks of previously unknown writing by Hemingway may have shown up in the hands
of a vanity-press novelist in this exhilarating fiction about writing fiction.

HELL-BENT MEN AND THEIR CITIES. By Susan Dodd. (Viking, $17.95.) Short stories,
intelligent, sympathetic and sometimes satirical, whose brave though unheroic
late-20th-century characters endure while keeping one another's spirits up.

HIS LITTLE WOMEN. By Judith Rossner. (Summit, $19.95.) Ms. Rossner's eighth book
of fiction takes on -- always with energy and humor -- Hollywood, multiple
marriages, the effect of divorce on children, cosmetic surgery, Playboy and Ms.
magazine.

HOCUS POCUS. By Kurt Vonnegut. (Putnam, $21.95.) Mr. Vonnegut's most topical,
realistic novel to date presents the first-person narrative of Eugene Debs
Hartke, a Vietnam veteran who loses a teaching job for being too pessimistic and
finds another at a state prison run for profit by a Japanese corporation.

HOLLYWOOD: A Novel of America in the 1920s. By Gore Vidal. (Random House,
$19.95.) The latest wonderfully literate installment in Mr. Vidal's docudramatic
revision of American history and politics features a movie star with a mission:
to persuade producers to make anti-German World War I movies.

HOMEBOY. By Seth Morgan. (Random House, $19.95.) Savagely comic and often
brilliant, Mr. Morgan's first novel conveys a relentless, hellish vision of a
San Francisco nether world of drugs and hustlers, thieves and exotic pimps.

HOT FUDGE. By Richard Spilman. (Poseidon, $17.95.) An impressive collection of
short stories, written with precision and compassion, about Middle Americans for
whom keeping a low profile has the authority of a chivalric code.

IN A FATHER'S PLACE. By Christopher Tilghman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.)
The author's first book contains seven short stories, clear and charged with
feeling, set in various places, rich enough in significant detail to do the work
of novels.

THE INDIAN LAWYER. By James Welch. (Norton, $19.95.) The fourth novel by the
author of "Fools Crow" focuses on a young Indian attorney and the path he
navigates between the reservation and "the real world"; his most mature and
readable book.

THE INNOCENT. By Ian McEwan. (Doubleday, $18.95.) A hair-raising thriller whose
effects are produced by an acute rendering of the ordinary mind and of the
violence and horror that can erupt from what that mind does not know about
itself.

IN PRAISE OF THE STEPMOTHER. By Mario Vargas Llosa. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$18.95.) An erotic tale of familial hanky-panky in which acts of foreplay are
described fully but chastely, erogenous zones are poeticized and art hovers over
all.

KILLING MISTER WATSON. By Peter Matthiessen. (Random House, $21.95.) A fierce,
fascinating novel based on the life and death of a buccaneer businessman shot to
death in Florida in 1910.

THE KING. By Donald Barthelme. (Edward Burlingame/HarperCollins, $16.95.) The
author, who died last year, left us one more wild, parodic metafiction; in this
one, King Arthur meets World War II.

THE KNIGHT, DEATH AND THE DEVIL. By Ella Leffland. (Morrow, $22.95.) This
vigorous novel about Hermann Goring, Hitler's baroque, enigmatic No. 2 Nazi,
gives a credible sense of why Nazism succeeded in inflaming so many
imaginations.

LANTERN SLIDES. By Edna O'Brien. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) This fine
collection of stories, little tragedies of passion, stupidity or stubbornness,
continues the quest for origins and explanations that has concerned Ms.
O'Brien's fiction for decades.

THE LAST STATION: A Novel of Tolstoy's Last Year. By Jay Parini. (Holt, $22.95.)
Mr. Parini conjures up a familiar cast, according more respect than usual to the
hopes, fears, torments and motives of the all-too-human people who drove the old
man to distraction.

LEWIS PERCY. By Anita Brookner. (Pantheon, $18.95.) Ms. Brookner concentrates
her mature novelist's intelligence on an innocent, well-meaning man who gets
beat up in the sexual wars.

LIES OF SILENCE. By Brian Moore. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $18.95.) The 16th
novel of this quietly controlled, unassuming, intelligent, spiritually alert
writer turns an ugly incident in Northern Ireland into an agonizing, provocative
ethical quandary.

LIKE LIFE. By Lorrie Moore. (Knopf, $18.95.) Her characters are not a happy lot,
but the author's witty and wry observations prevent these stories from being
grim or maudlin.

LUCY. By Jamaica Kincaid. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $16.95.) This first-person
novel about a young Caribbean woman in America renders a spare, somewhat numbed
account of a first year abroad in which much is left behind and nowhere is quite
arrived at.

LYING TOGETHER. By D. M. Thomas. (Viking, $17.95.) The final novel of the
author's "Russian Nights" quintet purports to be an improvisation by characters
from the other four; the engaging, witty result grapples with big issues like
meaning and truth.

MARY REILLY. By Valerie Martin. (Doubleday, $18.95.) Stevenson's story of Dr.
Jekyll and Mr. Hyde from the unexpected viewpoint of a housemaid, a woman fierce
with love, loyalty and the will to figure out what's going on between good and
evil.

ME AND MY BABY VIEW THE ECLIPSE. By Lee Smith. (Putnam, $18.95.) Powerful short
stories of small-town life and the passage of time in the American South, full
of striving, jealousy and pettiness but also of transcendent generosity and
devotion.

THE MESSAGE TO THE PLANET. By Iris Murdoch. (Viking, $22.95.) Miss Murdoch's
24th novel treats men and women seriously through a kind of high philosophical
clowning, starring a charismatic philosopher exposed to huge overdoses of real
life.

THE MUSIC OF CHANCE. by Paul Auster. (Viking, $18.95.) A tour de force of
eccentricity and obsessionalism, this half-picaresque novel concerns a fireman
who meets many strange strangers.

THE MUSIC ROOM. By Dennis McFarland. (Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) The themes
struck in Mr. McFarland's generous, hopeful and stylistically bold first novel
include history and continuity, independence and separation, as its 29-year-old
hero searches past and present for secrets of identity.

MY HARD BARGAIN: Stories. By Walter Kirn. (Knopf, $18.95.) Smooth, agreeable,
conversational stories whose conventional backgrounds serve to set off a shimmer
of modern loopiness.

NATURAL SELECTION. By Frederick Barthelme. (Viking, $18.95.) Mr. Barthelme's
fourth fast, fresh novel examines the marriage of Peter, a born suburban
faultfinder, and his wife, Lily, whose shopping lists he has been correcting for
15 years.

THE NEUMILLER STORIES. By Larry Woiwode. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.)
Utterly direct but sometimes painfully difficult in their emotional
discriminations, most of these stories are the original versions of material
later incorporated into the author's fine 1975 novel of Great Plains life,
"Beyond the Bedroom Wall."

ORDINARY MONEY. By Louis B. Jones. (Viking, $18.95.) A wacky, satirical first
novel of life among the relatively disadvantaged of Marin County, California,
who are saddled with responsibility for a truckload of counterfeit money (except
it may be real).

OTHER WOMEN'S CHILDREN. By Perri Klass. (Random House, $19.95.) Dr. Amelia
Stern, the protagonist of Dr. Klass's fine novel, struggles profoundly and
plausibly to balance her duties as a pediatrician and as a wife and mother.

PALACE WALK. By Naguib Mahfouz. (Doubleday, $22.95.) Now available in English,
the first volume of "The Cairo Trilogy," reputed to be the masterpiece of the
Egyptian novelist and 1988 Nobel laureate, nobly supports that reputation.

PASSING ON. By Penelope Lively. (Grove Weidenfeld, $17.95.) Tough and shrewd,
precise and understated, Ms. Lively's eighth novel renders a family's painful
efforts to sort out and overcome the emotional legacy of a truly awful mother.

THE PAST IS ANOTHER COUNTRY. By Lois Battle. (Viking, $19.95.) A well-told and
satisfying tale of a brilliantly successful former convent girl's return to her
roots, which in this case are fastened deep in Western Australia.

THE PEREZ FAMILY. By Christine Bell. (Norton, $19.95.) A loud, gaudy,
sentimental, enthusiastic heartbreaker of a novel about Cuban immigrants making
new lives in an enchanted Miami.

PHILADELPHIA FIRE. By John Edgar Wideman. (Holt, $18.95.) First hinted at in his
collection of stories, "Fever" (1989), this is a passionate, angry and formally
fascinating novel of urban disintegration based on the 1985 police bombing of a
Philadelphia row house by frustrated police.

PICTURING WILL. By Ann Beattie. (Random House, $18.95.) Complex points of view
unfold to yield the shock of enlightenment in Ms. Beattie's fourth novel, a
lyrical, deeply affecting story about a little boy and the people who love him,
or should.

PINTO AND SONS. By Leslie Epstein. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A fantastic epic
of 19th-century technology, in which the hero, a Hungarian Jew, wastes much
effort trying to improve the world.

A PLACE I'VE NEVER BEEN. By David Leavitt. (Viking, $18.95.) A fine collection
of deft short stories about highly individualized love triangles, complicated by
gender permutations.

THE QUINCUNX. By Charles Palliser. (Ballantine, $25.) Can you imagine a gigantic
(788 pages) imitation of Dickens, abounding in wickedness, full of descriptive
power, replete with plot and gratifyingly difficult to put down? Mr. Palliser
did!

REACHING TIN RIVER. By Thea Astley. (Putnam, $19.95.) A vivid novel about
growing up in great big Australia; at its heart is an eerie, hypnotic,
sentimental excursion across that brown land.

RESTORATION: A Novel of Seventeenth-Century England. By Rose Tremain. (Viking,
$19.95.) Ms. Tremain's fine sixth novel restores the good name of historical
fiction as it propels its insecure hero through hassles high and low in Charles
II's England.

SECRET ANNIVERSARIES. By Scott Spencer. (Knopf, $19.95.) A convincing
Bildungsroman whose heroine's soul is formed, in public and private, by
historical events from the 30's to the 60's.

SEVENTH HEAVEN. By Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $19.95.) Life on Hemlock Street is
conventional, orderly and very 1950's in this bustling novel, except that
8-year-old Billy Silk is clairvoyant.

SHIRA. By S. Y. Agnon. (Schocken, $24.95.) For more than 20 years the Israeli
Nobel laureate worked on this unfinished novel, whose protagonist is a
German-born scholar and whose theme is art's search for a vision of tragedy when
real horror is unbearably vast.

SILVER LIGHT. By David Thomson. (Knopf, $19.95.) Mr. Thomson's third novel
presents America's wild West from the Civil War to the 1950's, writ very large
and loony in handsome prose, with loads of real, imaginary and intermediate
characters.

SOLOMON GURSKY WAS HERE. By Mordecai Richler. (Knopf, $19.95.) Mr. Richler's
ninth and most complex novel chronicles, with frequent and intense indignation,
the generations of the convoluted, manic Gursky family through Canadian history.

A STONE OF THE HEART. By Tom Grimes. (Four Walls Eight Windows, $15.95.) The
afflictions of adolescence are rendered in unique and universal terms in this
first novel, set in Queens in 1961, about a 14-year-old boy who idolizes Roger
Maris.

THE SUITCASE. By Sergei Dovlatov. (Grove Weidenfeld, $16.95.) Sergei Dovlatov,
who died in August at 48, wrote this collection of autobiographical fictions --
each recalling the unlikely origin of a piece of clothing brought from the
Soviet Union -- in a wholly Russian voice but a straightforward American tone.

SWEET TALK. By Stephanie Vaughn. (Random House, $16.95.) Ms. Vaughn's fine first
story collection offers harrowing situations made alternately funny and sad by
lively, believable characters.

A TENURED PROFESSOR. By John Kenneth Galbraith. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A
liberal economist learns to quantify investor irrationality and makes millions
until conservatives cut him down in Mr. Galbraith's rollicking spoof of
free-market ideology.

THAT TIME IN MALOMBA. By James Hamilton-Paterson. (Soho Press, $18.95.) A
brilliant religious satire with elements of E. F. Benson and Evelyn Waugh, set
in a Far East teeming with gurus, guerrillas, imams, fakirs, mullahs, rabbis and
tourists.

TITMUSS REGAINED. By John Mortimer. (Viking, $19.95.) Mr. Mortimer's splendid
classical comedy of political manners in an English village paints all
participants as greedy ninnies, most notably the title character, a politically
prominent twerp.

TO ALL APPEARANCES A LADY. By Marilyn Bowering. (Viking, $18.95.) Melodramatic
and proud of it, this vigorous historical novel tells of a modern identity quest
and late-Victorian adventures in the Far East and British Columbia.

THE TONGUES OF ANGELS. By Reynolds Price. (Atheneum, $17.95.) The narrator of
this chastely visionary novel looks back 34 years to examine his responsibility,
perhaps, for a boy's death.

A TRAIL OF HEART'S BLOOD WHEREVER WE GO. By Robert Olmstead. (Random House,
$19.95.) The plot of this deft and peculiar novel goes round and round, but at
the middle are the citizens -- especially the dead ones -- of Inverawe, N.H.

THE WILD COLONIAL BOY. By James Hynes. (Atheneum, $18.95.) Brian Donovan, the
American protagonist of Mr. Hynes's sharp-eyed and convincing first novel, finds
himself swiftly involved with an I.R.A. dispute and a young American woman
backpacker.

WILDLIFE. By Richard Ford. (Atlantic Monthly, $18.95.) Mr. Ford's fourth novel,
which concerns a 16-year-old boy, his parents and his mother's casual lover,
holds at its heart a nostalgia for the true perfection of the way things used to
be, before ruin set in.

THE WOMAN LIT BY FIREFLIES. By Jim Harrison. (Seymour Lawrence/ Houghton
Mifflin, $19.95.) A collection of three novellas whose energetic "interior"
storytelling emphasizes character and subtext over plot and immediacy.

THE WORLD OF NAGARAJ. By R. K. Narayan. (Viking, $18.95.) In his mid-80's and
still at the top of his form, Mr. Narayan returns to his imaginary Mysore with a
comic novel about some universal truths, among them the importance of
personality and family.

VINELAND. By Thomas Pynchon. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The passions of the 1960's
continue to govern the lives of members of a California community.

YOU DON'T LOVE YOURSELF. By Nathalie Sarraute. (Braziller, $17.95.) The
nonagenarian doyenne of the nouveau roman offers a novel in the form of an
anonymous dialogue on the theme of self-hatred, with interior voices in lieu of
characters.

History

COMING OUT UNDER FIRE: The History of Gay Men and Women in World War Two. By
Allan Berube. (Free Press, $22.95.) This deeply researched account shows that
the military and perhaps a million homosexuals often coped with each other
fairly well.

ENCYCLOPEDIA OF THE HOLOCAUST. Edited by Israel Gutman. (Macmillan, four
volumes, $440.) An extraordinarily detailed and complete account of the
extermination of almost six million Jews by the Nazis.

EVERY SPY A PRINCE: The Complete History of Israel's Intelligence Community. By
Dan Raviv and Yossi Melman. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A fascinating account of
an intelligence establishment to which nearly supernatural powers are often
attributed, but which makes mistakes like all the others.

FORGED IN BATTLE: The Civil War Alliance of Black Soldiers and White Officers.
By Joseph T. Glatthaar. (Free Press, $24.95.) The absorbing story, more social
than military, of the revolution through which 180,000 blacks fought for the
Union in the Civil War.

A HISTORY OF SOUTH AFRICA. By Leonard Thompson. (Yale University, $29.95.) An
admirably objective one-volume history of that rich but unfortunate land that
offers some grounds to hope that compromise and reconciliation may indeed
prevail.

THE HOLOCAUST: The Fate of European Jewry, 1932-1945. By Leni Yahil. (Oxford
University, $35.) A work of synthesis rather than documentary scholarship, this
popular survey aims to cover all aspects of the subject, including its political
context.

THE JEWS IN AMERICA. Four Centuries of an Uneasy Encounter: A History. By Arthur
Hertzberg. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) A broadly familiar story that rises to
the superb in its account of the last 60 years or so, but is pessimistic about
the future, foreseeing an end to Jewish history unless a spiritual revival
supervenes.

THE POLK CONSPIRACY: Murder and Cover-Up in the Case of CBS News Correspondent
George Polk. By Kati Marton. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.95.) Who killed
George Polk, 34, and left his body in Salonika Bay in 1948? This angry book
offers a plausible theory and a supporting view of Greek politics after World
War II.

RED VICTORY: A History of the Russian Civil War. By W. Bruce Lincoln. (Simon &
Schuster, $24.95.) Between 1919 and 1921 the Soviet state was created out of
chaos by armed force, this timely and thorough account by a university historian
reminds us.

ROAD TO DIVORCE: England, 1530-1987. By Lawrence Stone. (Oxford University,
$29.95.) A distinguished historian traces the evolution of English marriage law
and moral values that led from the Reformation to our own breathlessly divorcing
century.

THE SECOND WORLD WAR. By John Keegan. (Viking, $29.95.) THE TIMES ATLAS OF THE
SECOND WORLD WAR. Edited by John Keegan. (HarperCollins, $50.) A bold but
balanced one-volume military history and a superbly produced and edited
historical atlas that has no equivalent in its field.

STALIN IN POWER: The Revolution From Above, 1928-1941. By Robert C. Tucker.
(Norton, $29.95.) This painstaking study, 15 years in the making, documents
Stalin's part in the rise of Hitler and presents a psychological thesis:
Stalin's paranoia arose from his projection of his own character traits onto
others.

STALIN: The Glasnost Revelations. By Walter Laqueur. (Robert Stewart/Scribners,
$24.95.) Mr. Laqueur's third book on the Soviet Union in three years mixes old
knowledge with glasnost-era discoveries, including startling anecdotes recently
revealed.

TOKYO RISING: The City Since the Great Earthquake. By Edward Seidensticker.
(Knopf, $24.95.) An informal and contentious history of the Japanese capital
from 1923 to the present, often anecdotal, equally often painstakingly thorough.

AN UNCERTAIN HOUR: The French, the Germans, the Jews, the Klaus Barbie Trial,
and the City of Lyon, 1940-1945. By Ted Morgan. (Arbor House/Morrow, $21.95.) An
eloquent book of personal and public history by a French-born American
journalist out to understand the contradictions of his former country.

VOICES OF FREEDOM: An Oral History of the Civil Rights Movement From the 1950s
Through the 1980s. By Henry Hampton and Steve Fayer with Sarah Flynn. (Bantam,
$25.95.) An intimate survey sprung from the "Eyes on the Prize" television
series.

Poetry

ABOVE THE RIVER: The Complete Poems. By James Wright. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$27.95.) Lucidity, precision, poise, intelligence and the rigors of a craft that
liberated imagination were the poetic values James Wright cherished, and his
best poems, with their grace and intelligence, remain among the finest examples
of midcentury American lyric.

ARARAT. By Louise Gluck. (Ecco, $17.95.) There is nothing relaxed about the
white-knuckle language of these poems, which give a family history with
objectivity, compassion and regret, and with wit more mordant than trenchant. No
American poet writes better than Louise Gluck; perhaps none can lead us so
deeply into our own natures.

THE AUGUST SLEEPWALKER. By Bei Dao. Translated by Bonnie S. McDougall. (New
Directions, Cloth, $16.95; Paper, $8.95.) Bei Dao, the guiding voice of the
stillborn "Democracy Movement" in China in the late 1970's, uses words as if he
were fighting for his life with them. Living in a nightmare of cruelty and
dreaming of normality, he has forged a language that speaks to all of us in
astonishing, beautiful poems.

THE NIGHT PARADE. By Edward Hirsch. (Knopf, $18.95.) Emotional richness combined
with a precision of language and metaphor make the best of these poems wonderful
to read. Some seem to have forced themselves into being; silence was no longer
possible.

SELECTED POEMS, 1966-1987. By Seamus Heaney. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.)
Seamus Heaney's patch is Ireland, with its turmoil and mutilated native culture,
and no poet has taken his role more seriously or defined his responsibility with
greater care. The great heart and humanity of the man ring through the decades
of his splendid poetry.

THE TONGUES WE SPEAK: New and Selected Poems. By Patricia Goedicke. (Milkweed,
$9.95.) This volume spans 25 years of the work of a poet who is always aware of
the political state of the world and of history. Her strengths are sincerity,
memorable rhythms and great emotional power.

THE TRANSPARENT MAN. By Anthony Hecht. (Knopf, $18.95.) COLLECTED EARLIER POEMS.
By Anthony Hecht. (Knopf, $22.95.) No poet can write more beautifully when he
wants to, but Anthony Hecht is also our only poet who can horrify. He achieves
most in the intensity of lyric, but always he speaks like a biblical patriarch,
and his elegant speech is a brilliant counterirritant to the contemporary
wastage of our language.

THE WANT BONE. By Robert Pinsky. (Ecco, $17.95.) Jazzlike improvisations and
brooding civility mark these poems about the overlapping metaphysics of
Christianity and Judaism, about history as invisible presence, about the shaping
drives and powers we turn into the artifacts of culture. It is Mr. Pinsky's
riskiest and most imaginative book.

Popular Culture

AFRICAN CANVAS: The Art of West African Women. By Margaret Courtney-Clarke.
(Rizzoli, $60.) A stunning photographic study that celebrates the timeless but
vulnerable arts of everyday.

CLEOPATRA: Histories, Dreams and Distortions. By Lucy Hughes-Hallett.
(HarperCollins, $27.50.) The author's feminist thesis -- and who can deny it? --
is that Cleopatra's image has been manipulated from the beginning by men with
axes to grind. Her research is both thorough and interesting and her writing
sharp.

THE DAME IN THE KIMONO: Hollywood, Censorship, and the Production Code From the
1920s to the 1960s. By Leonard J. Leff and Jerold L. Simmons. (Grove Weidenfeld,
$22.50.) What couldn't happen on screen: a virtual negative history of sex in
America.

ENCHANTED DRAWINGS: The History of Animation. By Charles Solomon. (Knopf, $75.)
An ambitious, sprawling illustrated account of the evolution of animated movies,
packed with tales of warring studios, greedy producers and great artists.

THE GREAT GOOD PLACE. By Ray Oldenburg. (Paragon House, $19.95.) A good society
has places for people to hang out -- taverns, cafes, barbershops -- and Mr.
Oldenburg, a sociologist, investigates what's become of ours and how to get them
back.

JEAN HOWARD'S HOLLYWOOD: A Photo Memoir. With photographs by Jean Howard and
text by James Watters. (Abrams, $39.95.) Herself one of Hollywood's most
beautiful and privileged people, Jean Howard snapped her shutter with a social
historian's eye, capturing the great at play in the 1940's and 50's.

LOVE FOR SALE: The Words and Pictures of Barbara Kruger. By Kate Linker.
(Abrams, $29.95.) Socially and politically conscious photomontages in an
unmistakable signature style, thoughtfully clarified and interpreted by Ms.
Linker's text.

THE MAN WHO SHOT GARBO: The Hollywood Photographs of Clarence Sinclair Bull.
(Simon & Schuster, $40.) Greta Garbo and other gods and goddesses, luminously
rendered by the head of the M-G-M stills department from 1924 to 1961; 183
portraits in all.

THE MISSING REEL: The Untold Story of the Lost Inventor of Motion Pictures. By
Christopher Rawlence. (Atheneum, $19.95.) An argument for the priority of a
Frenchman whose movie camera preceded Edison's and who disappeared in 1890.

OUR NEW YORK. Text by Alfred Kazin. Photographs by David Finn. (HarperCollins,
$35.) A delightful collaboration on the New York landscape and its meaning by
two wise old Brooklyn hands.

THE RUNAWAY BRIDE: Hollywood Romantic Comedy of the 1930's. By Elizabeth
Kendall. (Knopf, $24.95.) A comprehensive evocation of the screwball comedy --
its silliness, its acknowledgment of social disorder, its emphasis on witty
talk.

SATURDAY NIGHT. By Susan Orlean. (Knopf, $19.95.) Eight hours in the hebdomadal
cycle of American culture, sharply observed by a journalist with a gift for
hanging around while paying attention.

THE SPIRIT OF FOLK ART: The Girard Collection at the Museum of International
Folk Art. By Henry Glassie. Color photographs by Michael Monteaux. (Abrams,
$60.) With 154 splendid color pages, this rather ambitious illustrated essay
celebrates a collection (located in Santa Fe, N.M.) that richly deserves it.

STONE ALONE: The Story of a Rock 'n' Roll Band. By Bill Wyman with Ray Coleman.
(Viking, $22.95.) A lively and detailed narrative, spiced with score-settling,
of the origin and ascent to fame of the Rolling Stones, by the group's bassist.

WRITERS IN HOLLYWOOD: 1915-1951. By Ian Hamilton. (Edward
Burlingame/HarperCollins, $25.) An ably researched and entertaining account of
the literati who condescended to, and profited from, the movie industry during
its infant and golden years.

Religion


 THE BOOK OF J. Translated by David Rosenberg. Interpreted by Harold Bloom.
(Grove Weidenfeld, $21.95.) A rugged modern version of the J narrative, the
oldest layer of the Pentateuch, with an interpretation of the author and her --
yes, her -- intentions.

THE CATHOLIC MYTH: The Behavior and Beliefs of American Catholics. By Andrew M.
Greeley. (Scribners, $21.95.) The priest, novelist, sociologist and maverick
argues, with cogent figures, that Roman Catholics are better educated and richer
than Protestants and more liberal on political issues.

MAKING SAINTS: How the Catholic Church Determines Who Becomes a Saint, Who
Doesn't, and Why. By Kenneth L. Woodward. (Simon & Schuster, $24.95.) The
religion editor of Newsweek explains the political factors that influence which
potential saints are selected for official canonization.

NO TURNING BACK: Two Nuns' Battle With the Vatican Over Women's Right to Choose.
By Barbara Ferraro and Patricia Hussey with Jane O'Reilly. (Poseidon, $19.95.)
An intriguing case history with a point of view, by two women who took on the
hierarchy of the Roman Catholic Church and refused to give in.

THE SPIRITUAL LIFE OF CHILDREN. By Robert Coles. (Peter Davison/Houghton
Mifflin, $22.95.) This latest volume in a distinguished series of children's
oral history focuses on the subjects' religious beliefs; the result is a
remarkable book.

UNDER GOD: Religion and American Politics. By Garry Wills. (Simon & Schuster,
$24.95.) Struck by the prominence of religion in American politics and the
incapacity of journalists and academics to deal with it, Mr. Wills thoughtfully
examines some pertinent and permanent themes in this continuing relationship.

Science Fiction

HYPERION. By Dan Simmons. (Foundation/ Doubleday, Cloth, $18.95; Paper, $8.95;
Spectra/Bantam, Paper, $4.95.) THE FALL OF HYPERION. By Dan Simmons.
(Foundation/Doubleday, Cloth, $18.95; Paper, $8.95.) Combined, these two make up
a thousand-page novel; both are generously conceived and stylistically
sure-handed works.

THE DIVIDE. By Robert Charles Wilson. (Foundation/Doubleday, $19.95.) This
literate thriller is a superbly crafted novel of character and a thoughtful
exploration of what it might feel like to be a superman.

RAMA II. By Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.95.) The
sequel to Mr. Clarke's famous novel "Rendezvous With Rama" -- about a vast alien
spaceship that seems oblivious to humanity's best efforts to make an impression
-- is just as gripping in this second encounter.

LENS OF THE WORLD. By R. A. MacAvoy. (Morrow, $18.95). Ms. MacAvoy has written a
fantasy novel with all the conceptual rigor of good science fiction.
Genre-mixing is only one of the narrative strategies she uses to draw readers
into the tale of Nazhuret, an engaging orphan who has only his wits to help him
as he sets out to discover his identity.

QUEEN OF ANGELS. By Greg Bear. (Warner, $19.95.) A novel about the nature of
consciousness that manages to be both entertaining and thought-provoking. A
famous poet who murders eight of his young disciples, a policewoman who colors
her skin black for cosmetic reasons and a scientist who invents a mind probe
that can make psychotherapy an exact science are among the characters in this
complex book that succeeds on virtually every level.

Science, Medicine and Psychology

ALTERED LOVES: Mothers and Daughters During Adolescence. By Terri Apter. (St.
Martin's, $24.95.) An analysis of 65 mother-daughter pairs in Britain and the
United States blows away some old misconceptions -- including the belief that
adolescents achieve identity through rebellion, turmoil and separation.

THE CHANGING ATMOSPHERE: A Global Challenge. By John Firor. (Yale University,
$19.95.) A scientist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research explains
the interrelationship of current environmental issues and the combined threat
they present to life on earth.

DISAPPEARING THROUGH THE SKYLIGHT: Culture and Technology in the Twentieth
Century. By O. B. Hardison Jr. (Viking, $22.95.) A polymathic scholar and social
critic's optimistic synthesis of future technology and consciousness.

FINAL ANALYSIS: The Making and Unmaking of a Psychoanalyst. By Jeffrey
Moussaieff Masson. (Addison-Wesley, $18.95.) The author's account of how
disillusionment and disbelief made him "the Antichrist in the church of
psychoanalysis."

FIRE & ICE: The Greenhouse Effect, Ozone Depletion, and Nuclear Winter. By David
E. Fisher. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) THE NEXT ONE HUNDRED YEARS: Shaping the Fate
of Our Living Earth. By Jonathan Weiner. (Bantam, $19.95.) There is, both
authors assure us, a scientific consensus about global warming: it's coming. But
something can be done, they believe, and these studies passionately and credibly
urge attention to a threatening future that many of us seem to have despaired of
in advance.

FLOW: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. By Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi.
(HarperCollins, $21.95.) "Flow," according to the author, a professor of
psychology at the University of Chicago, is a learnable state of consciousness
that comes with rightly interpreting what we are doing and what is happening to
us.

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF A DRUID PRINCE: The Story of Lindow Man, an Archaeological
Sensation. By Anne Ross and Don Robins. (Summit, $19.95.) A fascinating
argument, even if fetched a bit far, about a 2,000-year-old corpse found in
England in 1984.

MARS BECKONS: The Mysteries, the Challenges, the Expectations of Our Next Great
Adventure in Space. By John Noble Wilford. (Knopf, $24.95.) What shall we do
about Mars? A science correspondent of The Times examines our relationship with
Mars so far and weighs the issues and options for the future.

PILTDOWN: A Scientific Forgery. By Frank Spencer. (National History Museum/
Oxford University, $24.95.) Who invented Piltdown Man back in 1912? Mr.
Spencer's studious compilation of the evidence points to a suspect -- and a
motive.

THE SPACE TELESCOPE: A Study of NASA, Science, Technology, and Politics. By
Robert W. Smith. (Cambridge University, $39.50.) A big book about big science,
focused on the history of space technology and the development of the Hubble
Space Telescope.

TECHNOLOGICAL RISK. By H. W. Lewis. (Norton, $22.95.) A valuable, clearly
written appraisal of what's risky -- and not risky -- about technology, written
by a physicist specializing in risk assessment and management.

WHAT KIND OF LIFE: The Limits of Medical Progress. By Daniel Callahan. (Simon &
Schuster, $19.95.) An ethical philosopher's tough-minded look at the debate
about medical costs and society's resources, arguing for rules that would give
far higher priorities to prevention than to high-cost care in marginal cases.

Spies & Thrillers

BLOOD TIDE. By Robert F. Jones. (Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) Double revenge is
the motif of this exciting thriller about a father and daughter who set out in a
boat for the Philippines. The writing is superior.

THE BLUE GATE OF BABYLON. By Paul Pickering. (Random House, $18.95.) This
blackly humorous espionage novel is about a young British diplomat in West
Berlin who likes women too much for his own good.

BROTHERHOOD OF THE TOMB. By Daniel Easterman. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A
frightening, action-packed book that involves the Vatican, a former C.I.A. man
and a brotherhood established not long after the death of Christ.

THE RUNNING TARGET. By Gerald Seymour. (Morrow, $19.95.) A top deskman at
British intelligence is kidnapped by Iranians in this scary and searing book.

SOVIET SOURCES. By Robert Cullen. (Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) In the immediate
future, an American journalist in the Soviet Union is set up by the K.G.B. The
author has been a correspondent in Moscow, and every word he writes carries
authority.

UNDER SIEGE. By Stephen Coonts. (Pocket Books, $19.95.) Colombian drug lords
declare war against the United States and send killer squads to Washington. This
is escape reading at its best.

Sports

BASEBALL: The People's Game. By Harold Seymour. (Oxford University, $24.95.) The
third volume in Mr. Seymour's history of baseball broadly details the game
outside so-called Organized Baseball and its capture by designing institutions.

DAMNED YANKEES: A No-Holds-Barred Account of Life With "Boss" Steinbrenner. By
Bill Madden and Moss Klein. (Warner, $19.95.) A well-told account of the decline
and fall of the New York Yankees at the hands of the team's principal owner.

KAREEM. By Kareem Abdul-Jabbar with Mignon McCarthy. (Random House, $18.95.) A
memoir in the form of a diary, combining this amazing player's last season as a
Los Angeles Laker with autobiographical recollections, mostly magnanimous.

MEN AT WORK: The Craft of Baseball. By George F. Will. (Macmillan, $19.95.) An
elegant analysis of what baseball players actually do, investigated by the
conservative columnist with love and curiosity but without sentimentality or
mythologizing.

Travel, Nature and Adventure


 THE ANTS. By Bert Holldobler and Edward O. Wilson. (Belknap/Harvard University,
$65.) Two distinguished, articulate biologists reveal everything we didn't know
we wanted to know about ants.

PLAYING WITH WATER: Passion and Solitude on a Philippine Island. By James
Hamilton-Paterson. (New Amsterdam Books, Cloth, $19.95; Paper, $11.95.) A truly
remarkable lyrical meditation on sea, sunlight and the analysis of
consciousness.

SONORAN DESERT SUMMER. By John Alcock. (University of Arizona, $19.95.) A
handsome, thoughtful record of nature observation and conceptual ecology in a
very hard place to live.

TIGERS: The Secret Life. By Valmik Thapar. Photographs by Fateh Singh Rathore.
(Rodale, $35.) An education in tigerology and a hopeful assessment of their
future as wild animals, even under India's population pressures. The photographs
are gorgeous.

A YEAR IN PROVENCE. By Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $19.95.) When the author, his wife
and their dogs leave London for a sojourn in sunny Provence they encounter
year-round surprises -- icy mistrals, unwelcome visitors, burst pipes and
village rustics.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 16, 1990, Sunday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error in the listing of notable books of the year in The
New York Times Book Review on Dec. 2, three entries were omitted. These are the
missing entries:

CONSTANCIA AND OTHER STORIES FOR VIRGINS. By Carlos Fuentes. Translated by
Thomas Christensen. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.95. ) Five bizarre short
stories by the Mexican writer, whose authority is absolute and who is peremptory
in leaving his readers to their own devices, trusting them not to be dolts.

THE GENERAL IN HIS LABYRINTH. By Gabriel Garcia Marquez.  Translated by Edith
Grossman. (Knopf, $19.95.) The Latin American novelist chooses Simon Bolivar as
the hero of his new novel; the result is a fascinating literary tour de force, a
moving tribute to an extraordinary man and a sad commentary on the ruthlessness
of the political process.

THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION. By Richard Pipes. (Knopf, $40.) A massive,
intellectually challenging history of Russia's national convulsion by the Baird
Professor of History at Harvard, superbly and at times trenchantly written.

TYPE: Review; List

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 2, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Postal Officials and Others Ask: Where Is the Mail for the Troops?

BYLINE: By ELSA BRENNER

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 1; Column 4; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1192 words

DATELINE: MOUNT VERNON


THE Postal Service's own version of Operation Desert Shield is ready to roll in
Westchester. The mail center here activated additional Army post office numbers
last week and installed new sorting procedures to rush holiday letters and
packages from county residents to troops in the Persian Gulf.

But the problem is not unlike being all dressed up with no place to go, said
Lawrence Adams, manager of the General Mail Facility on Sandford Boulevard here,
which is the processing hub for all the county's mail. A system is in place to
handle a large volume of mail, but what was expected to be an onslaught of
letters and packages destined for the Middle East has not materialized.

"It's so close to Christmas, we had hoped to see more action by now," Mr. Adams
said. "Personally, no matter what it entails in work for the Post Office, I'd
like to see more mail coming through for those troops."

A Note of Concern

As usual for this time of year, Westchester residents are preparing for the
festivities of the holiday season. But now a note of concern is being sounded
from various quarters in the county, by people who are worried that American
military personnel stationed in the Middle East will be forgotten by the folks
at home.

"We don't want to see our men and women in the Middle East feel like they are
carrying on this struggle alone," said Bonnie Abel, a spokeswoman for the
Westchester division of the Postal Service. "We learned a lesson from past
conflicts, when there were a lot of bad feelings about the wars and the people
who fought them."

Vincent Boddie of Montrose, the national chaplain of the Korean War Veterans of
the United States, is trying to initiate a mail campaign. "Vietnam was an
unpopular war," he explained, "and I don't want to see what happened to them
happen to the troops in the Mideast now." He was chairman of Mail Call Vietnam
during that war.

Mr. Boddie, who has a son in the Marines stationed in Saudi Arabia and another
son, a lieutenant in the Navy, on standby, said, "The men should not be
forgotten again." According to an informal survey he conducted and reports back
from fellow officials in the National Korean War Veterans Organization, mail
from Westchester to troops in Saudi Arabia has been "very light," said Mr.
Boddie, who was a medic in the Korean War.

Although that may be a reflection of the number of county families who have
relatives and friends serving in the Mideast, Mr. Boddie said: "I know the
importance of mail, especially mail from strangers. It lightens their hearts to
know people at home are thinking about them."

Last month Mr. Boddie made an appeal on a Peekskill radio station asking more
residents to communicate with the troops. He is also urging large corporations
in the county to back grass-roots efforts in their companies and is encouraging
employees to send letters and notes.

Mr. Boddie is offering to speak to interested groups to initiate mail campaigns,
"not just for the holidays but for however long those troops are there." He can
be reached at 28 Lent Avenue, Montrose, N.Y., 10548, or by telephone in the
evenings at 739-3384.

Students Write to Soldiers

At Hendrick Hudson High School in Montrose, Thomas McLoughlin, an English
teacher, said he, too, was concerned that the troops might be forgotten.

Mr. McLoughlin said he decided to "kill two birds with one stone" by having his
11th- and 12th-grade students write to soldiers in the Persian Gulf. Part of the
writing-competency requirement for the courses he teaches is completing a
letter-writing component.

The English teacher formed "the Rocky and Chris Fan Club," named after the first
two G.I.'s his students wrote to. Since the club began six weeks ago, Mr.
McLoughlin has expanded the list of people his students communicate with to
nine, including relatives and friends of students and of staff members at the
school.

Don't Grade This Letter

The Rocky and Chris Fan Club has already received responses to its initial
letters. One response directed to the English teacher included a postscript that
said, "Please don't grade my letter."

Another letter, to 17-year-old Thomas Stroock, who said he had inquired about
the troops' living conditions, included the following description: "You asked
what it's like here? Well, picture what it would be like if you went into your
room, took out all the furniture, the rugs, the posters and left just a chair.
Next, raise the temperature in the room to 120 degrees. Then, get a dump truck
to spread sand all over the floor. That's what it's like here."

Mr. McLoughlin said he had told his students to imagine themselves in Saudi
Arabia and write about the things they would like to know if they were stationed
there. He suggested writing about what kind of music they enjoy, the National
Football League, interests they might share in common with the soldiers and
events happening at home.

"You know," Mr. McLoughlin explained, "my students are 17 and 18 years old. Some
of these soldiers are 20. We're talking about only a few years difference. They
can identify with one another."

No Road Network in the Sand

At the Mount Vernon mail distribution hub, Mr. Adams said he was urging
residents to get letters and packages mailed as early as possible. Although mail
takes only about three days to travel from a local post office to Saudi Arabia,
there may be delays in sorting it on the other end, he said.

"We're talking about 230,000 troops," Mr. Adams said. "Delivering the mail is a
mammoth task. It must be like delivering to the Bronx but worse: there's no road
network in the sand."

Thomas C. Nucifore is the officer in charge of the Yonkers Post Office, which is
processing the largest volume of mail in the county to the Middle East -- 400 to
500 pieces a week. He suggested that the reason the numbers in Yonkers were
higher than elsewhere in Westchester was because his is the largest post office
in the county.

Roseann Kiernan, communications manager for the Westchester division of the
Postal Service, offered some guidelines for mailing to the troops:

Recommended items for mailing to the area include games like Monopoly and
puzzles, toiletries, tanning lotion and hard candy. Items to avoid are
chocolates and other foodstuffs that would melt, and pictures of pinup girls,
which would offend the Saudis.

One Deadline Has Passed

Although the deadlines for mailing in time for Christmas have passed, Mr.
Nucifore said postal employees could help customers find ways to speed delivery
to the Persian Gulf by using air mail and other priority systems. "Even if it's
a little late, it's O.K.," he said.

Those wishing to send letters and care packages to the troops, but not
necessarily to specific friends or relatives, should use the following
addresses:

For mail to the Navy or Marines, the address should read: Any Service Member;
Branch of the Service; Operation Desert Shield; F.P.O., N.Y. 09866-0006.

For mail going to Army or Air Force members, the address should read: Any
Service Member; Branch of the Service; Operation Desert Shield; A.P.O., N.Y.
09848-0006.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Trading Plowshares for Swords, Citizen-Soldiers Prepare for War

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1816 words

DATELINE: ROME, Ga., Nov. 27


For the past two weeks, Second Lieut. Paul Tamburrino has put off giving his 2
1/2-year-old son a special gift. But time is running out.

As part of the first group of National Guard troops and reservists called for
potential combat duty in the Persian Gulf, Lieutenant Tamburrino will trade in
his 9-to-5 desk job with J. C. Penney on Monday for command of an Army platoon
of M-1 tanks. The move could catapult him to the front lines of a winter war in
the Middle East.

Before he leaves, Lieutenant Tamburrino, who is 23 years old, plans to videotape
a message for his son, Brendan, to keep while he is gone.

"I'll tell him to be good, and what I'm off doing and that I love him," he said.
"But I've been putting off making the tape, because I know it'll freak me out to
do it. It's really weird to think there's a possibility this is the last time
I'll see my family."

 No Longer Part Time

Not since the Vietnam War has the United States summoned its citizen-soldiers --
the Guard and the Reserves -- for possible combat in a distant land. Until now,
guardsmen and reservists have performed support roles behind the lines.

Lieutenant Tamburrino and the 74 other men in Company A of the 1-108th Armor
Battalion of the Georgia Army National Guard are among the 15,000 part-time
combat corps being activated for potential duty in the gulf. For the men of
Company A -- everyday ranchers, mechanics, police officers and insurance agents
who range in age from 19 to 57 -- the call to arms is transforming a
weekend-a-month, two weeks-a-year pastime into a full-time Army job.

Company A, known as Alpha Company, leaves Monday for Fort Stewart, Ga., and the
first of two exercises in the United States. Practicing on their M-1 tanks in
the woods and swamps of southern Georgia, and later in the Mojave Desert of
California, Alpha Company will be under scrutiny. The Pentagon will decide after
several weeks whether to send the unit to Saudi Arabia.

Defense Department officials and lawmakers in Washington will also be watching
Alpha Company and similar units as the first big test of the policy, adopted in
1973 after the draft was abandoned, of integrating active-duty forces with
reservists and guardsmen.

'What Kind of Message?

A visit to this river valley community wedged in the Appalachian foothills of
northwest Georgia found the men of Alpha Company prepared to fight a war that no
one wants, if only to stop President Saddam Hussein of Iraq from building an
arsenal of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and using it to gain a
stranglehold on much of the world's oil.

"If we allow Hussein to take over Kuwait and no one does anything about it, what
kind of message does that send?" said First Lieut. William Jinright, 28, an
insurance agent who is the leader of Alpha Company's Third Platoon. "Hussein is
a crazy man, and if it takes giving up my life to stop him, it'll save a lot of
other lives later on."

The voices of determination and pride are tinged with ambivalence. "I don't want
to go to Saudi Arabia; I'd rather be here with my family," said Sgt. Aubrey
Howren, a 49-year-old grandfather of 14, as he checked the spare-parts supply in
a maintenance shed behind the red-brick armory building here. "But someone has
to lay down the law."

The guardsmen worry about matters profound and mundane. They fear poison gas
attacks in the desert and wonder if they will panic in battle. They worry about
paychecks reaching families back home and whether that balky furnace might break
down on a cold winter night.

There are last-minute tasks. Wills must be drawn up. Bills must be paid.
Employers must be consulted. Fathers pull out maps to explain to their children
where they are going, and why. Through tears and hushed tones, husbands and
wives speak about the unspeakable: What if he doesn't come home?

Who They Are
Rich and Poor, Hill and Dale

 There are farmers from poor, rural families. There are fast-talking salesmen
born into wealth and living in the city. There are police officers, gardeners,
mental health workers, forklift operators, ambulance drivers, mechanics,
draftsmen and city zoning officials. Most live in Rome, but some come from as
far as Atlanta, 70 miles away.

Together, the men of Alpha Company cut across the lines of age, race and
professional backgrounds. There is Specialist 4 Gary Dowdy, at 19 the company's
youngest soldier, for whom military life has been a dream since boyhood. And
there is Staff Sgt. Billy West, 57, the company mess sergeant and oldest member,
who has been in and out of the National Guard since 1949.

Many guardsmen are products of the active military or of military families --
five are Vietnam veterans -- and are eager to win the respect of skeptics.

"People still look at us as a good-old-boy network who sit around the armory
drinking coffee and playing cards," said First Lieut. Chris Nichols, 29, the
leader of Alpha Company's Second Platoon, the Turret Lizards. "The commitment
level is much higher."

In addition to his basic drill requirements, Lieutenant Nichols attended two
two-week Army courses this year, on tank-commander skills and airlift planning
strategies. On top of his regular job as a Cobb County deputy sheriff, he is
writing his master's thesis at Georgia State University on the credibility of
the National Guard.

 'Maintenance From Hell'

Others, like the company commander, Capt. Roy C. Mears Jr., 34, a laid-back
former North Carolinian who grew up in the 1960's as an "anti-war, long-haired,
give-peace-a-chance" type, joined the Guard to fulfill a sense of duty or earn
an extra paycheck and tuition for college.

For the younger guardsmen, there are plenty of older role models. "I call them
my children," Staff Sgt. Rodney Smith, 34, said of the three-man tank crew he
commands.

And then there is the incomparable "Maintenance from Hell" duo, the two
wisecracking, inseparable mechanics who lighten up the entire company:
Specialist 4 Eddy Clark, 26, and Sgt. Michael Lance, 23.

While the unit was training in the Mojave last summer, Specialist Clark and
Sergeant Lance bet on who could go the longest without showering. "He lost,"
Specialist Clark said with a grin, pointing to his buddy, who gave in after 12
1/2 smelly days.

Getting Ready
A Packing Job Like No Other

At Fort Stewart, Alpha Company will join other companies in the battalion and
other battalions in the 48th Infantry Brigade.

The 48th Brigade rounds out the 24th Mechanized Infantry Division, an
active-duty unit already in Saudi Arabia. When the 24th was activated in August
and the 48th was not, the guardsmen here felt cheated. For years, they have
trained with the regular army unit and are equipped with the same M-1 tanks.

Now that the callup has come, the days are filled with details. Soldiers load
gas masks, tents and other supplies on 2 1/2-ton sand-colored trucks. The tanks
are at Fort Stewart.

By the end of the day, everyone breaks for 30 minutes of "P.T." -- traditional
physical training with a twist: push-ups and sit-ups topped off by a rousing
game of ultimate Frisbee.

There is also mental preparation. "I won't say I haven't sat back and wondered
what it'd be like in combat," said Sgt. Peter Millsap, 26, a police officer, who
was stenciling identification numbers onto bayonets and rifles. "Would I be a
Rambo or would I panic? If you don't go into that situation without a knot in
your stomach and a lump in your throat, you're not normal."

Commanders concede that if fighting broke out tomorrow, Alpha Company would not
be ready. The soldiers still need several weeks of refresher training. "We're
about 80 percent there," Captain Mears said.

The Community
Simple Values Deeply Felt

 A military tradition imbues this community. Alpha Company is one of six Marine
and Army Guard and Reserve units in this city of 30,000 people, but the only one
assigned a combat role.

Red, white and blue bows adorn front doors and mailboxes, and yellow ribbons
stream from car antennas. Values are rooted in family, church and country.

At a crowded Sunday service of the Fellowship Baptist Church, one of nearly 150
Baptist churches in Floyd County, the congregation offers prayers for
parishioners in uniform, like Sgt. 1st Class Randy Hardin.

"We're just patriotic people here," said Sue Adams, a parishioner who has helped
organize a support group for friends and relatives of troops serving in the
Persian Gulf region.

A few cracks have appeared in the otherwise rock-solid support. "Bush has gotten
in over his head to the point where he's made wild threats that can only be
carried out by going to war," said Bob Chisholm, 69, a retired college
administrator who was a Navy medic in World War II. "This whole thing is
misguided."

The Families
Tiny Wedding, Big Worries

 Pfc. Jimmy Boyd, 20, and his fiancee, Stephanie Penney, 18, sweethearts since
junior high school, were to be married on Valentine's Day in a big ceremony at a
lovely Baptist church outside of town.

The callup changed that. A judge married the young couple on Monday. Private
Boyd, his head shorn to the scalp, wore his dress-green uniform. Stephanie, her
long blond hair flowing, wore a simple green dress. Private Boyd's father,
Oliver, was the best man and only witness. The ceremony was over in less than 10
minutes.

The mobilization has put all sorts of strains on families. First Sgt. Donald N.
Warren joined the National Guard 15 years ago to travel, to serve his country
and to make a little extra money. Sergeant Warren, Alpha Company's
highest-ranking enlisted man, says he is as patriotic as the next soldier and
ready to defend American interests in the gulf. But the callup has forced him to
take a 35 percent pay cut from the $50,000 a year he earns as a draftsman at
General Electric. For the first time in years, his family faces a financial
pinch.

"It's going to be hard," said Sergeant Warren, 55, who has two married sons and
two others still living at home.

 Heaven Can Wait

Money matters weigh on everyone. But the heavy talks between husbands and wives,
parents and children, are even tougher.

For the past several days, Vickie Weldy and her 5-year-old daughter, Shannon,
have talked about where Daddy -- Sgt. Brian Weldy -- may be going and what the
dangers are.

Shannon can now find Saudi Arabia on the map. And she kind of understands why
American soldiers have to stop a bad man near there. But other stuff is harder.

"And what if Daddy comes back without an arm or a leg?" Vickie Weldy asks her
daughter. "We'll still love him, right?"

"Yes," Shannon says, fidgeting with a blond ponytail and bobbing her head in
agreement. "But what if Daddy dies?"

"It would be sad," Mrs. Weldy said, choking back tears. "But when we die, we
would have something to look forward to when we go to heaven."

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Company A - A periodic visit to a Guard tank unit preparing for the
gulf.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sgt. Peter Millsap, left, and Sgt. Steven Miller of the Georgia
Army National Guard stenciling identification numbers onto weapons. (pg. A1);
Members of Company A of the 1-108th Armor Battalion of the Georgia Army National
Guard being told that their unit was being activated.; Specialist 4 Eddy Clark,
right, and Sgt. Michael Lance, the unit's wisecracking mechanics, loading a
truck with equipment as they were watched by Jon Boyd, the son of one of the
unit's members. (pg. A14) (Photographs by Alan S. Weiner/The New York Times)
Map: Map of Georgia showing location of Rome. (pg. A14)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Metro Matters;
2 Projects Assist Those Who Test HIV-Positive

BYLINE: By SAM ROBERTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 772 words


Leo Downey is a 34-year-old Boston native, Navy veteran of the Vietnam War, and
ex-convict who worked as a tile installer and as a bouncer. Marshall Thomson is
a 43-year-old former Bronx resident who was employed in statistical and payroll
departments of advertising agencies, but has not held a steady job in five
years.

Both men are former heroin addicts who have tested positive for the AIDS virus.
They are enrolled in separate New York City programs that began last spring and
hold great promise -- for people struggling with the physical and psychological
consequences of testing HIV positive, and also for a society coping with the
epidemic's financial and social implications.

Mr. Downey is one of 30 patients in a methadone clinic operated by the Spellman
Center for HIV-Related Diseases at St. Clare's Hospital and Health Center on
West 52d Street. Mr. Thomson is temporarily living in one of 12 cozy
8-by-10-foot cubicles, carved out of the vaulted basement of Blessed Sacrament
Roman Catholic Church on West 71st Street. They are operated by the Partnership
for the Homeless, as transitional housing for homeless people with AIDS. The
programs' proposed expansion and replication seem meritorious.

"It's not just a juice clinic," said Charles D'Amico, a counselor at St. Clare's
and a former heroin addict himself.

"We're trying to offer private-type medicine through a public-type program,"
said Dr. William Wilkinson, who runs a primary care medical clinic for the
methadone patients, a number of whom, like some in the Partnership's project,
are gay. Dr. Victoria L. Sharp, the Spellman Center's medical director, hopes to
serve 200 patients eventually.

They get timely medical attention, are tested weekly for illegal drugs, receive
counseling from the staff and from each other and are helped to "manage their
illness," as Anastasios Kalomiris, another counselor, put it.

"It's nice to be there for people," said Mr. Downey, who lives in a room ing
house uptown.  "When I was shooting dope I couldn't even be there for myself."

Some of St. Clare's outpatients live at the Partnership for the Homeless's
transitional housing project, which oper ates from 4:30 P.M.  to 9 A.M.,
provides support services and coordinates referrals to daytime recreation,
counseling, medical and vocational programs. After screening, the Partnership
accepts men in the early stages of the disease who are not yet eligible for
comprehensive services elsewhere. Within two months or so, they are helped to
find private housing with rents that qualify for the city's subsidy for welfare
recipients with AIDS.

Charles Green, vice-president of the Partnership, said 30 people have already
gone through the program; he expects that figure to grow to 100 by the end of
its first year. The Partnership raised $100,000 to renovate the basement, which
residents maintain themselves and where they are served dinner and breakfast in
spotless common areas. Dinners are donated by God's Love-We Deliver; social
workers and volunteer coordinators are paid by the city or are provided by the
parish. Mr. Green estimated the daily cost per resident at $28, compared with
maybe 30 times that amount in a hospital.

Mr. Thomson was living in parks and subways until friends let him sleep on the
floor of their one-bedroom apartment in the Bronx. But they were "AIDS phobic,"
he said, and so he left before they discovered that he had the disease. He
recently located an apartment and would like to study court stenography. Unlike
most other residents, he has not decorated his roomette with a picture. "I
wanted it to be homey," he said, "but I didn't want it to become home.'

In austere times, some people might question the value of such extensive
programs for people who probably will die of the disease anyway. One patient at
the St. Clare's methadone clinic already has. Purely from a financial
standpoint, those services might prove less expensive than some alternatives.
Moreover, there are moral imperatives and, perhaps, compelling self-interest,
too.

"We are taking care of people living with AIDS and we want them to feel that
somebody gives a damn," said Ted Corbin, a volunteer coordinator at the
Partnership's residence. "And by giving them an opportunity that keeps them off
the street and from crime, we're protecting society as much as we're protecting
them."

Mr. Downey said, "When you test HIV positive you feel that death is coming
tomorrow. But I could get hit by a bus tomorrow and never die of the virus." The
St. Clare's clinic, he said, "helped me to see there's still a future."

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 4, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodian Guerrillas Shell Government Post

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 233 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


The heaviest artillery duels in five months have erupted between Government
troops and guerrillas just inside Cambodia, Thai military officials said today.

Sporadic exchanges have been heard in the Thai border town of Aranyaprathet
since Sunday afternoon, they said.

The non-Communist Khmer People's National Liberation Front was shelling a
Government base at Ban Proaw, north of Route 5 leading into Thailand, the
officials said. Their allies, the Communist Khmer Rouge, were pounding Dong Aran
base to the south of the highway, they said.

"The combat is about six miles from the border area," said one official,
speaking from the border by telephone.

There was no information about casualties.

The guerrilla forces allied against the Phnom Penh Government supported by
Vietnam operate from a string of bases along the border with Thailand.

A new round of offensives had been widely expected with the end of the rainy
season and a stalemate in international efforts to end Cambodia's 11 years of
civil war.

The Khmer Rouge seized Phnom Penh in April 1975 and drove hundreds of thousands
of citizens to work in the fields. More than a million people died under the
Khmer Rouge rule, which lasted until December 1978. Vietnamese troops then
invaded Cambodia and occupied Phnom Penh on Jan. 7, 1979, driving the Khmer
Rouge to camps along the western frontier with Thailand.


LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 4, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM PUBLISHES PLAN FOR ECONOMY

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 453 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Dec. 3


Vietnam has devised a new plan to end decades of poverty that is intended to
double the nation's income by the year 2000, cut inflation to single digits and
increase export values five times.

Officials said the ruling Communist Party hoped the economic blueprint and a
political platform, which were published on Friday, would give Vietnam's aging
socialist system a facelift but maintain the state's grip on society.

"Until now we are still among the poorest countries of the world," was the
beginning of the plan, published in three leading state newspapers.

The draft was approved by Communist leaders last week and will be debated
nationwide before being submitted to a full congress in May, officials said.

Uneven Economic Growth

Vietnam's economy, ravaged by poor state management and war with the United
States and others, has grown unevenly since limited economic reforms were
instituted three years ago. Moves to increase rice production and end inflation
last year proved short-lived.

The plan -- called the Draft Strategy of Socio-Economic Stabilization and
Development Up to the Year 2000 -- blamed many of the problems of the last few
decades on Communist dogmatism. It listed three main goals: making people
richer, introducing a multi-faceted economy and creating a more open economic
system.

Among the Government's goals are doubling the country's per-capita income, which
was given as between $200 and $210, and raising rice production by 50 percent,
to 30 million tons. Electricity output would triple under the plan and
inflation, hovering around 50 percent after reaching nearly 1,000 percent in
1988, would be less than 10 percent by 1995, the newspapers said.

The draft plan set as a goal a fivefold increase for the value of exports by the
year 2000. In 1988, Vietnam's exports were worth $1.07 billion.

Hard-Liners Giving Way

Diplomats said the targets were ambitious but not unattainable.

In recent years, hard-line Communist officials who dealt with economic planning
have given way to educated technocrats, and party ideologues have stressed the
value of basic market forces.

But Vietnam, denied aid and Western investment because of its 1978 invasion of
Cambodia, has yet to secure investor confidence or enough capital to dent
shortages in basic infrastructure and industry.

It has also failed to address short-term problems that have aroused fears of a
Soviet-style crisis in basic foods.

Severe cuts in aid from the Soviet Union, its chief ally, have distorted the
limited reforms that have been undertaken. Many civil servants have not been
paid for five months. Hopes for a bumper rice crop this year are being
threatened by a fertilizer shortage.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 4, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Excerpts From Gulf Testimony

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1776 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 3


Following are excerpts from testimony to the Senate Armed Services Committee
today by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, as provided by the Federal News Service, a transcription
service:

MR. CHENEY: Let me say just a word about sanctions. . . . We think we've shut
down much of the flow of goods into Iraq from outside. We don't think it is
totally successful but, clearly, he cannot get anything through the Persian Gulf
or through the Red Sea. A little bit of air traffic going in, and there's some
smuggling. . . . But, basically, in terms of major international commerce, we
think we've been able to pretty well dry that up.

The question that comes up with respect to sanctions, though, is -- I think it
is important for us to focus upon what our objective is and, of course, that's
the goal of getting Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait. So, when you talk about
sanctions and sanctions working, I think it has to be with that caveat that
sanctions working doesn't mean just destruction of the Iraqi economy, it means
getting Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait. That's our goal; that's our objective;
that's why the sanctions have been employed.

In terms of trying to assess whether or not that will happen, we have to look at
several things; we have to look at circumstances inside Iraq. . . . Iraq has
been through an eight-year war with Iran. They clearly have the capacity to
hunker down, if you will, and operate on a subsistence basis. It's been
suggested that if you compare the pain -- the economic pain that he feels now --
with the pain that the population felt during the Iraq-Iran War, that today the
pain is not as significant as it was then. Because, of course, then, not only
were they faced with the burden of the war, they were also faced with the
propositions of casualties and attacks on Iraqi territory.

 Iraqi Food Resources

We think we clearly have been successful in closing off the flow of spare parts
and military supplies from the Soviet Union and France, which previously were
his major suppliers. But, with respect to food and agriculture, the picture is
somewhat murkier.

. . .Iraq is not a desolate country by any means. In the valley of the Tigris
and the Euphrates, there's a lot of good farmland there. And there are three
occasions in the last 25 years when they've been able to double from one year to
the next the total amount of cereal production, for example, in country. . . .

Another key element from the standpoint of the sanctions that we have to keep in
mind, I think, is that sanctions do not impose pain just on Iraq. They impose
pain on everybody who used to do business with Iraq. So, to say that we're going
to shut off the flow of commerce to Iraq, it is important for us to remind
ourselves that commerce is a two-way street and that when you close the pipeline
from Iraq across Turkey, Turkey loses the value and the benefits and the
earnings of having operated that pipeline, a significant loss to a nation that
obviously is very important to us and a key partner in the coalition.

There are other problems that I think have to be kept in mind as we contemplate
what the right course of action might be. While we wait for sanctions to work,
Saddam Hussein continues to obliterate any trace of Kuwait and her people. While
we wait, he continues to dig in in Kuwait, to send more forces south, to deploy
and mobilize additional manpower, to dig more formidable fortifications, so that
it's possible that at some point the military effort that might be required to
get him out will be more difficult in the future than it is today.

While we continue to wait, he also continues, obviously, his efforts to improve
his weapons arsenal, continues to work to see if he can acquire more weapons of
mass destruction. And while we wait, he continues to hold hundreds of Americans
hostage.

 Basic Propositions

So the questions, it seems to me, Mr. Chairman, that have been asked by this
committee and that you've addressed over the last few days, are vital ones. But
the notion that we can in fact wait a year or two, as some have suggested, that
we can wait indefinitely for him to withdraw, comes back again to a couple of
very basic, fundamental propositions.

Can we make the judgment that sanctions will achieve the desired result of
forcing him out of Kuwait? I don't know. I don't think we can make that
judgment. They might, but then again there's a lot of evidence that they won't.

Will the coalition hold? Will this relatively fragile, complex enterprise that
we've organized internationally produce the kind of ongoing support,
international effort, for the next year or two, that it has for the last four
months?

Will the economic pain be greater for Saddam Hussein than it will be for members
of the coalition, or for some of our other friends around the world? Will we be
in a better position ourselves, as a coalition and as a nation, to use military
force in the future than we are now?

. . .If Saddam wins, if he keeps Kuwait, if the coalition falls apart, if
economic sanctions don't work, if we don't use military force, if that's the
only way to achieve our objective to force him out, then we've got a hell of a
problem because of course he will, given his current location and his ability to
dominate the gulf, constitute a significant threat to the world economy.

Threat to U.S. Allies

He clearly will constitute and does today, a significant threat to our friends
in the region, especially to those Arab governments who have had the courage to
stand by us to try to stop Saddam Hussein. He clearly represents a threat to
Saudi Arabia, to the gulf state governments and, I would argue as well, to
President Mubarak's Government in Egypt. . . .

He clearly constitutes a significant threat to Israel. And the United States has
long-standing, indeed, commitments and an important strategic relationship with
the State of Israel. . . .

My own personal view is that it's far better for us to deal with him now while
the coalition is intact, while we have the United Nations behind us, while we
have some 26 other nations assembled with military forces in the gulf, than it
will be for us to deal with him 5 or 10 years from now when the members of the
coalition have gone their disparate ways and when Saddam has become an even
better armed and more threatening regional superpower than he is at present.

SENATOR NUNN: Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary.

General Powell?

GENERAL POWELL: . . .What I would like to do in my oral statement is to build on
Secretary Cheney's comments and provide you some insight into our military
planning, why we recommended what we did, and the underlying military rationale
for our deployments and our campaign planning.

. . .The mission is not to punish, the mission is not to retaliate, the mission
is not to see if Saddam Hussein will change his mind. The mission is to take
action to achieve our political objective if Saddam Hussein does not change his
mind.

Many experts, amateurs and others in this town believe that this can be
accomplished by such things as surgical air strikes or perhaps a sustained air
strike. And there are a variety of other nice, tidy, alleged low-cost,
incremental, may-work options that are floated around with great regularity all
over this town.

 Hussein Can't Control

The fundamental fatal flaw in all such strategies is that it leaves the
initiative in Saddam Hussein's hands. He makes the decision as to whether or not
he will or will not withdraw. He decides whether he has been punished enough so
that it is now necessary for him to reverse his direction and take a new
political tack.

Those strategies may work, but they also may not. The initiative is left in
Saddam Hussein's hands. These strategies are not decisive; they are not
success-oriented. Saddam Hussein has demonstrated for 10 years his willingness
and his ability to absorb punishment and to callously expend Iraqi lives and to
care not a whit about what happens to the citizens of his country.

Another flaw in such strategies is that it allows Iraq to concentrate
essentially on one threat -- as you pull apart these alternative strategies, an
air threat. I know the deserts of Kuwait and Iraq are quite different from the
triple-canopy jungles of Vietnam or the forests of Germany, and I have no
question about the competence and ability of our United States Air Force to
inflict terrible punishment.

But one can hunker down, one can dig in, one can disperse to try to ride out
such a single-dimension attack. Recognizing that such attack will do grievous
damage to the defenders after such a strategy has been executed, the decision is
still in the hands of the defender to decide whether or not he has had enough
punishment. Such strategies are designed to hope to win, they are not designed
to win.

General Schwarzkopf, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and I believe strongly that if
the armed forces of the United States are asked to go into combat to achieve a
decisive political objective, we must implement a decisive military strategy
that seizes the initiative -- one that is designed to win.

 Move It or Lose It

The second factor in our consideration is the enemy. We do not overestimate or
underestimate the capability of the Iraqi armed forces. We have studied them
very closely; we understand their strengths, we understand their
vulnerabilities. We must have a military strategy, and I believe we will have a
military strategy, that uses our strengths against their vulnerabilities, avoids
their strengths and protects us against attacks directed against our
vulnerabilities.

Based on our analysis of the mission, the enemy and other factors, we
recommended and the President approved a force buildup capable of accomplishing
the mission which seizes the initiative and which forces the Iraqis to consider
the consequences of a combined overwhelming air-land-sea campaign against a
powerful coalition force. The question they will have to consider is, do they
move it, or do they lose it?

We don't want a war; we aren't looking for one. The President doesn't want one.
The Secretary doesn't want one. No one in uniform wants one. No American wants
one. And certainly, no loved one waiting at home wants one. War is a terrible
thing with unpredictable consequences, but my job, and the job of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and the commanders involved in this operation, is to make sure
that if it is necessary to go to war, we go to war to win. That is the surest
way to achieve our objectives and to minimize casualties.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sam Nunn, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee,
conferring with Senator Strom Thurmond, right, before start of hearing. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 4, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Business Digest

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 539 words



Airline in Trouble

Continental Airlines filed for bankruptcy protection after months of struggling
with a financial squeeze from its huge debt and the soaring cost of jet fuel.
[Page A1.]

The nation's fifth-largest airline is taking great pains to assure customers and
travel agents that it will remain in the air. [D8.]

The combination of high fuel costs and low fares will severely damage other
airlines if it persists through the winter. [D9.]

Companies

NCR's stock jumped 43.6 percent as investors responded to the $90-a-share offer
from A.T.& T. [D1.]

Bergdorf Goodman named a new vice chairman, Burton Tansky, the president of Saks
Fifth Avenue. [D1.]

Sears, Roebuck & Company has a new headache: a big shareholder, a California
state pension fund, is upset. [D3.]

Lockheed rejected a buyout proposal from Harold Simmons, the Dallas investor,
because the plan involved too much debt. [D4.]

New publishers were named for Vogue, Vanity Fair and Conde Nast's Traveler.
[D18.]

 The Economy

An economic index compiled by purchasing managers fell to its weakest level
since November 1982. [D1.]

The Supreme Court gave employers a victory by ruling that lawsuits accusing
companies of firing workers to evade pension obligations come under Federal, not
state law. [D1.]

Record spending on public works lifted construction spending for the first time
since July. [D5.]

Engineers at the Brookhaven National Laboratory are working to pack more
circuits onto computer chips. They are hoping to take the initiative back from
Japanese manufacturers. [C1.]

International

Trade negotiators grew increasingly pessimistic about the global trade talks.
[D1.] The United States is seeking to build regional cooperation in the Western
hemisphere. [D7.]

Bush announced approval of the sale of a supercomputer to Brazil on his trip to
Latin America, as officials worried about the attempted military coup in
Argentina. [A14.]

Vietnam has come up with a plan to end decades of poverty, cut inflation and
increase exports. [A7.]

A Sunday newspaper in Britain folded just 14 months after its debut in the
market that many say is still too crowded. [D6.]

Markets

Stock prices continued to advance, led by A.T.& T.'s bid for NCR. The Dow gained
5.94, to 2,565.59. [D10.]

Treasury securities rose, pushed higher by foreign buying in overnight trading.
[D16.]

Oil finished 30 cents higher after traders felt that hopes for peace in the
Persian Gulf were fading. [D2.]

The dollar rose sharply on reports of intervention to halt the currency's fall.
[D17.] Soybeans rose to a five-week high. [D17.]

Today's Columns

The retail pharmacy business is so competitive that many drugstores still
deliver prescriptions to the homes of elderly customers. Milt Freudenheim:
Business and Health. [D2.]

Western Union's offer to buy back bonds initially cheered investors, but many
may not be able to get the full 50 cents for each dollar of their holdings.
Market Place. [D10.]

L.A. Gear is expected to be ready to hire an advertising agency. To date, the
nation's third-largest athletic shoe maker has created its own ads. Advertising.
[D19.]

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 4, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

American Indian Music Helps a Culture Hold On

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1020 words


At a narrow white frame building called a longhouse, members of the Akwesasne
Mohawk tribe gather to sing their most sacred music and, later, to have some
fun. Women enter by the west door, men through the east door, and they sit
separately. An elder gives a thanksgiving address, and then the songs begin,
sacred and secular, accompanied by drum and rattles.

For the most sacred, the Great Feather Dance, two singers use rattles made from
shells of snapping turtles that are not played in any other music. At other
ceremonies, songs for healing are performed by members of the False Face
Society, whose identities are not revealed even within the tribe. But when the
Akwesasne Mohawk Singers perform tonight at Weill Recital Hall, they will sing a
less mystical repertory: social songs and dances that are open to everyone.

"If we have ceremonies during the day," said Brad Bonaparte, a member of the
Akwesasne Mohawk Singers, "the evening afterward is a time to get together and
have fun. Everybody dances, from kids 3 years old to elders in their 60's and
70's."

Surviving Against the Odds

The Akwesasne Mohawk Singers, from the St. Regis Reservation in upstate New
York, will appear tonight in the concert of "Native American Ritual, Song, Music
and Dance," part of the Folk Masters series presented by Carnegie Hall. The
concert, which is sold out, is being recorded for broadcast on American Public
Radio in the spring. Along with the Mohawks, the program includes a Comanche
flute player from Apache, Okla.; Dakota Sioux singers from Fort Peck, Mont., and
Ojibway fiddlers from the Ebb and Flow Reservation in Manitoba, Canada. It
offers a rare chance to hear the oldest North American music, which has survived
against considerable odds.

While recent generations have reclaimed their heritage, for many years American
Indian culture was under siege -- first through open battle, later under the
pressures of assimilation. Mr. Bonaparte said his grandmother was beaten for
speaking the Mohawk language and didn't teach it to his mother; he has been
learning it from older Mohawks and from his fellow singers.

Doc Tate Nevaquaya, the Comanche flutist, has reconstructed a nearly extinct
music for wooden flute -- one of the few solo instruments in American Indian
music -- through musicological research. And Lawrence (Teddy Boy) Houle, the
Ojibway fiddler, plays tunes that reflect the French and Scottish music brought
by colonists; what has survived is an Ojibway approach to tone, phrasing and
ornament.

Native and Adopted Images

The songs and dances offer glimpses of nations far more venerable than the
United States. The Iroquois confederation, an alliance of the Mohawks, the
Oneidas, the Senecas, the Onondagas and later the Tuscaroras, "was the first
United Nations, united for peace," Mr. Bonaparte said. He added that the form of
government of the United States was influenced by the Great Law of the Iroquois,
whose system of delegates and representatives was studied by Benjamin Franklin
and Thomas Jefferson.

The Iroquois confederation, which at its peak controlled territory from what is
now Maine to Michigan and from the St. Lawrence River to Tennessee, was not
insular. One dance for couples, the alligator dance, has been in Iroquois lore
for generations despite the fact that upstate New York isn't alligator country;
the song was learned from the Seminoles of the South.

Nor is the singers' repertory a fixed body of music and words. One women's
dance, Mr. Bonaparte said, can stretch to 300 verses. "We can keep the girls
dancing for 45 minutes, though they get kind of angry at us," he said. And new
verses are continually added to old songs; one recent Mohawk verse mentions
casinos, warriors, gamblers, smugglers and AK-47's, alluding to the current
disputes over whether casinos will be built on Mohawk land.

Traditions From the West

A long way west, the Badlands Singers of Fort Peck, Mont., perform for dancers
on the powwow circuit -- large gatherings, often bringing together members of
various tribes, where old songs are performed while dancers compete for prizes.
The songs, some of them wordless, are austere and penetrating, with men's and
women's voices raised atop driving drumbeats. Like the Mohawks, the Sioux have
songs that are not heard outside tribal ceremonies in sweat lodges; aspects of
their costumes, particularly the war bonnets, are also consecrated. "The
feathers are very sacred," said Chuck Spottedbird, a member of the Badlands
Singers. "Our war bonnets have about 32 eagle feathers, and you have to be
pretty well known and respected to get to wear them. If you drop an eagle
feather, there is a song that is sung while four comrades help you pick up that
feather."

The dances generally fall into the categories of "traditional" and "fancy"
dances, for both men or women; one of the men's traditional dances is called the
sneak-up. "It shows him sneaking up on the enemy, looking for tracks, down on
one knee," Mr. Spottedbird said. "It comes from way back and a long time ago."

Mr. Spottedbird grew up hearing traditional music and began performing 20 years
ago; the Badlands Singers were founded in 1972. The powwow circuit has preserved
a large repertory. There are songs that commemorate people who died in the
Korean and Vietnam wars, songs about history, praise songs, funeral songs, even
songs about stealing horses from other tribes, as well as dance songs. "Every
weekend there's a powwow someplace," Mr. Spottedbird said. "You can expect at
least 15 to 20 drummers, and about 20 songs will be played in a night. But there
are so many of them you don't sing the same song over again in a long time."

It's not easy to maintain traditional music in the face of electronic media;
pressures to assimilate now are less blatant but just as pervasive. But the
performers expect their music and their culture to hold on. "I didn't learn
anything about my culture when I was younger," Mr. Bonaparte said. "But the more
I find out, the more I've been seeing the logic of it and how beautiful and
natural it was."

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Doc Tate Nevaquaya, a Comanche flute player, joins other
American Indian performers in a concert tonight at Weill Recital Hall. (Carnegie
Hall)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Leverage on Pretoria: Mandela's Group Turns to a Mass Protest Campaign

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1297 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG, Dec. 4


As it maneuvers for advantage before negotiations proposed by President F. W. de
Klerk on the nation's future, the African National Congress has replaced its
former at least rhetorical commitment to armed struggle against white minority
rule with a strategy of coordinated protest marches, strikes, consumer boycotts
and work stayaways.

Though protests against apartheid are not new and Mr. de Klerk has tolerated
peaceful dissent since taking office, mass action, as the Congress's current
policy is called, has become a key point of contention, delaying talks between
black and white leaders on a new national constitution.

From the perspective of the African National Congress, giving up mass action as
a tactic would mean going into negotiations with far less political clout. For
Mr. de Klerk, mass action complicates negotiations because his white electorate
would see any concessions to the Congress as coerced.

A Victory for Hard-Liners?

Some analysts like Ronnie Bethlehem, an economist who has studied revolutionary
change, speculate that the Congress's call for mass action signals a victory for
its hard-line strategists, who did not want to give up the guerrilla option,
over its pragmatists, who view negotiations as the best route to a
post-apartheid society.

"It is a victory which could assist strategists and racial ideologists against
pragmatists on the Government's side also," Mr. Bethlehem wrote in the financial
newspaper Business Day.

At a politically charged funeral here on Sunday for a man shot by the police at
a unapproved march here on Nov. 17, Nelson Mandela declared that the African
National Congress would not give up mass action.

"We will not trade off our mass struggle for negotiations," said Mr. Mandela,
who is deputy president of the Congress. He called for more demonstrations, even
if the authorities refused permission, as happened on Nov. 17.

The Remnants of Apartheid

The civil disobedience campaign has sought out flaws in Mr. de Klerk's policies
of change. As Mr. Mandela keeps pointing out, he and other blacks still cannot
vote and many other structures set up to enforce apartheid remain in place.

The African National Congress suspended its armed struggle, adopted in 1961
after nearly half a century of non-violence, at the last full round of talks
with the Government on Aug. 6. In military terms, the guerrilla warfare achieved
little because of a ruthlessly efficient counter-insurgency and had grown
quiescent months before its suspension.

The international isolation of South Africa began to unravel after Mr. de Klerk
declared the African National Congress and other liberation movements legal,
freed Mr. Mandela and began dismantling apartheid. Though he has far to go, Mr.
de Klerk has been warmly received in Washington and other Western European and
African capitals.

New Attitude in East Europe

Eastern European countries that championed the African National Congress with
money, weapons and political support have also shifted interest to Mr. de
Klerk's Government. Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia have established informal
diplomatic links and last week a Soviet delegation visited Pretoria for talks.
The Soviet Union, which awarded Mr. Mandela the Lenin Peace Prize while he was
in prison, has yet to arrange for him to collect it.

Economic sanctions are also starting to slip, raising the prospect that by the
time the Congress consents to their removal, they may be ineffective. Though the
case for sanctions could be reviewed at the Congress consultative conference
opening here on Dec. 14, Mr. Mandela told foreign correspondents on Nov. 15 that
"we have no plans to call on countries and the world to review sanctions."

At home, the African National Congress has failed to translate widespread
admiration for Mr. Mandela into equivalent grass roots support. Only one in 250
South Africans has joined the Congress, though many more endorse its aims. The
Congress has admitted signing up 150,000 members out of a total population of
37.5 million inhabitants, only 5 million of whom are white.

There are reasons for the lackluster showing. The Congress's claim to lead was
hurt by its inability to stop factional violence exploding around Johannesburg
in August and September. And the poverty, illiteracy and backwardness afflicting
many blacks is so severe that a recent survey of farm laborers in the rural
Eastern Cape reported that only 60 percent had heard of the African National
Congress and only 30 percent of Mr. Mandela.

Tactics of the 1950's

Because it cannot afford to lose credibility before it feels ready to negotiate
with the Government, the African National Congress has reverted to the kind of
tactics it used before the adoption of armed struggle, like the campaigns of the
1950's to defy restrictive pass laws and other apartheid legislation.

Mr. Mandela has likened mass action to demonstrations by Americans against the
war in Vietnam or by Western Europeans against the deployment of nuclear
weapons.

"We have reached the position where we are precisely because of mass action,"
Mr. Mandela told journalists on Nov. 10.

Last month, Mr. de Klerk accused the African National Congress of "a clearly
defined strategy of intimidation and undermining of local authorities, regional
and self-governing states." He called it a form of violence that the African
National Congress pledged to stop when it suspended the armed struggle on Aug. 6
and urged that it express dissatisfaction through the channels created in their
ongoing contacts.

'Peaceful Search for Solutions'

"I expect from them an unqualified stand against everything that is not
conducive to the peaceful search for solutions," Mr. de Klerk said. At a private
meeting last Tuesday, President de Klerk and Mr. Mandela failed to resolve their
differences over mass action.

The mass action campaign has set complex goals, like the nonracial election of a
constituent assembly and interim government during negotiations and the collapse
of black township councils created by Pretoria, both of which the Government
opposes.

The New Nation, a weekly newspaper that reflects the views of the African
National Congress, insisted recently that mass action was essential to maintain
pressure on the Government.

"It is asking too much that, having abandoned the armed struggle to help
facilitate the process of negotiations, the A.N.C. must now be expected to give
up its sole legal and legitimate means of organizing?" The New Nation said.

Congress's Motives Assailed

The Citizen, a daily tabloid that supports the Government, accused tbe African
National Congress in an editorial this week of being motivated by self-interest.

"Mass protests, marches, stayaways and boycotts, which President F. W. de Klerk
says can lead to violence and are therefore unacceptable, are not simple
expressions of mass feeling; they are organized to disrupt life as well as to
demonstrate the A.N.C.'s strength so that blacks are convinced of the A.N.C.'s
invincibility," The Citizen said.

Because mass action needs community mobilization, participation tends to be
enforced by unemployed youths who have intimidated those who want to go to work
or shop. When rival black political groupings oppose such tactics, factional
violence can result.

"There can be no denying that there have been instances of A.N.C. supporters
displaying intolerant behavior and at times even employing strong-arm methods to
bully political rivals into silence," Mr. Mandela said Friday in Cape Town.

"We want to take this opportunity to denounce in the strongest terms any such
tactics as completely contrary to A.N.C. policy."

He promised that those guilty of intimidation would be punished.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Nelson Mandela of the African National Congress has declared
that the Congress would not give up mass demonstrations, which might complicate
negotiations proposed by President F. W. de Klerk. In Cape Town on Friday, Mr.
Mandela received an honorary degree from the University of Cape Town. At left
was Harry Oppenheimer, chancellor. (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
House Democrats Caution Bush on War

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1163 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 4


House Democrats adopted a nonbinding policy statement late today declaring that
President Bush should not initiate any offensive military action in the Persian
Gulf without the formal approval of Congress unless American lives were in
immediate danger.

The resolution, adopted on a 177-37 vote after two hours of closed-door debate
by the House Democratic Caucus, reflected the views that Democratic leaders in
both the House and Senate have repeatedly expressed since Mr. Bush ordered more
American troops to the Gulf last month. But it is the most explicit and formal
statement to date of the Democratic position.

It also comes as concerns increase among lawmakers and outside experts about the
Bush Administration's apparent impatience with reliance on economic sanctions to
force the withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait. Before approving the
resolution, House Democrats agreed to accept modifying language that would also
put them on record in support of the President's actions to defend Saudi Arabia
and his efforts to use diplomatic initiatives and the economic sanctions to
resolve the crisis.

Court Clash on War Powers

The action today came as 54 Democratic members of Congress and the Bush
Administration clashed in Federal Court over whether the President can wage war
against Iraq without first getting explicit authority from Congress.

The confrontation, which involves questions of constitutional law dating back to
the founding of the nation, came as the result f a suit brought by the lawmakers
asking a judge to block Mr. Bush from going to war unless Congress first votes
its approval.

Noting that no court had ever issued such an injunction, Judge Harold H. Greene
said he would study the case and rule sometime in the future.

"The question before this court is straightforward," said Jules Lobel, a
University of Pittsburgh law professor who argued the case for the lawmakers.
"Can the President initiate a war against Iraq for the purpose of getting it out
of Kuwait without the consent of Congress? The President says he can but the
Constitution says he can't."

At issue is Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution, which vests Congress with
the sole authority to declare war. The question of how much of a role Congress
should play in the use of combat troops abroad has vexed policymakers since the
founding of the nation.

The Government's Stand

Stuart M. Gerson, the assistant attorney general who argued the case for the
Government, said Presidents have often sent troops into combat without a
Congressional declaration of war.

Judge Greene interrupted Mr. Gerson's argument to ask when the declaration of
war clause could be used.

"So when does it apply?" Judge Greene asked.

Mr. Gerson said, in effect, that the declaration of war power was optional, that
it allowed Congress to take the initiative to start a war if it chose to do so,
but did not limit a President from sending troops into combat.

Mr. Gerson also argued that the Constitution did not say when Congress had to
declare war. "It doesn't have to be in advance of hostilities," he said, "it
could be after."

Mr. Lobel, who was accompanied by four members of Congress at the counsel table,
argued that it was useless for Congress to have the ability to declare war once
a President has already sent troops into combat. Everyone knows, he said, that
Congress has no choice but to support troops once they are engaged in combat.

The power to declare war, he said, "is before it begins, not while it's going
on."

No 'Indefinite Threat'

The buildup in the Gulf, he argued, provided Judge Greene with the clearest case
in history for requiring the President to seek explicit approval from Congress.
Noting the troop deployment and statements from Administration officials that
they were running out of patience with the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein, he
said: "We're talking about the threat of war in six weeks. We're not talking
about some indefinite threat."

In October, before Congress adjourned for the year, both the House and Senate
overwhelmingly approved resolutions supporting President Bush's initial
deployment of American troops to the Gulf.

But the resolutions were deliberately ambiguous about continued support if the
President took military action without exlicit approval from Congress. The
Senate measure for example, included language approved by the White House that
tied future decisions to "United States constitutional and statutory processes,"
a statement vague enough to be open to different interpretations by the
Administration and lawmakers.

Cheney Stirs the Pot

The original House measure sidestepped the question of how or when force should
be used. At the time those measures were passed, and in the weeks since, a
number of liberal Democrats argued that Congress was too vague and had left the
door open for the President to make a military move.

The action by the House Democrats today appears to have been prompted in part by
statements on Monday by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney that the President has the
authority to order an attack on Iraq without Congressional approval. Although
lawmakers have generally given President Bush high marks for his willingness to
consult with Congress on the Gulf crisis, they have failed to win either a
public or private commitment from him that he would seek a formal declaration of
war prior to committing American troops to military action.

The touchy issue was also raised today as the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
opened a series of hearings on Gulf policy. When Democratic senators asked
former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara whether he shared Mr. Cheney's view
that Mr. Bush did not need approval from Congress, Mr. McNamara pointed to the
bitter lessons of Vietnam.

"I do not believe the President should, and I do not believe he will initiate
action without the approval of the American people expressed by the approval of
Congress," he said.

Mr. McNamara, who was President Lyndon B. Johnson's Defense Secretary during the
height of the Vietnam War, told the committee that the Bush Administration
should continue to rely on economic sanctions for perhaps as long as 18 months
as the means to dislodge Iraq from Kuwait. Democratic senators on the panel
shared that assessment.

'Toughness in Patience'

"Sometimes there is more toughness in patience than in lashing out," said
Senator Paul Simon, an Illinois Democrat. "This is such a time." Senator Daniel
Patrick Moynihan, a New York Democrat, said, "We have time, I don't see any
hurry." .

But Senator Rudy Boschwitz, a Minnesota Republican who lost his re-election bid
and will not be returning to Washington when the new Congress convenes on Jan.
3, said he shared Mr. Cheney's conclusion that giving the sanctions more time to
work also amounted to a decrease in pressure on Iraq that would allow President
Hussein to marshall his resources and build military strength.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Iraq Allows Soviets to Leave In Apparent End to Standoff

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 791 words

DATELINE: AMMAN, Jordan, Dec. 4


Iraq said today that it would allow all Soviet citizens still in Iraq to leave
beginning this week, apparently ending a weeks-old standoff.

Iraqi officials said without elaboration, however, that the departures were
contingent on a guarantee by the Soviet Union that it would "bear the
responsibility for the impact of the breach of worker contracts."

The Soviet Union, which was once a close ally of Iraq and was Baghdad's chief
arms supplier during the Iran-Iraq war, said that about 3,300 Soviet citizens
remain in Iraq, most of them employed as contract workers on Iraqi Government
projects. On Monday, Soviet television reported that one-third of the Soviet
citizens still in Iraq would be allowed to leave.

The Iraqi announcement came as Japan announced that it would send an official
envoy to Baghdad on a mission connected with the plight of the 300 Japanese
hostages being held there.

The nations in the multinational military alliance against Iraq have agreed not
to send official delegations to Baghdad to negotiate on the hostages' plight,
arguing that the trips might be perceived as lending legitimacy to Iraq's
hostage-taking policy.

Iraqi Negotiating Stance

King Hussein of Jordan left today for Baghdad, where he was expected to meet
with the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein, to discuss the Iraqi negotiating
stance in talks scheduled for later this month with the United States.

The King, whose nation has long depended on trade with Iraq for much of its
income, has tried to position himself as a mediator between President Hussein
and the United States.

Until today, Iraq had insisted that it would let Soviet workers leave only after
they had completed their contracts.

But the Iraqis appeared today to be giving in to pressure from Moscow to allow
all Soviet workers to leave in light of the crisis since Iraq's invasion of
Kuwait in August.

Soviet officials had expressed concern that the Soviet citizens in Iraq might be
in the same predicament as the more than 2,000 Westerners who have been detained
in Iraq since the Kuwait invasion.

Last week Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union suggested
that Soviet troops might be sent to the Gulf if Soviet nationals working in Iraq
continued to be held against their will.

In announcing the decision, the Iraqi Revolutionary Command Council said in a
statement that any Soviet worker "wishing to leave would be free to go as of
Wednesday provided the Soviet Government alone bears the responsibility for the
impact of the breach of worker contracts."

The statement did not explain how the "impact of the breach" would be measured,
or if this could pose a stumbling block to the departure of some Soviet
citizens, nor was it clear that Moscow would agree to any such condition. The
Soviet Embassy here could not be reached for comment.

The Revolutionary Command Council is the central decision-making body in Iraq
and is under President Hussein's control.

Hope for Improved Relations

A spokesman for the council was quoted by the official Iraqi press agency as
saying that the Soviet citizens were being allowed to go to prevent "distortion
and ambiguity" and in the hope of improved relations with the Soviet Union.

On Sunday, the Iraqi Foreign Ministry accused the Soviet Union of using the
presence of thousands of its citizens in Iraq as a pretense for deploying Soviet
soldiers to the gulf.

Since the invasion of Kuwait, the Iraqis have tried to draw a careful
distinction between the Westerners being held in Iraq and other foreign workers
in the country, including Soviet citizens.

Increasingly, however, that appeared to be a distinction without a difference,
and during an acrimonious meeting with Iraqi officials last month in Moscow,
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union demanded that Iraq withdraw
from Kuwait and permit all Soviet citizens to leave.

Even as Iraq's Foreign Minister, Tariq Aziz, prepares to travel to Washington
for talks later this month with President Bush, one of Iraq's leading newspapers
accused Mr. Bush of being a liar and warned that a war with Iraq would not be a
"picnic."

The Government-run newspaper, Al-Thawra, noted President Bush's comment last
week that any war with Iraq would end quickly with a victory by the American-led
forces.

"Being a liar, he claimed that war with Iraq would be quick and different from
the Vietnam War," the paper said. "The thing that Bush must understand clearly
is that a war with Iraq is not a picnic in the backyard of the United States."

"We will tell Bush that if he takes the decision of war, he will put the
American people and humanity at large on the brink of a catastrophe," it said.


LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 6, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. IS NOW READY FOR VIETNAM TALKS

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 364 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 5


The United States said today that it was ready to start formal talks with
Vietnam on normalizing relations as soon as the next major step toward peace in
Cambodia is completed, possibly next month.

Assistant Secretary of State Richard Solomon said full diplomatic relations
could be achieved within two years if Hanoi also made satisfactory steps toward
pinning down the fate of the 2,300 Americans who have not yet been accounted for
since the Vietnam War.

"This is a process that we see moving in stages," Mr. Solomon said at a
conference on business prospects with Vietnam. He said full normalization could
come once a democratically elected government takes office in Phnom Penh,
Cambodia.

North Vietnam defeated the American-backed South Vietnamese Government in 1975,
and the United States has never established normal diplomatic relations with the
Hanoi Government.

U.S. Moving Cautiously

Mr. Solomon said Washington was moving cautiously to generate domestic support
for normalization, notably among the families of servicemen still listed as
missing in Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos.

He said that to speed the process Vietnam should immediately turn over the
remains of servicemen to which it has access, share wartime records and help
resolve what are called "discrepancy cases," which relate to the fate of
Americans who were reported captured alive but did not return.

"We look forward to a new era in Indochina and for U.S. relations with Vietnam,
with Camodia and with Laos," he said. "Such a new era is only months away, we
hope." The United States already has full diplomatic relations with the
Government of Laos, an ally of Hanoi.

The immediate condition to opening normalization talks is the signing of a
United Nations-sponsored plan to end the 12-year war in Cambodia. Solomon said
he hoped the 19 nations involved in the process would sign in Paris as early as
next month.

The timetable announced by Solomon was based on stepped-up American-Vietnamese
contacts in recent months. In September, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d
and Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach met in the highest-level talks between the
two countries since 1973.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 6, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

STANDOFF IN THE GULF;
The Collapse Of a Coalition

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1194 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 5


The bipartisan coalition in support of President Bush's policy in the Persian
Gulf, which developed cracks last week with the defection of an influential
Democratic Senator, Sam Nunn of Georgia, fell apart today on Capitol Hill, live
on television in full view of the nation and the world.

Prominent Democrats of today, led by the senior members of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, joined prominent Democrats of the past, including a noted
hawk and a noted dove, in attacking the Bush Administration for what they termed
an indecent rush toward war against Iraq and in asserting that woefully
inadequate thought had been given to the consequences of such a war.

All said they spoke out of concern for the national interest, insisting that
policy, not politics, was the motivation. But senior Administration officials,
betraying for the first time something of a bunker mentality, suggested that the
criticism had grown out of partisanship; one ranking policy maker said the day's
events had showed that the Democrats "have decided this is the issue that will
break Bush's Presidency."

If Mr. Bush is engaged in a game of what John Foster Dulles used to call
"brinkmanship," hoping that by making war seem inevitable he will force
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to pull back and make it unnecessary, the
Democrats' tough new stance may hinder him greatly by making his threats less
credible.

Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d came close to saying as much when he called
on the Democrats on the committee to help persuade the Iraqi leader that "the
alternative to peaceful compliance is to be forced to comply." Given an opening
by a friendly Republican question, he commented rather wistfully that he wished
he could persaude Congress to back the Administration as fully as the United
Nations had done.

More Support Abroad

Mr. Bush clearly faces a Herculean repair job if he is to arrive at Jan. 15 with
anything approaching a national consensus behind him. That is the day after
which the United Nations Security Council has authorized member nations to use
force if Iraqi troops remain in Kuwait.

For the first time in recent history, an American Administration has more
comprehensive support abroad for a major foreign-policy position than it has at
home. And for the first time in recent history, public and political opinion in
the United States is split on the eve of a possible war -- not halfway through
it, as was the case in Vietnam, or toward its end, as in Korea.

The day's proceedings before the Foreign Relations Committee, a piece of
political theater full of the urgency lent by high political stakes, marked a
turning point of considerable importance. Democratic doubts and suspicions,
suppressed or ignored for months, suddenly coalesced.

In the process, Mr. Baker, who has grown accustomed in his many years in
Washington to being treated as something of an icon, was roughed up pretty
badly. Again and again, Democrats accused him of ignoring expert opinions on
sanctions and other subjects, of failing to justify the Administration's
impatience and of failing to get American allies to commit enough troops or
money to the common cause.

Many in the packed conference room recalled the hearings during the Vietnam War,
held by this same committee under the chairmanship of Senator J. William
Fulbright of Arkansas, that did much to fuel the antiwar movement. George
McGovern, the Democratic nominee who tried and failed to ride that movement into
the White House in 1972, was one of those who testified today; so was Zbigniew
Brzezinski, a prominent participant in the last American military adventure in
the gulf, the futile attempt to rescue American hostages from Iran.

Undesirable Side Effects

Mr. Brzezinski echoed other critics, including former cabinet members and
retired senior military officers, in arguing that economic sanctions had not
been given a fair chance to work. But he also introduced a new note to the
debate, suggesting that all sorts of undesirable and unanticipated side effects
might arise from a war, including Iranian dominance in the gulf, Syrian
leadership of the Arab world, overthrow of Arab governments friendly to the
United States, military involvement of the United States in the region for
decades and temptation for Israel to use its military force more freely.

In response to Senators' questions, he urged Mr. Bush and Mr. Baker to emulate
Dwight D. Eisenhower in his measured response to Beijing in the Quemoy and Matsu
crisis and John F. Kennedy in his measured response to Moscow in the Cuban
missile crisis. In a direct reproach to the President's language, Mr. Brzezinski
added, "To speak of Saddam Hussein as a Hitler is to trivialize Hitler and to
elevate Saddam."

Offstage, other lines of potential attack were becoming visible as Democrats
tried to exploit weaknesses in the Administration's position.

Representative Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee,
suggested that a surtax might be needed to pay for a war in the gulf or even for
the protracted deployment of hundreds of thousands of American troops in Saudi
Arabia. Such a surtax would surely be highly unwelcome to the Administration.

"We really haven't focused on the cost of the Persian Gulf," the Illinois
Democrat told reporters at a breakfast meeting. "People are not really aware of
it. When that surfaces, there is going to have to be some response from Congress
and the President."

On Tuesday, in another sign of the growing partisan polarization in the House,
Democrats there overwhelmingly adopted a nonbinding resolution that said Mr.
Bush should order no attack without the approval of Congress. It was passed by a
vote of 177 to 37 in a closed-door caucus.

The Democrats' tactical position is made easier by the contradictions in
statements about the gulf crisis made by top Administration officials.

On Oct. 16 in London, for example, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said, "The
sanctions and the embargo are beginning to have an impact" and predicted that
over the next few months the measures would erode Mr. Hussein's political base
as well as the Iraqi economy and military capacity.

On Capitol Hill on Monday, however, Mr. Cheney said it was unlikely the
sanctions would ever work, either by restricting food supplies enough or by
crippling the Iraqi military.

Now the Administration must decide how to fight back -- either directly, perhaps
by suggesting that the Democrats' conduct is vaguely unpatriotic, or indirectly,
perhaps by urging Jewish groups and others with an interest in an aggressive
United States policy to bring pressure on key Democratic critics like Senators
Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware and Paul S. Sarbanes of Maryland.

More likely, the President will leave the infighting to surrogates, like Senator
Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina.

Mr. Bush himself may well try to appeal over the heads of Congress to the
American people, who appear, at least from the evidence of opinion polls, to
have grave doubts of their own, and whom he has never found it as easy to sway
as Ronald Reagan did.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: William H. Webster, C.I.A. director, arriving yesterday at
hearing. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg. A1); Mr. Baker responding to a
question at the hearing.; Senator Paul S. Sarbanes questioning Secretary of
State James A. Baker 3d during Senate Foreign Relations Comittee hearing.
(Photographs by Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times) (pg. A17)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 6, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1181 words


International A3-20

Iraq can maintain combat readiness for no more than nine months if sanctions
continue to hold, the C.I.A. director, William Webster, said. The Iraqi Air
Force's abilities could degrade sooner, he said. Page A1

News analysis: The Democrats have abandoned the bipartisan coaltion supporting
President Bush's gulf policy, publicly attacking what they see as a rush toward
war. A1

News analysis: Military victory could harm U.S. interests A17

Turkey's president says war may now be averted A18

Saudi Arabia promises Egypt $1.5 billion to offset losses A18

Iraq prepares visas for Soviets; Moscow may absorb the cost A18

Israel warned the United States that it must force Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait
and dismantle its military threat. Foreign Minister David Levy said Israel might
attack Iraq if it is not disarmed. A18

U.S. tries to avoid using a U.N. veto in Israel's defense A19

U.S. troops helped quell a rebellion in Panama. The troops were called in by the
Panamanian national police to help capture supporters of a former chief of the
national police, who seized the police headquarters. A1

President Bush flew to Argentina only two days after a violent uprising by army
rebels. He said that "in Latin America, the day of the dictator is over." A15

Brazil's military is increasingly angry about low salaries A14

Five killed, 43 wounded after a campaign rally in Haiti A12

The swift fall of Chad's Government has alarmed diplomats, who say Libya, which
supported the 18-month campaign to topple President Hissen Habre, will use Chad
as a base to extend its influence. A3

In South Africa, Arthur Miller interviews Nelson Mandela A9

Keyna's ruling party rejects calls for multiparty system A10

Organized crime in the Soviet Union appears to be growing. A newspaper has
published a graphic survey of Moscow's underworld replete with accounts of
godfather summits and organized crime "brigades." A20

Karpov rebounds to beat Kasparov in 17th chess match B2

The pre-eminent writer of Albania, Ismail Kadare, said he sought refuge in
France a month ago in the hope "my defection would help the democratization of
my country." A20

Polish candidates deploy a new campaign weapon: their wives A20

Selection of a black candidate stirs Conservatives in Britain A3

Parties in India urge an end to Hindu protests at mosque site A5

Bangladesh's opposition parties name an interim leader A6

U.S. is now ready for formal talks with Vietnam A8

 National A22-24, B14-17, D19

The cost of a schizophrenia drug will be sharply cut by the Sandoz
Pharmaceutical Corporation. The Swiss-owned company had faced pressure from
Congress, hospitals and the public because of the drug's price. A1

Controversial panel supports finding on second-hand smoke A24

A.M.A. now favors reporting names of people with AIDS B4

Study links extra X-rays to their availabilityB15

Report says high-impact aerobics may damage inner ear B17

Gang warfare is paralyzing youths -- socially and physically. Gang members in
wheelchairs have become almost commonplace. For one, his injury has left him a
lot of time to try to reconsider his life in a gang. A1

The School Committee in Boston would be abolished under a plan approved by the
City Council. The Council voted to put the schools under the control of City
Hall. A22

A regulator said he was intimidated by five Senators in April 1987 when he met
with them to discuss the Government's treatment of the Lincoln Savings and Loan
Association. B14

Washington Talk: In the ethics spotlight, the committee itself B14

The captain of the DC-9 that burned after a runway collision said he had not
heard his co-pilot tell air traffic controllers that the plane may have strayed
onto a runway being used for takeoffs. D19

U.S. forms group to review safety of pipelines D19

Astronauts on troubled shuttle mission miss more targets A23

The wearing of Ku Klux Klan hoods can be banned, the Georgia Supreme Court
ruled, overturning a lower court's decision to strike down Georgia's anti-mask
law. B16

Missouri Journal: No earthquake but plenty of profits A22

 Regional B1-12

A compromise on an anti-crime plan for hiring new police officers was reached.
The plan would be financed by a property tax increase, extension of the income
tax surcharge and creation of a new lottery game. A1

Transit officials will cut service on several subway lines late at night and
eliminate dozens of express and local bus routes. The cuts, which take effect in
July, would bring $20.8 million in savings in 1991. A1

Commuters at hearing assail plans to cut L.I.R.R service B2

The debate in Albany over the budget has turned on semantics. Governor Cuomo
denied that deferring pay for state workers was a gimmick and said a surcharge
on hospital revenues was not a tax. B1

Court extends "family" rule to rent-stabilized units B3

The Roman Catholic Archdiocese plans to cut subsidies to its parochial
elementary schools in New York, a move that could reduce revenues of schools in
poorer areas by 25 percent or more. B1

A plan to give condoms to students in New York City high schools was criticized
by several members of the Board of Education during an vitriolic debate. B1
Saying war is declared, SUNY newspaper creates chaos B3

No progress reported in talks at The Daily News B7

Governor O'Neill's appointees are bracing for his retirement, which is proving
neither clean nor painless. Some hope to keep their jobs; others are trying to
find new ones in economically uncertain times. B1

Neediest Cases B6

Business Digest D1

 The Home Section

Touch a screen, do a chore C1

Quilts that warm in new ways C1

Postwar skimp: cozy, if ghastly C1

 Arts/Entertainment

Rushdie leaves hiding, briefly C16

Soviet cultural paths cross in Washington C17

Big Giacometti show in Madrid C17

Lawsuits seek truth in pop-music labeling C17

Music: A saxophone opera C17

Word and Image: NOW chapter boycotting book C17

 Sports

Baseball: Mets sign Vince Coleman D23

Padres and Blue Jays exchange All-Stars D23

Basketball: Redmen win in overtime D23

Column: Vecsey on Knicks D23

Football: Vikings a threat to Giants D25

Horse Racing: Valenzuela seeks to avoid expulsion D23

Health Page B18

Being a woman in modern times is a recipe for depression

Sunlight and breast cancer: danger in darkness?

Obituaries

William Hall Wendel, former head of Kennecott Copper D20

Alfonso Ossorio, artist D21

Lucy S. Dawidowicz, scholar of Jewish life D21

Edward Binns, actor D21

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

EditorialsA26

Peace: Can it be? In Lebanon?

Justice misfires

Wrong on teachers' pay hike

Topics: Token investments

Letters A26

Anna Quindlen: Consent of Congress A27

William Safire: Trusting our allies A27

Clyde V. Prestowitz Jr. and Robert W. Jerome: GATT A27

John R. MacArthur: Chilled by Hoover's ghost A27

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 6, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

PUBLIC & PRIVATE;
Consent of Congress

BYLINE: By Anna Quindlen

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 770 words


The courtroom spoke in small ways of old familiar differences in style and
viewpoint. The close shaves and the briefcases were in evidence on one side, the
facial hair and the backpacks on the other, as Judge Harold H. Greene listened
to arguments designed to lead him where no judge has gone before. Even the name
of the action speaks of deep divisions; Ronald V. Dellums et al. v. George Bush
demands that the President of the United States be barred from going to war
against Iraq without Congressional approval.

I read the Constitution the way that any lay person raised beneath its umbrella
does, and while I know that Article I, section 8 has been a subject for debate
and scholarship for many years, it seems rather clear to me.

The Congress declares war. The men who built this tripartite system from scratch
knew too much about governments in which all the power rested with a single
individual. They spread it around. How far it should be spread has always been
debatable, as it was this week in Judge Greene's courtroom in Washington.

Poor George Bush, defendant.  There has never been a more likely time for the
people to take a rigorous, critical, unforgiving look at how this country gets
itself into armed conflict with others. The hearings airing all the
disagreements and all the recent regrets are being held day after day.  The
troops are in the desert, waiting. The element of surprise is largely absent,
unless Saddam Hussein is stupid as well as malevolent. And so if the President
eschews the consent of the legislative branch, it will not be for lack of golden
opportunity. It will be because he is either imperial or fearful, the actions of
a President who believes he has unlimited rights or limited support.

It was only coincidence that arguments in the matter were heard the same week as
the anniversary of Pearl Harbor, the day Japanese planes gave both the executive
and the legislative branches of our Government what amounted to an engraved
invitation to enter World War II. That's the last time Congress approved a
formal declaration of war. It's probably surprising to some Americans that while
we've used troops abroad more than 100 times, Congress has only formally
declared war on five occasions.

If the time for combat comes, this should be the sixth.

There's not much of a premium for George Bush in that. If Congress does vote to
declare war on Iraq, it will only temporarily lift the burden of responsibility
from the President's shoulders. No one ever marched in front of the Capitol
chanting, "Hey, Hey, House of Representatives, How many kids did you kill
today?" despite Congressional approval of the Tonkin Gulf resolution. A
President carries his wars with him into history, like a heavy package he cannot
put down.

But Congressional approval might imply something that has been conspicuously
missing from this conflict since summer turned into fall: an American consensus.
In our messy, troublesome, grand system of checks and balances, the ultimate
check -- the checkmate -- comes in the voting booth. The usual suspects have
brought this action against the President, 54 Democratic members of Congress who
can be written off within the Oval Office largely as liberal partisan peacenik
types. The President would be wrong to do this, because their action illuminates
something within the electorate, some desire to have this war, if it is
necessary, handled cleanly, with all the t's crossed and the i's dotted, so that
we can live with ourselves when the coffins start to come home.

The lesson of recent months is that Americans are weary of sneaky wars, wars
that pass themselves off as something less until it is too late, until we become
so busy with the business of digging the graves that we cannot kid ourselves
anymore. We know a war in peacekeeping-force clothing when we see one. The
lessons of the half-century since Congress last declared war can be read in the
citations in Dellums v. Bush: Mitchell v. Laird. Holtzman v. Schlesinger. Lowry
v. Reagan. The President, assuring us that there will not be another Vietnam
here, knows we've learned these lessons.

That assurance is not enough. The defendant in the action brought by Ronald V.
Dellums et al. could render the matter moot by asking for a declaration of war
from Congress if he believes that war is essential. If he is not confident of
the votes, perhaps that should tell him something about the consent of the
governed. That may be a phrase that experts have argued about for years. But it
seems clear to me, and clear to me too that we haven't arrived at it yet.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 7, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

STANDOFF IN THE GULF: Washington Talk;
Bush Told To Listen To Voices Of Dissent

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 690 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 6


Zbigniew Brzezinski, who served as national security adviser in the Carter era,
joined the chorus of warnings about President Bush's policy in the Persian Gulf
this week, telling a hearing on Capitol Hill that he was worried, among other
things, about "the very narrow decision-making process in this Administration."

"Alternate strategic perspectives," put "very directly and at the highest
level," were needed by all Presidents, Mr. Brzezinski said. He cited the role of
Under Secretary of State George Ball as "an in-house dissident" during the
Vietnam War.

"I don't have a sense that in this Administration the decision-making circle is
very wide," he said. "I think it's basically confined to four people, and I
don't have a sense that there are fundamental disagreements. There are strengths
in that, but there's also the danger that you begin to have a situation in which
views are reinforced rather than examined."

Right from the start, foreign policy professionals have complained that Mr.
Bush, something of a foreign policy professional himself, has drawn the circle
too tight, limiting discussions of really important decisions to himself,
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Brent
Scowcroft, his national security adviser.

The problem has been complicated, the critics have argued, because Mr. Baker
keeps his own circle of advisers equally restricted, cutting even Under
Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger, one of the most respected active
members of the Foreign Service, out of the loop on many crucial policy
questions.

While things were going smoothly, such views were little heeded. But during the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearings at which Mr. Brzezinski testified,
several Democratic Senators -- including the usually quite temperate Paul S.
Sarbanes of Maryland -- more or less accused Mr. Baker (and by extension Mr.
Bush) of having such closed minds that they didn't bother to read expert
testimony on important matters like the efficacy of sanctions.

Walter Williams, a professor at the University of Washington who toiled in the
bureauracy in the Johnson Administration, believes that episodes like this one
are part of an ongoing process -- a continuing tendency not only for
decision-makers to cut themselves off from the best advice available within the
Government but also todowngrade the quality of the Civil Service and the
analysis it delivers.

In a new book, "Mismanaging America: The Rise of the Anti-Analytic Presidency"
(University Press of Kansas), and in a paper delivered last fall at a symposium
at Gettysburg College, Professor Williams argues that the result has been
"hollow, incompetent government."

Mr. Bush, like most Presidents since John F. Kennedy, has shunned the
bureaucrats "to rely on his little circle of generalists," Mr. Williams writes.
"Professional civil servants offer a tremendous store of knowledge and
experience that can be used effectively by political appointees."

"Just as not all civil servants are intelligent, cooperative and innocent of
harboring partisan views, so not all are stupid, intransigent or closet
enemies," he says. "Nearly 30 years of presidencies in which the latter
combination was assumed has proved the dangers of such an approach."

Professor Williams focuses mostly on domestic matters, where the counterparts of
Mr. Baker and Mr. Cheney are Richard G. Darman, the budget director, and John H.
Sununu, the White House chief of staff, a pair criticized earlier this year for
giving the President bad advice that led to mishandling the budget crisis.

Bu the problems are parallel. The State Department's staff of Arab experts has
been greatly depleted in recent years by retirements and resignations, some of
the latter motivated by the belief that expertise and experience were going out
of fashion.

April C.Glaspie, the American Ambassador to Baghdad, was on leave when Saddam
Hussein attacked on Aug. 2. Many believe she is the leading Foreign Service
authority on the Arab world, but she remains in Washington, with little role to
play except twisting slowly in the wind.

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 7, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

HOMICIDE RATE UP FOR YOUNG BLACKS

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 870 words


The homicide rate among black men from the ages of 15 to 24 rose by two-thirds
in the five years through 1988, the Federal Centers for Disease Control said
yesterday.

In the latest evidence of a continuing increase in violence among young blacks,
Dr. Robert Froehlke, the principal author of the report, said more than 95
percent of the increase grew out of a rise in the rate at which these young men
were being killed with guns.

"In some areas of the country it is now more likely for a black male between his
15th and 25th birthday to die from homicide than it was for a United States
soldier to be killed on a tour of duty in Vietnam," said Dr. Froehlke, an
epidemiologist with the agency.

Rise Among Adolescents

The most recent figures, collated from the agency's National Center for Health
Statistics, showed that one in a thousand young black males died in a homicide.
The rate was about six times that of all people in the same age group. That gap
has been steadily increasing, Dr. Froehlke said.

He said the high homicide rate among young black males was a concern of public
health officials, even though it was "not a disease in the classic sense,"
because it was ravaging the community of young black men.

And, he said, the figures showed that the rate among black males was rising
fastest among those of ages 15 to 19, indicating that violent death was becoming
increasingly a problem among adolescents.

'An Endangered Species'

"Young blacks are an endangered species," said Charles Norman, who counsels
inner-city gang members in Los Angeles under a local government program. "They
are dying out, like the condor, out there on the streets.

"Violence has become a way of life," he said. "Homicide has gotten to the point
where it's almost a recreation."

Among factors contributing to the rising numbers of killings, the report listed
"immediate access to firearms, alcohol and substance abuse, drug trafficking,
poverty, racial discrimination and cultural acceptance of violent behavior."

Dr. Froehlke said the spread of violence through poor black communities,
including drug and gang violence, could have a numbing effect that leads to
further violence.

Dr. Frederick P. Rivara, director of the Harborview Injury Prevention Center, a
Seattle hospital that has studied firearm injuries, blamed the frustration and
anger bred by poverty, along with the widespread availability of firearms and
the spread of drugs and gangs.

"I think one of the reasons that more isn't being done about it is that it
affects minorities more than it affects other groups in our society," he said.
"If the homicide rate were the same among white males in suburbia, you better
believe there would be something done."

Trend Continues

The report by the Atlanta-based agency was based on tabulations of all the death
certificates in the United States, on which doctors and morticians list causes
of death, and covered the years 1978 to 1987. It found a decline in the rate
from 1980 to 1984, then a sharp increase from 1985 to 1987, the last year
included in the report.

The author said 1988 figures, which became available after the report was
completed, showed that the upward trend continued. He said other preliminary
figures gathered by the Federal Bureau of Investigation showed a further
increase through June of this year.

The increase from 1984 to 1987 was highest in Florida (88 percent), New York (84
percent), Michigan (78 percent), California (71 percent), the District of
Columbia (40 percent) and Missouri (22 percent).

The report followed a study released one week ago by the National Center for
Health Statistics that showed a dramatic drop in the life expectancy of black
people, falling to 69.2 years for babies born in 1988, compared to 75.6 years
for white people.

Like the statistics released yesterday, the earlier report showed black males
had the lowest life expectancy and showed an increasing gap between the rates
for black and white people.

Call for Urgent Measures

The most recent report noted earlier findings that homicide was the leading
cause of death for black males of ages 15 to 24. In 1987 homicides accounted for
42 percent of deaths among men in this group.

In the 10 years from 1978-87, it said, 20,315 young black males were killed, for
an average annual rate of 73.1 per 100,000. It said firearms were involved in
15,781 of these homicides, or 78 percent.

In the same period, it said, average annual homicide rates for young black males
were four to five times higher than for young black females, five to eight times
higher than for young white males and 15 to 22 times higher than for young white
females.

Viewed from a medical perspective, Dr. Froehlke said, the fast-rising death toll
calls for urgent public health measures.

"If there were a disease that was causing 40 percent of deaths in a group that
should be at the peak of physical health and if there were a substantial
increase in the rate of deaths in that disease caused by a particular agent
almost all the time," he said, referring to firearms, "there would be
substantial public health and other agency efforts in trying to address it."

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "The Gun Factor" showing the homicide rate per 100,000
population, for black males ages 15 to 24. (Source: Centers for Disease Control)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 7, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

East Timor: The Shame Endures

SECTION: Section A; Page 34; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 431 words


A European empire retrenches, leaving a distant dependency to fend for itself.
The vulnerable enclave is then invaded and annexed by its powerful neighbor, a
major oil exporter with a formidable army and a notorious human rights record.

Kuwait in 1990? Yes, but also East Timor in 1975. With a few honorable
exceptions, the rest of the world winked at Indonesia's brazen aggression then.
Worse still, the winking continues today.

Today marks the 15th anniversary of Indonesia's grab. How fitting it would be if
President Bush used the occasion to condemn what America never should have
condoned in the first place.

Portugal ruled East Timor for 450 years. Lisbon's 1974 revolution brought
instant decolonization, and instant civil war in East Timor. Fretilin, the
leftist contender, triumphed. On Nov. 28, 1975, East Timor declared its
independence; on Dec. 7, Indonesia, the ruler of West Timor, invaded.

The invasion, which used U.S.-supplied military equipment in violation of
American law, came one day after President Ford and Secretary of State Kissinger
left Jakarta. Saigon had fallen to the North Vietnamese, and Washington was
ready to accept Jakarta's claim that it acted to halt the Communist tide
coursing through the region.

Between 100,000 and 200,000 Timorese died between 1974 and 1980, most at the
hands of the Indonesian Army. One-seventh of the territory's population was
annihilated, proportionately a steeper toll than that inflicted on Cambodia by
Pol Pot. To hide its crimes, Jakarta sealed off East Timor from most foreign
contact until last year.

Since 1982 a native Timorese Governor, Mario Vegas Carrascaloa, has tried to
soften official repression. But on a recent visit to the territory, The Times's
Steven Erlanger found only limited gains. He reported that the principal city,
Dili, "has the atmosphere of a police state," and that in the countryside,
civilians have been killed for such offenses as inattention during the raising
of the Indonesian flag.

Earlier this year, after Indonesian police beat Timorese who had met with U.S.
Ambassador John Monjo, the Ambassador registered his official concern. But
Washington seems reluctant to take a stronger stand on the Timor issue for fear
of antagonizing Jakarta. Last month 223 U.S. representatives from both parties
signed a letter asking the Bush Administration to use its influence to help ease
repression and encourage peace talks.

For 15 years this aggression has stood. Even at this late date, President Bush
could serve America's principles and honor by raising his voice.

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 8, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Fight Guns, Not Just Drugs

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 488 words


The homicide rate for young black men has jumped by two-thirds in recent years,
reaching levels in some areas that now exceed the death rate for American
soldiers in Vietnam. The vast majority of those killings were committed with
guns, according to a new Federal analysis. Meanwhile, murder rates for all races
in New York and the District of Columbia are soaring to record levels this year,
continuing a sadly predictable trend. But police in those cities add a
surprising footnote: Fewer murders are drug-related. That demonstrates how much
reducing urban violence requires tough policies against guns as well as drugs.

A recent weekend's violence in the nation's capital has already pushed total
homicides this year past last year's record of 434. In New York City, a string
of homicides last weekend brought the unofficial count to more than 2,000, also
a historic high.

Police find fewer murders related to drug dealing or addiction. In Washington,
such homicides account for only 39 percent of the total, compared with 52
percent last year and 66 percent in 1988. In New York, the figure for this year
is 25 percent, down from 28 percent last year and 38 percent in 1980.

Increases in urban homicides appear to arise from increases in juvenile crime.
Police report that schoolyard fights once settled with fists or knives now
routinely escalate to shootouts. Two of New York City's recent murders were
committed during struggles over leather coats. Incredibly, a 3-year-old boy took
a loaded handgun to a nursery school in Brooklyn this week, becoming perhaps the
youngest juvenile to bear firearms in the city's history. In Washington so far
this year, more than 60 juveniles have been charged with homicide, a figure
similar to that of last year. Yet in the eight previous years, there were only a
total of 60 juvenile homicide arrests. Nationally, homicide arrests of people
between the ages of 10 and 17 have climbed sharply since 1984.

The slaughter may be indirectly related to drugs; crack dealing gave countless
teen-agers the wherewithal to buy sophisticated guns that now are common
features of the adolescent demimonde.

Whatever the cause, the proliferation of powerful weapons demands a strong
response. New York's Police Commissioner, Lee Brown, has taken some promising
steps, including creating a task force to target groups that import guns from
states with lax laws, and cracking down on local abuse of Federal licenses for
gun dealers.

There is also a glaring need for more support from Congress, which is now so
intimidated by the gun lobby that it resists even popular, sensible laws to
limit interstate gun traffic and youngsters' access to firearms.

The need to keep guns from juveniles is at least as obvious as the need to limit
their access to drugs and alcohol. As urban bloodshed mounts, perhaps even the
gun lobby will acknowledge that children with guns kill people.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "But the Total Is Up" lists homocides in Washington D.C. from
1988 to 1990. (Source: Metropolitan Police Department)

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Still Bored, Still Dealing Dope

BYLINE: By James Atlas; James Atlas is an editor of The New York Times Magazine.
He is at work on a biography of Saul Bellow.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 942 words



SMACK GODDESS
By Richard Stratton.
388 pp. New York:
Birch Lane Press/Carol Publishing Group. $18.95.

"SMACK GODDESS" comes adorned with a blurb from Norman Mailer, lauding Richard
Stratton's characters ("realized with the depth one expects from a serious
novel") and the veracity of his plot, which "takes us through a love story,
murder, an exciting trial and a jailbreak -- all remarkably believable." The
author's note on the book jacket reports that in 1982 Mr. Stratton "was
arrested, convicted and sentenced for conspiracy to import marijuana and
hashish. He wrote 'Smack Goddess' while in prison." To celebrate the book's
publication, Mr. Mailer gave a party for his underworld find at the Century
Association.

Does this ring a bell? Thirteen years ago Mr. Mailer discovered another
promising author who had come out of that unlikely writers' workshop, the
Federal prison system. Jack Henry Abbott, a convicted murderer who had been in
jail for nearly 25 years, had initiated a correspondence with Mr. Mailer, who
was so enthralled by the charged rhetoric of Mr. Abbott's prose that he got him
a book contract and sponsored him for parole. Six weeks after being released
from prison, in 1981, Mr. Abbott provoked a dispute over use of the men's room
in a Lower East Side restaurant and stabbed to death a young actor and
playwright who worked there as a waiter. Mr. Mailer was philosophical: "It's a
tragedy all around. . . ."

At least this time he's pushing an ex-con who can tell a story. For all its
defects of style and taste, "Smack Goddess" is an absorbing tale. The goddess of
the title, Sonia (Sonny) Byrne-Downes is a decadent upper-class Englishwoman who
gets her kicks by running a drug ring out of her Upper West Side brownstone. In
her olive green jump suit and black karate belt, writes Mr. Stratton, "She
looked like some sexy mock commando, a masochist's fantasy from the cover of a
pulp magazine."

When Sonny gets busted in a raid that makes headlines in The New York Post, a
private eye and attorney by the name of Arthur Grimm is assigned to work on the
case. Grimm, through whose eyes the story is largely told, is a curious figure
-- part gangster, part 1960's fugitive, part high-class lawyer. He knows his way
around the back rooms of Mafia hangouts in East Harlem, and has a horse farm in
Connecticut. Grimm is a gumshoe intellectual -- a familiar type by now in
literature if not in life.

Mr. Stratton's book is instructive; it offers a real inside glimpse of the drug
trade. "Smack Goddess" is dense with underworld lore: tapped phones, coded
conversations, the intricacies of heroin distribution around the globe. (One of
the book's many subplots, involving a music promoter with a castle in
Southampton who finds himself on the wrong end of a deal and winds up a corpse
in the California desert, is clearly based on the life and death of Roy Radin, a
failed show-business mogul murdered in 1983.) Mr. Stratton's grasp of the law
enforcement side is equally impressive; his courtroom scenes are aswarm with
undercover agents and hit men, crooked lawyers and Mafiosi. The prosecutors in
"Smack Goddess" are just as corrupt as the drug kingpins. There's no such thing
as justice; only deals.

Mr. Stratton has an eye for the telling detail -- Sonny, for instance, has "a
big face, one of those horsey British faces that is saved from being
lantern-jawed by high cheekbones and a wide, voluptuous mouth." But his ear for
the vernacular is weirdly archaic: "I need your noodle on this one." "Let's blow
this popsicle stand." Does anyone still talk like that? And there's something
out of focus about his evocation of place. The beach houses in Malibu, the
bungalows at the Beverly Hills Hotel, the stretch limousines and Caribbean
compounds seem faintly unreal, as if seen through a dope haze (or dimly
remembered from a jail cell). Mr. Stratton's version of the 60's is a cliche:
Grimm's mind was blown in Vietnam; Sonny made the hippie trek to Nepal in search
of hashish; a rock star named Rickie Rude started out doing gigs in "Harvard
Square and Club 47 where Joan Baez, Tom Rush, Pete Seeger and many others
played." It all feels very stilted and worked up, as if the author wasn't there.

"I may be a criminal, but I have values," Sonny says, refusing to testify
against her partners in the trade. Does she? What motivates these characters is
boredom, a "need to live on the edge," as Grimm puts it, "the thin line where
nothing but survival mattered." The trouble is, Mr. Stratton never really
examines this impulse. There's none of the nihilistic craziness of William
Burroughs or Jean Genet in his bland meditations on criminality, nor any
suggestion of remorse. The message of "Smack Goddess" is banal: Crime pays. In
the end, Sonny escapes from a minimum security prison and fetches up in the
paradise of Jamaica, still bored, still dealing dope -- yet somehow the very
picture of health and vitality. Never mind that a lot of people, including loved
ones, have ended up in dumpsters or otherwise dead. The notion of consequences,
of a moral life, is absent from this book. "Smack Goddess" is about obtaining
satisfaction -- no matter how. Sonny and Grimm are empty souls; their love is
simply a matter of great sex. "They indulged themselves in their seclusion," Mr.
Stratton writes of the couple's reunion. "They sat on the bed and slowly
undressed each other, prolonging each divestiture as though discovering each
other's nakedness for the first time. Then Sonny got to her knees beside the
bed. . . ."

Stendhal claimed that bad taste leads to crime. The reverse is also true.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Business Diary/December 2-7

BYLINE: By Allen R. Myerson

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1533 words



COMPANIES

Phones, Computers and Price

Lawsuits, rebuffs and a hostile bid might not seem like the stuff of courtship,
but multibillion-dollar corporations don't conduct their romances like everyone
else. The NCR Corporation, the nation's fifth-largest computer maker, rejected
the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's takeover offer of $6 billion, or
$90 a share. A.T.& T., whose own efforts to market computers have been costly
disgraces, desires NCR so ardently that it offered a 60 percent premium over the
stock's previous price. NCR initially resorted to the "Garbo defense." Said
NCR's chairman and chief executive, Charles E. Exley Jr., "We want to be left
alone." Then his board members decided they would rather be left wealthy, and
offered to negotiate at $125 a share. Whereupon A.T.& T. turned its $90 bid into
a hostile offer. Analysts treated all the hubub as tactical -- a prelude, said
Jack Grubman of PaineWebber, to a friendly deal for at least $100 a share.
"A.T.& T. wants to get this done in the nicest, most friendly way possible," he
said. "It's just a matter of price."

Bankrupt, Again

For Continental Airlines, bankruptcy is becoming the continuation of business by
other means. The nation's fifth-largest airline filed for bankruptcy protection
on Monday while assuring passengers and travel agents that it would continue to
do business as usual. The last time the airline filed for bankruptcy was in
1983, in the grip of a strike, and it resumed operating at a fraction of its
former size. Continental's current problems are the huge debts created by Frank
Lorenzo, the former chairman, and the high oil prices that have accompanied the
Mideast crisis. "I think the creditors understand that this bankruptcy is
substantially different," said Thomas Longman, an analyst at Bear Stearns. "I
don't see any reason to think they will be out of business." It helps that under
Hollis L. Harris, the current chairman, Continental has taught cabin attendants
to treat passengers better than the baggage.

Talley's Tally

From corporate headquarters in Phoenix came word that Talley Industries Inc.
would eliminate its quarterly 12 1/2-cent dividend. From the board meeting in
Miami came word that the dividend would be paid. Turns out that the company's
clever administrators had written press releases to suit every possible board
decision. Fortunately for stockholders, the Miami announcement was right.

Yes, There Will Be a Macy's

R.H. Macy & Company took out a full-page advertisement last week to say it can
survive the Christmas season without "miracles on 34th Street." "We expect it to
be slow and we are prepared for it," wrote Edward S. Finkelstein, chairman and
chief executive. Macy's is bowed under $5 billion in debt and mounting losses.
The ad, in Women's Wear Daily, might have worried the very suppliers and
creditors it was supposed to reassure. In the movie, "Miracle on 34th Street,"
after all, a headline-conscious Macy's executive says he believes in Santa
Claus.

Fed Helps Banks to a Hold

You can't just tell bankers to make more loans. You have to offer them money.
After months of urging the banks to stoke the economy by loosening credit, the
Federal Reserve Board on Tuesday came up with an incentive. The Fed eliminated a
requirement that banks hold in reserves 3 percent of their corporate
certificates of deposit. The action frees about $13 billion for new lending, and
is expected to increase bank profits by about $1 billion a year, mostly at the
largest institutions. Bank stocks jumped from dismal levels to merely low, as
some industry analysts upgraded their recommendations from sell to hold.

Sandoz Cuts a Price, a Bit

No blood, no drug. That had been the Sandoz Pharmaceutical Corporation's
profitable slogan. The company forced schizophrenia victims to buy a
blood-monitoring rig that pushed the cost of treatment with the drug clozapine
to $8,944 a year. Many Federal and state hospitals ruled the drug out instead of
paying such a price. Under pressure from Congress and advocates for the mentally
ill, the Swiss-owned company has agreed to sell the drug alone, cutting the
price to about $5,000 in the United States. That's still much higher than the
government-controlled prices of $2,500 in Germany and $1,000 in Britain.

<

INTERNATIONAL



Japan's Mideast Role

One Japanese export unlikely to grow is aid to the American-led military effort
in the Middle East. Although Japan buys a higher portion of its oil from the
Middle East than the United States does, Japanese leaders only reluctantly
raised their contribution, from $1 billion to $4 billion -- "microscopic,"
considering the size of the Japanese economy, former Commerce Secretary Peter G.
Peterson, chairman of the Blackstone Group investment bank, recently told the
Japanese Chamber of Commerce and Industry in New York. Shuzo Muramoto, former
president of Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank, said in New York last week that Japan already
gives more foreign aid than the United States, and added, "Japanese resources
are not as abundant as you may think." But Henry A. Kissinger, the former
Secretary of State, told the Japan Society of one other reason the Japanese were
unlikely to raise their support for American forces in the Middle East: the
troops are already there. "Make sure the next time military peace keeping is
undertaken by the United States, we get our commitments before we go in," he
advised.

Vietnam's Sorry Economic State

As Vietnam begs for foreign aid, United States officials ponder whether to end
their economic blockade. C. Peter Timmer, a Harvard economist, said that the
Vietnamese dong is worth so little that dollars are the accepted medium of
exchange. The 5,000 dong note, the nation's largest, is worth less than a
dollar. Vietnam's leaders published a plan last week to save the economy from
socialist strangulation by turning to free markets. They aim to cut the annual
inflation rate from 50 percent to 10 percent by 1995 and double income per
person to about $200 and increase exports fivefold by the year 2000. "We are
still among the poorest nations of the world," the plan says. Jane Werner, an
associate research scholar at Columbia University, expects that steps toward
normalization of relations with the United States next year will help Vietnam
compensate for the loss of Soviet aid. Several American companies want
Vietnamese business.

British Airways Reaches Out

British Airways is finding its way from England to Europe without the help of
the channel tunnel. The company said last week that it wants to join German
investors in forming a new Berlin-based airline that will give Lufthansa more
competition. It already has asked the European Commission's approval for sharing
ownership of the Belgian airline, Sabena, with Dutch and Belgian partners. And,
farther east, it seeks to start Air Russia in Moscow. Once a dreary
Government-owned airline, British Airways has transformed itself since its 1987
privatization into an ambitious international competitor.



THE ECONOMY



Jobs Down, Unemployment Up

The nation is losing jobs far more rapidly than economists or Federal officials
had feared. Friday's reported decline of 450,000 civilian jobs caused many
economists to abandon their hopes for only a mild recession. The November
unemployment rate rose two-tenths of 1 percent to 5.9 percent. In the view of
Allen Sinai, the Boston Company's chief economist, the latest figures "suggest
the cumulative, downward spiral that the Federal Reserve chairman said was not
in evidence." The Federal Reserve eased on Friday, and several banks lowered
their prime lending rate from 10 to 9 3/4 percent.

An Abrupt Halt in Trade Talks

European leaders faced with 30,000 rampaging farmers on one side and renewed
trade barriers on the other have decided that sharpened pitchforks can do them
more harm. The European Community refused last week to meet American demands for
deep reductions in farm subsidies. Crucial trade talks in Brussels then came to
a halt after four years of delicate preparation. Negotiators hope the talks will
resume next year.

The Plunge in Purchasing

The last time purchasing managers were so pessimistic, the nation was caught in
the recession of the early 1980's. An index based on a survey of the nation's
industrial purchasing managers fell to 41.3 percent in November, down from 43.3
percent the month before. Roseanne M. Cahn, an economist at First Boston, said
that the index has already fallen below the level typical of a mild recession.
"I think it will go lower," she added. "The weakness feeds on itself."

In Brief

Retailers reported slower holiday sales than last year. Sears, risking an
intensified price war, announced that its everyday low prices would become lower
still, with the usual after-Christmas reductions coming before.

As prospects for avoiding a Middle East war improved, oil prices fell $2.27 a
barrel to $26.58 last week. Economists said that lower oil prices would only
gradually help pull the nation from a recession.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Charles Exley of NCR, reluctant (Reuters); Shuzo Muramoto; From
"Miracle on 34th Street." Continental Airline planes (Associated Press)

Graphs: Civilian unemployment rate, Dec. 1989-Nov. 1990 (Source: Bureau of Labor
Statistics); Citicorp's stock price, daily closings, late October-Dec. 7, 1990
(Source: Datastream); "The Plunge in Purchasing" tracking the yearly highs and
lows in the Purchasing Managers Index, 1982-1990 (1990, through November)
(Source: National Association of Purchasing Managers)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Northeast Notebook: Chicopee, Mass.;
Germans Build A Wire Factory

SECTION: Section 10; Page 13; Column 1; Real Estate Desk

LENGTH: 427 words

DATELINE: ANNE-GERARD FLYNN


A NUREMBERG maker of copper wire is entering the American market with a
58,000-square-foot factory on seven and a half acres of what once was part of an
Air Force base in this western Massachusetts city.

The company, Leonische Drahtwerke, with sales estimated at $350 million a year,
is investing $3.5 million in land, the building and equipment to be brought in
from Europe.

Robert H. Pueschel, who manages a recently formed subsidiary, Leonische of
America, said the Chicopee site near Westover Air Force base was chosen because
it is only a few miles from both Interstate 91 and the Massachusetts Turnpike.
He also cited the city's water and electric rates, among the lowest in the
state, and its finances -- it was one of the few cities in the Commonwealth to
have a surplus at the end of its last fiscal year.

The land, bought in May, is part of a 101-acre air park -- an industrial site
with access to an airport -- opened this year by Westover Development
Corporation. The company is a nonprofit organization based on the site that has
developed two other industrial parks as well as the Westover Metropolitan
Airport on surplus land at Westover Air Force Base. After the Vietnam War, 2,500
of Westover's 4,500 acres were sold and it became a reservist base.

Allan W. Blair, president of Westover Development, said Leonische was the first
foreign company to invest in a factory site at his corporation's air parks.
Ground was broken in October, with opening scheduled in September. The air
park's other tenant, Dennison Stationery Products, is building a $16 million,
300,000-square-foot plant on 36 acres, scheduled to open in January.

Westover's two other parks, opened in the 70's, have 54 companies with more than
2,000 employees. Among the largest is Sundor Brands, a fruit-juice company owned
by Proctor & Gamble, which is completing a 100,000-square-foot addition to its
125,000-square-foot plant. Mr. Blair said the parks have about 200 acres left
for development. Land sells for $50,000 to $75,000 an acre, depending on its
proximity to Westover Metropolitan Airport.

Leonische is the second German company in recent months to announce construction
plans in Massachusetts. BASF, a diversified international company, with American
headquarters in Parsippany, N.J., and $26 billion in sales worldwide, plans to
break ground in nearby Wooster in February on a 300,000-square-foot building for
its new BASF Bioresearch Corporation. The project, expected to take more than
two years, represents an investment of some $100 million by BASF.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing: Copper wire plant planned for German concern in Chicopee,
Mass. (Associated Builders)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Magazine Is Found Liable in Killing After Ad

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 490 words

DATELINE: MONTGOMERY, Ala., Dec. 8


Soldier of Fortune magazine on Friday was found liable for $12.4 million in
damages for publishing a "gun for hire" advertisement blamed in the killing of a
businessman in 1985.

A lawyer for the sons of the businessman, Richard Braun, had urged the Federal
District Court jury here to send a message to publishers about responsibility
for their advertising. Lawyers for the magazine argued that the publication
should not be held liable and that publishers had no duty to research the
background of their advertisers.

The lawsuit had sought $120 millionin damages. In a similar, previous suit, a
jury in Houston returned a $9.4 million verdict in finding the publication
liable in a woman's slaying in 1985. But that award was reversed on appeal in
1989, and the Supreme Court let the decision stand.

Slaying of Father in 1985

In the Alabama case, Michael and Ian Braun, who live here, said a "gun for hire"
classified advertisement in the magazine's June 1985 issue, by Richard Savage of
Knoxville, Tenn., was responsible for their father's death. The Brauns contended
that their father's business associate, Bruce Gastwirth, had used the
advertisement to arrange to have their father killed.

Michael, then 16 years old, was wounded in the Aug. 27, 1985, attack in the
family's driveway in Atlanta.

Mr. Savage's advertisement read: "GUN FOR HIRE: 37-year-old professional
mercenary desires jobs. Vietnam veteran." The advertisement promised discretion
and privacy and went on: "Bodyguard, courier and other special skills. All jobs
considered."

In 1986, the magazine stopped running such advertisements.

Mr. Gastwirth, Mr. Savage and two associates were convicted of murdering Mr.
Braun. Mr. Savage had already been convicted in a similar murder-for-hire case
in West Palm Beach, Fla., as well as several attempted assassinations that went
awry. They are now serving prison sentences.

 Defense Argument to Jury

Jim Garrett, a defense lawyer for the magazine, told the jury, "A publisher has
no duty to investigate" every advertiser, but if the magazine had checked Mr.
Savage, it would have found that he served in Vietnam and was a courier under
Gen. William C. Westmoreland.

Trial testimony showed Mr. Savage had no felony record when he placed the
advertisement, and Mr. Garrett said the advertisement "did not contain a clearly
identifiable risk that it is an offer to commit murder."A lawyer for the Braun
family, Steve Glassroth, said Soldier of Fortune should have been aware of news
articles about a series of unrelated crimes in the early 1980's tied to its
classified advertising. Those reports should have stopped the magazine from
running the personal services advertisements long before 1986, he argued.

Robert Brown, the magazine's founder and publisher, denied seeing any of those
articles. He said he ran the advertisements to help Vietnam veterans find jobs
using their military skills.


LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

STANDOFF IN THE GULF;
Needs of Family and Country Clash in Persian Gulf Mission

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1716 words


Her husband has been mobilized and is about to be sent to the Persian Gulf. Her
own deployment, also as an Army reservist, is likely to follow, a few months
after her first child was born.

And so Sgt. Twila Erickson-Schamer passes these jittery days at home in
Kirkland, Wash., cuddling 10-week-old Jacob, waiting for her sister to arrive
from Arizona to serve as the baby's guardian and wondering what ever made her
think she could be both a soldier and a mother at the same time.

"There are so many feelings, how can I possibly sort them out?" Sergeant Schamer
asked, adding that she never expected the escalating military call-ups or the
storm of emotions brought on by first-time motherhood. "I've tried to convince
myself that it's going to be O.K. and displayed that attitude to other people.
If I didn't, I'd be in a constant state of emotional breakdown. I'd be crying
all the time."

Sergeant Schamer's situation is a dramatic measure of how different this
military crisis is from any other in history. For her and other parents like
her, the demands of war are colliding with those of the evolving American
family, and they are facing a child-care nightmare that has forced some women to
leave children with baby sitters and head for the Persian Gulf.

Who Would Care for the Children?

In many ways, the armed forces simply mirror the changes in the civilian work
force in the last two decades, when increasing numbers of women, two-career
couples and single parents have awkwardly juggled the demands of jobs and
family. But for parents poised to fight in the gulf, the problems are starker --
exaggerated by distance, danger and the shadow of death.

When the military began recruiting women to a peacetime, volunteer force, it
took on a host of unanticipated problems.

Would women with children be ready for instant deployment anywhere in the world,
just like men and childless service members? Who would care for the children
left behind when mothers who once tended the hearth were instead mobilized? And
if women with children balked at certain forms of service, would they find
themselves suddenly unwelcome, told they must play by the rules or not play at
all?

For now, the armed forces have answered these questions by applying identical
rules to women, who must be ready for deployment after a six-week maternity
leave. Single parents of either sex, or those in dual military marriages, are
required to file plans spelling out who will tend their offspring. When
satisfactory arrangements cannot be made, barring rare exemptions, the service
member is discharged, sometimes honorably and sometimes not, at the discretion
of the commander.

Lori Moore at Fort Benning, Ga., was unwilling to go to the Persian Gulf because
her children could not adjust to living with relatives and thus received a
general discharge from the Army, a discharge less desirable than an honorable
one. The experience changed her mind about many things.

"This is all new for America and we're feeling our way blindly through this
deployment," Ms. Moore said. "I hate to say it because it doesn't fit with the
whole scheme of the women's movement, but I think we have to reconsider what
we're doing."

'Conflict Between 2 Loves'

Ms. Moore, a former sergeant, said she had counted herself a "gung-ho
careerist," clamoring for every opportunity the Army had to offer, until she saw
the suffering her call-up caused Jessica, 9 months old, Denver, 2, and Rachel,
3, who were left in Northern California with an aunt, uncle and three cousins
they hardly knew.

"For me, this was a major conflict between two loves," said Ms. Moore, whose
husband is a sergeant at Fort Benning. "I'm a soldier. I was ready to go. But I
produced these kids, and I need to take responsibility for them. I'm afraid the
children are the unsung victims of Operation Desert Shield. There's no question
that women can do this. The question is whether we should."

Fears of a Backlash

Ms. Moore, Sergeant Schamer and others like them in the military worry that
their reluctance to serve in the Persian Gulf will prompt a backlash against
women, who now make up 11 percent of the armed forces. Before the all-volunteer
military replaced the draft in the early 1970's, fewer than 2 percent of the
armed forces were women.

The concerns are echoed by Representative Patricia Schroeder, a Colorado
Democrat and a senior member of the House Armed Services Committee.

"We have to be careful that we don't start talking about mommy tracking,"
Representative Schroeder said.

There is tentative talk of that kind among military officials supervising the
child-care arrangments for families on the way to the gulf. At the Presidio in
San Francisco, home of the Sixth Army, Maj. Brady Lawrence, chief of human
resources, said the dismay among mothers proves the wisdom of barring women from
combat.

"Do we really want to open up the field if we're having the problems we're
having now?" Major Lawrence asked.

The military parents interviewed all seemed genuinely shocked that a peacetime,
volunteer force could suddenly be called to war, that both members of a couple
could be deployed and that children could be assigned to guardians, although
military regulations on these matters are unambiguous.

"I guess that sounds stupid on my part," Sergeant Schamer said. "But never in my
wildest dreams.  . . ."

That shock makes sense in the context of the times, said Jean Hollands, a
counselor in Mountain View, Calif., who has been working with military families.
"The country, since Vietnam, believed we'd never be involved in a war again,"
she said. "I don't blame the mother who didn't get it. Nobody got it."

Over all in the two million-member armed forces there are 55,103 single parents,
37,267 of them men and 17,836 women. The Pentagon keeps no tally of dual-career
couples.

At least two Army women, Ms. Moore and Terrie Cortez at Fort Bragg in
Fayetteville, N.C., have quit because they did not have satisfactory care plans
for their children, and they are now challenging the general discharges they
were awarded. Ms. Moore said she felt degraded by the general discharge.

Ms. Cortez had summoned her parents from Arkansas to care for her 4-month-old
daughter. Ms. Cortez's father had a heart ailment and postponed surgery to come
to North Carolina. After the older couple arrived, Ms. Cortez's mother had a
heart attack, leaving the baby without a caretaker. When given the general
discharge, Ms. Cortez said, her commander called her "a quitter and a coward."

The Defense Department would not discuss details of individual cases -- why
certain people were granted honorable discharges or exemptions and others were
not -- and referred general queries to the individual services. Army officials
emphasized that most families are coping smoothly with child-care arrangements.

"Less than one-tenth of 1 percent are undeployable because of faulty Family Care
Plans," said Capt. Barbara A. Goodno, an Army public affairs officer in
Washington.

Plans on Paper, and Reality

But some of the families involved in the mobilization contend that coping is in
the eye of the beholder and plans that work on paper, permitting a parent to go
to the Persian Gulf, still cause incalculable suffering.

Doan Nguyen, a member of the Air Force National Guard in Hayward, Calif., and a
single mother, shipped out this week and left her children, who are 4 years and
14 months old, with a paid babysitter.

Sergeant Nguyen's mother is "not mentally or physically capable" of caring for
Joshua and Kermit, she said. Her sister, the person she would most trust with
the children, is only a college freshman. And her boyfriend works long and
irregular hours.

Robin Rutledge, an Army specialist from Fort Carson, Colo., split up her
children when she left for the Persian Gulf, leaving 7-year-old Zachery with his
father, whom she is in the process of divorcing, and sending 15-month-old Tyler
to his grandmother in Wisconsin.

It was necessary to separate the children because Zachery has cerebral palsy and
is in special education classes in Colorado, said Specialist Rutledge's mother,
Jo Bradley of Brodhead, Wis. Quitting the Army was not an option for Specialist
Rutledge, Ms. Bradley said, because she needs the military's generous benefits
for her family's staggering medical bills.

Sergeant Schamer's child-care arrangements are considered by her commanders to
be an example of a well-conceived Family Care Plan, although there is great
sacrifice for her sister, LaNita Erickson, who is the baby's guardian. Ms.
Erickson, a 24-year-old college student in Tempe, Ariz., has sublet her
apartment, given up her part-time job, arranged to take a course by
correspondence, said goodbye to her boyfriend and is headed to Washington State
to look after her nephew.

Representative Schroeder predicts that America will take a long, hard look at
policies on the deployment of parents once this military engagement is over and
there is time for reflection.

Representative Schroeder said the military had been too cavalier about its
Family Care Plans, not offering adequate counseling to pregnant service members
or sufficiently checking child-care arrangements.

Military officials deny this, pointing to the half dozen forms that must be
filled out on the subject, with detailed questions and warnings. "These
individuals don't pay attention to what they raise their hands to," said Maj.
Nell Andre, who is part of the Family Care Plan operation at the 124th Army
Reserve Command in Seattle.

But the forms did not tell Ms. Moore what would happen after her children had
been shipped to her sister's home in Sonoma County, where they jostled for
attention with three cousins and wept for their mother.  And the forms did not
tell her how guilty she would feel.

"We're mission-oriented and our mission is combat," Ms. Moore said. "Sending my
kids out was just part of my job -- until they left. Then I was overwhelmed with
guilt. I asked the good Lord, what is going on? Why am I feeling this way? What
did I do to my family? And what I came up with is a mother should be with her
children. I had to pursue that, because if I didn't I couldn't be at peace."


LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "There are so many feelings, how can I possibly sort them
out?," said Sgt. Twila Erickson-Schamer of Kirkland, Wash. She has asked her
sister to serve as the guardian of her 10-week-old son, Jacob, if she is sent to
the Persian Gulf. Her husband, who is also an Army reservists, has already been
mobilized and is about to be deployed (Doug Wilson for The New York Times); "I
hate to say it, because it doesn't fit with the whole scheme of the women's
movement, but I think we have to reconsider what we're doing," said Lori Moore,
who received a general discharge from theArmy because she was not willing to
leave her three children to go to the Persian Gulf. With her in Columbus, Ga.,
were, from the left, Rachel, 3 years old, Jessica, 9 months old, and Denver, 2.
(Alan S. Weiner/The New York Times); Jo Bradley of Brodhead, Wis., with her
15-month-old grandson, Tyler. She his taking care of the baby for her daughter,
Robin Rutledge, an Army specialist from Colorado who was sent to the Persian
Gulf. (Tom Capp for The New York Times) (pg. 16)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Notes From The Brink;
Hostage Decision And U.S. Doubts May Give Iraq A New Edge

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 2; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1167 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


"THE ability to get to the verge without getting into war is the necessary art,"
said John Foster Dulles in January 1956, having passed his own test at the
Korean truce talks, in Indochina and in Taiwan. "If you cannot master it, you
inevitably get into war."

Is President Bush trying to emulate the strong-willed Secretary of State of the
1950's? Is he trying to make war with Iraq less likely by making it seem more
likely? And if so, is he going to bring it off, as Dulles did?

Yes, yes and maybe, in the judgment of many Washington experts.

Mr. Bush seized the political high ground when he invited the Iraqi Foreign
Minister, Tariq Aziz, to Washington, and offered to send his closest political
partner, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, to Baghdad. But the advantage
seemed to shift again last week, in this protracted test of wits and wills, to
Saddam Hussein.

Partly, it was the Iraqi President's decision to free the hundreds of hostages
he has been holding since invading Kuwait on Aug. 2. By doing so, he converted a
liability into an asset. He met one of the major United Nations demands,
eliminated one of the main sources of foreign enmity toward himself and his
Government and cast himself as the peacemaker, not the warmonger.

"He may not know much about the rest of the world, but he's not short of
political instincts or timing," said a senior American official.

There was a shift in Washington, too, with the collapse of the bipartisan
coalition that had been backing Mr. Bush's policy. One after another,
influential figures in the Democratic Party -- people who speak out against the
foreign policy of any President only after considerable reflection and with
considerable caution -- argued that this President was moving too quickly toward
war, without having adequately weighed the consequences.

Among the nay-sayers were Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, the chairman of the Armed
Services Committee; Representative Lee Hamilton of Indiana, his party's point
man on foreign affairs in the House; Zbigniew Brzezinski, the hawkish professor
who served as Jimmy Carter's national security adviser, and even Senator Charles
Robb of Virginia, a former Marine who well remembers what Capitol Hill critics
did to the Vietnam policy of his father-in-law, Lyndon B. Johnson.

"The Administration's argument that the sanctions are not working suggests that
in the first instance it had entertained extremely naive notions regarding how
sanctions actually do work," said Mr. Brzezinski. "They not only take time; they
are by their nature an instrument for softening up the opponent, inducing in the
adversary a more compliant attitude towards an eventual nonviolent resolution."

Bitter White House officials suggested that Mr. Nunn had turned against the
President because he had decided to run for President himself, but to less
partisan observers that didn't seem a very likely explanation, and no one
suggested that Mr. Hamilton had developed Oval Office fever.

Mr. Baker, who was questioned sharply in Senate and House hearings, told his
interrogators with equal asperity that they were making it harder to convince
the Iraqis that the United States was serious about going to war if necessary.
The next day, Mr. Hussein mentioned, as one reason for relenting on the
hostages, "the decision of the Democratic majority in the U.S. Senate," whose
views he contrasted to those of "Bush, the enemy of God."

That only intensified the argument. Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the leader of
the Republican minority, commented that "the President's policy is working, and
the last thing we need are more timid signals from Congress." Senator Paul S.
Sarbanes, a Maryland Democrat, said that release of the hostages would
constitute "the achievement of one of our goals without the expenditure of any
lives, which runs directly counter to what Dole is saying."

It sounded as if the Administration had either failed to take key Democrats into
its confidence -- failed to assure them that this was brinkmanship, not a
headlong rush into combat -- or had failed utterly to convince them. Whatever
the explanation, the partisan split was a major setback for the Administration,
its first big stumble of the gulf crisis.

Increased pressure can now be expected, from some American allies and from some
segments of the American public, to make the Baker journey to Baghdad, which
will probably take place either between Christmas and New Year's or in early
January, more of a negotiation and less of a message-delivery mission. President
Bush promised to resist that, but the Secretary of State will at a minimum find
it hard to avoid discussing the security arrangements that would follow the
withdrawal of Iraqi troops from Kuwait.

"He's not going to be able just to tell Saddam to get out or face war," a State
Department official conceded.  "Saddam will ask when the sanctions would be
lifted, when our troops would leave, when we'll talk about the Palestinians, and
we will have to answer at least some of his questions in some way. In that
sense, I suppose, it will be a negotiation, but there will be no softening our
demands."

Already, the United States has offered three carrots to Mr. Hussein, all while
insisting that it has offered none.  The first is Mr. Baker's trip itself, the
reward of having obliged his enemy to come to him. The second is the Secretary's
pledge that if Baghdad's troops left Kuwait, the United States would not attack
Iraq, however much talk there may be about dismantling Mr. Hussein's war-making
machinery. The third is the prospect of a Middle East peace conference, now
under open discussion precisely because of its connection to a settlement in the
gulf, despite all the official denials.

This week's discussions between the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A.
Shevardnadze, and Mr. Baker, then Mr. Bush, as well as the visit to Washington
of the Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, may produce some new move
designed to restore the initiative to the anti-Baghdad coalition.

But the next crucial moment is likely to be Mr. Aziz's visit to the capital,
probably in a week or 10 days. And what could prove most important about that
event is not the Foreign Minister's talks with Mr. Bush but his conversations on
the Hill and elsewhere. What will he conclude about American resolve? What will
he, a clever observer, a trusted messenger, tell Saddam Hussein? Whatever it is,
it may well be a fateful piece of assessment.

The fear here, of course, is that he will paint a picture of American
irresolution. Mr. Hussein might then offer to withdraw from all of Kuwait except
the two islands dominating his access to the sea, but no more. The United States
and the United Nations would have achieved almost all that they have demanded.
Reluctant to fight in any event, Mr. Bush's electorate might find a war over a
boundary dispute (as some would then term it) intolerable.

It is such a development that the President now seeks to preclude.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Nation: A Campus Forum on Multiculturalism;
Opening Academia Without Closing It Down

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 3139 words


IS there such a thing as a disinterested Western cultural tradition, rooted in a
commitment to rational inquiry and converging, century by century, on the truth?
Or is "Western culture" in reality an ideology of white males who, in the name
of progress and reason, have psychologically dominated the earth? In recent
years, this debate has become especially heated on American campuses, with
upholders of the Western tradition accusing their opponents of imposing their
own ideology, based on calls for multiculturalism and a rejection of Western
civilization. This supposed new orthodoxy is sometimes derisively called "the
tyranny of the politically correct." The Week in Review asked people at several
universities for their views from the front lines.

Educational Democracy

The tyranny of the politically correct? Multiculturalism as Exhibit A? You must
be kidding. Perhaps unfortunate phrases, coined in California, play differently
on the East Coast. Speaking from California, where the nonwhite population is
rapidly becoming a statewide majority (and already is so in grades K through
12), dismissive talk about political correctness sounds just plain silly. The
students are already in the classroom. They are diverse, and they do talk back.

If the pain of changes under way is great, the pain of no change is even
greater. I remember what it was like as a Chicano in junior high school during
the 1950's in Tucson, Ariz. The punishment was bending over, holding your
ankles, and getting swats with a board. The crime was speaking Spanish on the
playground. Somehow, fluency in Spanish was a deficit in elementary school and
an achievement in college. When will we discover that diversity is a valuable
resource?

Try beginning to teach a diverse classroom with: "We must first learn our
heritage. It extends from Plato and Aristotle to Milton and Shakespeare." The
students ask, "Who's the 'We' ?" At Stanford, over 40 percent of the entering
undergraduates are Asian-Americans, African Americans, native Americans and
Chicanos. Who, they wonder, is included in the phrase "our heritage?" Are they
included? Must they continue to look into the curricular mirror and see nothing?

Sure, there's lip service, trendiness, insensitivity, confusion and all the
rest. Sure, multiculturalism can sound inadequate or worse to those historically
left out. But many people are also using multiculturalism as a tool for
grappling with vexed issues. Newly diverse classrooms often do not work by the
old rules. Newly selected texts cannot always be read in the old ways.

Educational democracy will not come easily. It will involve what I have come to
call questions of cultural citizenship. How can diverse groups retain their
diversity and participate in a democratic community? Can they be full and equal
citizens who enjoy the privilege of shaping their destiny? Can they do so
without having to surrender their heritages? -- Renato Rosaldo, Professor of
Anthropology, Stanford University

'The Light of Reason Goes Out'

Deriding those who seek to understand the world, Marx said, "The point is to
change it." That too is the point of "pluralist" academics who promote
"diversity" and "multiculturalism." The terms are seriously misleading: one is
naturally led to think of pluralists as fostering academically demanding
programs requiring mastery of one or more foreign languages and thorough study
of some (non-Western) culture(s). The agenda, however, is political: to
transform an academy (ultimately, a society) that has "silenced" women and
minorities. Pluralists tend to believe that the American university, supposedly
liberal and humane, serves to perpetuate an oppressor class. (For feminists this
is the "hetero-patriarchy"; more generally, it is the white, "Eurocentric" elite
that "imposes prevailing cultural norms.") Finding the ideal of disinterested
scholarship hypocritical, pluralists advocate a pedagogy that "empowers"
students by alerting them to the need for struggle against partriarchy, racism
and classism.

Pluralists tend to be latter-day Sophists, holding a Protagorean view that truth
is not "out there" but "manmade." The contrasting phrases are Richard Rorty's,
who has also said he finds no useful distinction between propaganda and the use
of reason. Is it any wonder that pluralist classes tend to be "workshops" in
consciousness-raising? When the intellectual is the political, the light of
reason goes out. -- Frederic T. Sommers, Professor of Philosophy, Brandeis
University

When Is Something 'Political'?

George Orwell once wrote that "no book is genuinely free from political bias.
The opinion that art should have nothing to do with politics is itself a
political attitude."

Orwell's point was that literature shapes our political attitudes all the more
when it isn't explicitly about politics. Language silently thrusts all kinds of
political assumptions on us if we don't become alert to them -- assumptions, for
example, about whose sexuality is normal and abnormal and which groups have the
right to run things.

Often, these assumptions are taken for granted as going without saying in the
culture, as Milton took it for granted in "Paradise Lost" that Eve was mentally
inferior to Adam, or as Tom Wolfe takes it for granted in "The Bonfire of the
Vanities" that blacks will get out of hand if the whites who naturally run
society don't have the guts to control them.

The Nigerian novelist Chinua Achebe has said that no novel is ever politically
neutral, because "even the attempt to say nothing about politics is a big
political statement. You are saying, then, that everything is O.K." Yet I'm
described as being political if I discuss a work's treatment of gender and race
with my students, but if I don't mention such matters because I'm satisfied with
the existing arrangements I'm not taken to be doing anything political. There's
a double standard here: criticizing the status quo is political while accepting
it isn't. -- Gerald Graff, Professor of English, Northwestern University

Who's to Say What's 'Acceptable'

I am a black woman with a memory of what things were like before the advent of
affirmative action, feminist theories, African-American studies, and diversified
faculties and student bodies. I recall the time when virtually no people of
color or white women taught at the great research universities, many of whose
undergraduate student bodies were exclusively male.

In the 1960's and 1970's, most of academia rejected racial/ethnic and women's
studies as narrowly particular, as though only nonwhite people had race and only
nonmale people had gender. Hence black graduate students were warned away from
racial topics, and women were told that if they wanted to be respected
intellectually, they should avoid women's studies. We were steered toward more
acceptable subjects, which were the lives and works of the wealthy, white and
male.

In those days, the champions of orthodoxy described their own preoccupations in
handsome, universal terms such as "truth" and "intrinsic worth." They disdained
our ways of thinking as "political," while they wrapped themselves in the
unassailable: "excellence."

I wish that those who take potshots at what they see as a new "political
correctness" would give a thought to what American universities used to be like.
Then, perhaps, they would hesitate before assailing the attempt to forge a
pedagogy appropriate for newly diversified student bodies and faculties. -- Nell
Irvin Painter, Professor of History, Princeton University

Indoctrination Is Not Education

The chief danger posed by academic leftists -- advocates of radical feminism,
the normalization of homosexuality, Marxist revolution, and the like -- lies in
the principled refusal of so many of them to allow others the space in which to
articulate objections to their way of thinking -- space that is indispensable to
survival of critical thought. When all dissent is immediately labeled as bigotry
or ascribed to self-interest, dialogue and debate become impossible, and
education degenerates into indoctrination. This poisonous process, most
pronounced in literary and religious fields, has undone many of the most
distinguished programs and faculties. Its antidote is something the radicals
themselves often endorse loudly: diversity and pluralism. But they tend to
define diversity exclusively by gender, race and sometimes class, ignoring the
more subtle differences of intellectual and religious tradition and moral
vision.

It is especially regrettable that the preoccupation with race tends to
assimilate the experience of all whites to that of elite Protestant groups from
northwestern Europe and helps perpetuate the anti-Catholicism still potent in
academia. The source of this cramped definition of diversity is the neo-Marxist
idea that class, race and gender determine consciousness. Ironic, is it not,
that as so many nations discard the legacy of Marx, American professors embrace
it all the more tightly?

The most alarming aspect of the current ideologization of academic life is the
impression students receive that truth reduces to issues of power. As this
impression spreads, the "deconstruction" of the university accelerates, for the
transcendent horizon that alone justifies our enormous investment in humanistic
education is not just ignored, but denied. -- Jon D. Levenson, Professor of
Jewish Studies, Harvard Divinity School

'Europhobia' In the High Schools

We must urgently look at how these currently fashionable orthodoxies at the
university level have begun to affect the public schools. Most pre-college
students are too naive to understand how university-trained teachers or
curriculum developers are manipulating them. And school committees and parents
are usually totally unaware of what is going on because the Europhobia, national
self-hatred and inter-ethnic hostilities that these orthodoxies are promoting
have been cleverly disguised by current buzz words like multiculturalism,
critical thinking and diversity.

All these terms can have straightforward and positive academic meanings, and in
many school curriculum guides or individual courses they do. That is why
manifestations of the ideology they cover up are difficult for unsophisticated
parents to discern.

A current example of how a school committee is allowing a once outstanding
academic curriculum to be transformed into a curriculum for political
indoctrination is taking place right now in Brookline, Mass., where I live. Last
year, the school committee voted to drop one of the high school's most popular
and intellectually challenging courses -- Advanced Placement European History --
when its assistant superintendent for curriculum and most of the high school's
social studies department argued that such a course was now incompatible with a
multicultural curriculum. This year, large numbers of students have petitioned
to have the course reinstated and obtained support from a legal ruling by the
State Department of Education. High noon comes on Dec. 18, with a confused
school committee caught between the intellectual demands of its own students and
the fierce hostility of a Europhobic social studies department. If the course is
reinstated, the department wants, as its pound of flesh, ninth graders
henceforth to have to choose between taking European history in their sophomore
year and taking the advanced placement course when they are seniors. If students
are forced to forego as sophomores a European history course in order to be
eligible for the advanced placement course as seniors, the remaining sophomore
alternatives include a course in African-American history, which discusses the
trans-Atlantic slave trade but conveniently omits discussion of the Arab slave
trade in its coverage of African history, and another controversial course that
focuses on three unrelated areas of conflict in the world: Northern Ireland,
Vietnam and the Middle East. The school committee wants to believe that such
courses are justified by the "needs" of the diverse population at the high
school. The basic purpose of these and the other sophomore courses, however, is
to balkanize students ethnically before they take U.S. history in grade 11 and
to encourage them to view Britain, America and Israel as oppressor nations. --
Sandra Stotsky, Director, Summer Institute on Writing, Reading and Civic
Education, Harvard Graduate School of Education

Weeding Outc The New Puritanism

Like the Puritans, the politically correct have an apparently desperate need to
create an exclusive community. Their rituals are the conferences they attend;
their liturgical language, an indecipherable jargon that belies their commitment
to openness. Ultimately, American Puritanism centered itself around the need to
distinguish between the saved and the damned. Making that distinction was an
endless process, as it is for the politically correct. The saved -- in p.c.
language, the "oppressed" -- are good no matter what they do; racial minorities,
for instance, are, by definition, incapable of racism. The damned -- the white
male "oppressors" of p.c. language -- are evil, even when they teach or act
politically in favor of the oppressed.

But oppression is real, injustice based on gender, race and class is profound,
pervasive and morally indefensible. The problem for the universities is not that
the issues are less important than the politically correct make them, but that a
Puritan style of reform is incompatible with the life of the mind. Many bonafide
liberals have been startled to find themselves condemned, cursed, occasionally
even physically attacked, by the politically correct. There is no room for the
hesitations of reason in matters of faith.

There is a less noble dynamic at work here. Consider the endless possibilities
political correctness holds out for research and publication, especially in the
field of literature. Each new critical weapon opens the whole Western textual
tradition to a new campaign of slash and burn. This is serious stuff. Academic
careers are made and unmade in these waves of puritan heresy hunting. -- John E.
Becker, Director of the Core Curriculum, Fairleigh Dickinson University,
Madison, N.J.

The Diversity Of Women's Studies

In fields such as women's studies, there is scarcely agreement on the assortment
of positions claimed to be hegemonic. Currently there are over a half dozen
ideological and theoretical "schools" in women's studies itself. Theories also
overlap. Some conservative thinkers share with some radical feminists the belief
that there are innate, biological differences between men and women. Arguments
over the role of the state in the regulation of pornography and prostitution
have allied conservatives with radical feminists against sexual liberals and
libertarians. All of these disagreements form the basis for Women's (or Gender)
Studies 101. While there is agreement that these issues should be discussed
within the university by conservatives and radicals alike, there is not
agreement among the scholars who adhere to and publish about these various
schools of thought. -- Lois West, Assistant Professor of Sociology and Women's
Studies, Florida International University

It's Not Simply 'Us vs. Them'

The criticism of political correctness usually comes in one of two versions:
conservatives gripe about the politicization of academia (as if it had ever been
unpolitical) and liberals whine about academic freedom (as if the issue were not
precisely what that is). There are always only two sides to the issue, and if
"we" are on the right side, "they" must be in the wrong.

I am interested in undercutting such binary logic. Rather than fruitlessly
condemning the phenomenon, I would ask what makes p.c.-ness tick. I suspect that
political correctness is much like other better-known fundamentalisms in that it
is primarily concerned not with achieving its stated goals, but with preserving
its own coherence. What counts about a fervent belief is not the belief itself
(be it racial harmony, equality between the sexes, or the literal truth of the
Bible) but the fervor with which it is held. People latch onto an orthodoxy
because it provides them with a mental grid with which they organize their
experience; the content of the orthodoxy is almost irrelevant.

A critique of political correctness need not imply a conservative political
agenda; conservatives and p.c.-niks both like to give up contentious argument
for orthodoxy, which puts a halt to thinking and takes the last bit of fun out
of academia. -- Michel Chaouli, Department of Comparative Literature, University
of California, Berkeley

A Bad Case of Academic Autism

'The 80's taught us a lesson about how the critical hairshirt could become more
of a fashion statement than a political one.  In the old days, an academic book
review might chastise a work of scholarship for inaccuracies in citation and
such. Of late, for equally venial offenses, you'd probably be accused of
complicity with the ideologies of oppression, of silencing all the wretched of
the earth with a single paragraph. It is heady stuff: real politics never felt
that good.

How did we come to appraise works of cultural criticism in terms more
appropriate to combat? Academics made a pendular swing from the silly notion
that scholarship existed wholly apart from politics to the equally silly
position that everything we did had the very gravest political significance. We
fell into what I call academic autism: close your eyes tight, recite the mantra
of race-class-gender, and social problems will disappear.

A friend of mine cynically suggested that we institutionalize something that
used to happen implicitly at conferences on "minority discourse" -- award a
prize for the most oppressed speaker or respondent. At the end of the year, she
added, we could hold a sort of Oppression Academy Awards ceremony. Once the
invocation of oppression became another move in a game of academic
one-upmanship, it was easy to lose sight of what's happening on the streets
outside -- where almost half of the black children in this country live below
the poverty line, and a black male in his 20's is more likely to end up in jail
than in college.

Joining mood rings and Earth Shoes, "political correctness" has now entered into
the realm of the merely facetious. Which isn't to say that the academy is no
longer a theater for larger social conflicts. It's just that the academic
intellectuals no longer have to pretend to know all the answers ahead of time.
After all the shouting is over, is it too much to hope that the real
conversation, long deferred, may begin? -- Henry Louis Gates Jr., Professor of
English, Duke University

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Let's Be Serious When We Talk About War

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 293 words


To the Editor:

In "We're Feeling the Draft" (Op-Ed, Nov. 28), Adam Wolman reduces a profound
argument about the necessity for war into the self-pitying whine of an
irresponsible generation. I'm not a hawk; I too am gripped with fears about what
is right, when it is proper to use force, the moral implications of waging war
in the modern world. I do not want to kill. I do not wish to die. However, I
have no sympathy for anyone who gave registration no more than a passing
thought, as Mr. Wolman says.

I too registered for the draft, in 1982, when war seemed nothing more than a
chapter in a history book. But I recall friends wondering about its
ramifications, I remember a college -- Wesleyan University -- that explained
what our responsibilities were under the law, as well as what our rights were if
we resisted registering. I remember a barrage of attention in the news media.

Mr. Wolman bewails his state of indecision, yet fails to take it to the next
level: the responsibility of humankind in an untenable situation. Instead, he
focuses on the fears and failings of his friends, more concerned with preserving
their way of life and yet avoiding "life in the Canadian wilderness." I can't
imagine anyone who went to Canada in the Vietnam War looking with understanding
on Mr. Wolman's reaction.

The prospect of a draft is frightening; it should certainly ignite debate. I
believe that there is no right and wrong in a situation like this; there is a
large gray area where we have to stake a position. Mr. Wolman says he is
thinking about running away. Fine. But that is the act of a follower, not a
leader. We need the give and take of argument. It is a time for philosophy, not
self-pity.

WILLIAM F. WRUBEL
New York, Nov. 29, 1990

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Musical Is Money to His Ears

BYLINE: BY MERVYN ROTHSTEIN; Mervyn Rothstein reports on the arts for The New
York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 48; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4819 words


IT IS 6 O'CLOCK IN THE EVENING IN THE south of France and the intense yellow
heat of a lazy Provencal summer day has finally begun to soften. A chunky,
youthful-looking man in a gray T-shirt is standing behind the counter of the
large kitchen in his white converted farmhouse holding an uncooked chicken leg
in his left hand. The T-shirt might be prison issue; indeed, on its front are
stenciled five black numerals: 24601. His right hand has just put down the
telephone, from which he has found out that the evening's guest list has grown
from 7 to more than 15.

No problem, he says to the four friends assisting him. He reaches into the
refrigerator and removes a few more packages of chicken for the barbecue down by
the swimming pool, along with some more apples, limes and peaches for the
barbecue marinade. And then, as he arranges the chicken in several pans, dousing
it with sesame and olive oil, he assigns the various other tasks: dice the
apples, slice the peaches, sliver the lime, pound the ginger, peel the garlic,
cut the shallots, pick the lettuce. Soon he will check his colleagues' work,
making sure that the pieces of apple, peach and lime are neither too big nor too
small, that the shallots have been cut in circles, that the lettuce leaves are
not wilted. He is smiling and joking, but behind the twinkling eyes is a boss;
if the slices of peach do not pass muster, there is no doubt that they will be
replaced.

It is the way he does things: on a big scale, with a large cast -- and with
attention to every detail. Cameron Mackintosh, the most successful, influential
and powerful theatrical producer in the world, is producing dinner.

The method works. The dinner is a hit, and so is almost everything the
44-year-old Mackintosh touches. It is a method that in the last decade has
turned a journeyman British producer outside the mainstream who specialized in
shows touring the English countryside into a man whose name appears above the
title as producer or co-producer of the most publicized and successful musicals
of recent times.

The hits began with Andrew Lloyd Webber's "Cats," the first of the British
megamusicals. Then came "Les Miserables" (the 24601 on the T-shirt is Jean
Valjean's prison ID number in the adaptation of the Victor Hugo novel) and Lloyd
Webber's "Phantom of the Opera." Now there is "Miss Saigon," the "Madama
Butterfly" clone and controversial smash London hit about the love between a
Vietnamese bar girl and an American marine in Vietnam during and after the fall
of Saigon in 1975. "Miss Saigon" is scheduled -- now that Mackintosh's dispute
with Actors' Equity over the casting of the British actor Jonathan Pryce in the
role of a Eurasian has finally been settled -- to begin performances in New York
in March at the Broadway Theater. These shows have played in more than a score
of cities around the world; in addition to London and New York, they include
Paris, Stockholm, Oslo, Sydney, Melbourne, Vienna, Tokyo, Los Angeles, San
Francisco, Chicago, Toronto and Tel Aviv.

In a time when the musical tradition in America has become an endangered
species, when spiraling costs are keeping away investors and limiting profits,
Mackintosh has been the leader of the British invasion that creates hits in the
West End of London and exports them as money-making machines first to Broadway
and then around the world.

It is a method that has placed Mackintosh on the list of the 200 richest men in
England and built for him a personal fortune estimated at more than $120
million. (He himself says he has no idea how much he is worth and that he is too
busy to find out.) It brings in millions of dollars a year to his company,
Cameron Mackintosh Ltd. The New York productions of "Cats," "The Phantom of the
Opera" and "Les Miserables" alone gross about $1.5 million a week; they are now
the three longest-running shows on Broadway and are all still playing in London,
along with "Miss Saigon."

But the shows are more than money-making machines. The public likes them, and
sometimes the critics do, too. It is Mackintosh's genius, many theater people
say, that through his years of trial and error in the business he has developed
a knack for knowing what the public will flock to see. Mackintosh himself
agrees. "My own tastes happen to be in tune with what the public wants," he
says. "I think that's the reason my batting average is so high, not because I've
discovered some brilliant formula."

Those tastes were developed out of a love for the theater that he admits is
confined to the musical. No other form of the art interests him. "I suppose it
has to be the very heightened theatrical experience it provides," he says. "The
musical is the one area of the theater that can give you the biggest buzz of
all. I'm still as mad about it as I was when I started, indeed when I was a
schoolboy dreaming about doing it."

The love also encompasses the hype of Broadway. Not since David Merrick was in
his prime, in the 1950's and 60's, has there been a producer so adept at getting
publicity for his musicals and at building up audience expectation. He took the
word of mouth on "Les Miz" (despite a very mixed London critical reception), the
anticipation of a new Lloyd Webber musical for "Phantom" and the return of the
"Les Miz" authors for "Miss Saigon" and made each New York production more
eagerly anticipated than the one before. "Les Miz" had a $12 million advance
ticket sale on Broadway; the advance for "Phantom" was $19 million, and the one
for "Miss Saigon," already more than $30 million, is expected to rise to between
$35 million and $40 million before opening night.

"Cameron's idol is David Merrick," Andrew Lloyd Webber says. "He has marketed
'Les Miz' to pieces. That's what he's brilliant at doing. I don't think you'll
find anybody in my generation of musical theater who will equal Cameron when it
comes to knowing how to take a situation and turn it to an advantage and sell
tickets." Mackintosh and his one-time partner have gone their separate ways in
recent years, amid reports of a falling out that both publicly deny. But
Mackintosh declined to be part of the production team on "Aspects of Love,"
Lloyd Webber's most recent musical.

One Mackintosh technique is to release and heavily promote the London cast album
in America. Another is to build anticipation by making sure that, amid the
promotion, tickets for Broadway do not go on sale until long after the London
opening. And, perhaps most important, he understands the lure of spectacle --
whether it be singing cats, a waif on the barricades, a falling chandelier or,
lately, a helicopter landing on stage -- in attracting a thrill-seeking
audience.

Mackintosh also demands good producing on the financial side, which means
insuring that his investors get their money back as quickly as possible. For
"Miss Saigon," all the seats in the orchestra are being sold at $60 apiece and
about 220 seats in the front mezzanine are going for $100 each. (There have been
complaints for years of the high ticket prices on Broadway, but a Mackintosh
production seems to be proof that, whatever the price, if theatergoers want to
see the show they'll pay it.)

The price scale allows a profit of $250,000 a week. "Miss Saigon" is likely to
cost as much as $10 million, but because of the large profit margin will
probably recoup its investment in 30 to 40 weeks, the classic, old-style
Broadway period of recoupment. "I always aim to recoup in 30 weeks," Mackintosh
says. "Les Miz," which cost a little more than $4 million to produce in New
York, recouped in 24 weeks. By now, anyone who invested $100,000 in the Broadway
production of "Les Miz" will have made a profit of $500,000, the producer says;
for the London production, he adds, the profit figure is about $600,000.

NOT EVERY MACKINTOSH show in the last decade has been a hit, of course. His
London production of Stephen Sondheim's "Follies" got a very mixed critical
reception and was hardly a box-office bonanza. The New York production of Lloyd
Webber's "Song and Dance" did not fare particularly well, and Mackintosh's
Broadway revival of "Oliver!" in 1984 closed in three weeks. But it's the number
of his successes, and the international profits that those hits generate, that
account for Mackintosh's status in the theater world.

Side by side with Mackintosh's reputation of creating profit is his reputation
of being a shrewd and hard negotiator. "Cameron is very tough to do business
with," says Bernard Jacobs, president of the Shubert Organization, Broadway's
biggest theater owner, who has been involved with Mackintosh on the productions
of all four major hits. "He is very knowledgeable. He understands every
negotiating point and everybody's vulnerability, and he makes as good a deal as
anybody can make."

He is tough not only with the theater owners. Earlier this year, Mackintosh
announced that for "Miss Saigon" he was reducing the 10 percent commission
usually paid to theater-party agents to 7 1/2 percent on some tickets and 5
percent on others. When some agents refused to sell tickets for the show, the
producer set up his own theater-party and group-sales agency.

"He has a lot of guts," Jacobs says. "In London, when he perceived that a
theater owner was trying to take advantage of him on the sale of souvenirs, he
opened a store across the street from the theater to sell them on his own."

Mackintosh's successes have made him a man used to getting his own way. Even so,
one reason he gets his own way is his charm. Like most successful men, he has a
temper, and it has been known to flare. But most of the time it is not with the
temper that he accomplishes things, it is with gentle persuasion.

Combined with the need to be in charge is an unassuming ease, a confidence that
most often prevents his ego from alienating others. One colleague tells of
arranging to meet Mackintosh for dinner at a fancy London hotel. When the
producer showed up in shirt sleeves, the maitre d'hotel told him that jacket and
tie were required. Celebrities have been known to tear restaurants apart in such
circumstances. Not Mackintosh. He asked if the restaurant had jacket and tie
available, and put them on. When his companion remarked on silly dress codes,
Mackintosh's response was quiet and simple. Not at all, he said. They're right,
you know.

People in the theater world, of course, rarely speak ill of a competitor for
public consumption, however negative they may be in private. In Mackintosh's
case, most unflattering comments come from those whose own strong egos have
clashed with his. Yet one colleague who was feuding with the producer, to the
extent of being thrown out of his office, seems to have little rancor, even off
the record. The prevailing comment is that Mackintosh is a dedicated
professional, not to mention very good company.

Even those who have lost out in deals with Mackintosh say they admire his
business acumen. "He's a good producer," says James M. Nederlander, head of the
Nederlander Organization, the No. 2 theater owner, which fought hard and
unsuccessfully to get "Les Miz," "Phantom" and "Miss Saigon." Arthur Rubin, the
Nederlander vice president and general manager, also calls Mackintosh a "tough
businessman, a tough negotiator; he's the guy everybody wants, and he makes his
own terms."

There has been talk that the Shubert relationship with Mackintosh, however much
they may kiss in public, is a marriage of purely business convenience. Jacobs
says it isn't so, adding that he has known Mackintosh for 15 years, since the
producer's lean days, and considers him "a very sweet, very decent man."

But Jacobs will admit that there is one thing about the producer that riles him.
"Cameron would stay at my home and eat with me, because obviously he wanted to
save on the hotel bill," Jacobs recalls. "And the only complaint I've ever had
with Cameron is I've always felt that he should have owed me a greater loyalty
than he did, that he shouldn't have made things as tough as he did for me. I had
to struggle very hard to get 'Phantom,' for example."

Nederlander's Rubin says he firmly believes that one reason the Shubert
Organization won on "Miss Saigon" has to do with what theater people call the
"float" -- the interest gained from advance ticket sales, interest that has
traditionally gone to the theater owner and that the Nederlanders will not give
up. Neither Mackintosh nor the Shubert Organization will discuss the specific
contract terms involving the float on "Miss Saigon," but Rubin says he believes
that the deal has put at least some of the float in the Mackintosh company
pocket.

"Can you imagine what the float is on $25 million?" Rubin asks longingly.

Whether or not the Mackintosh method has given him a piece of the float, it has
given him apartments in New York and London, plus an 1830 town house in London
and a cottage in the English countryside, an island retreat in the north of
Scotland that he reaches by helicopter and the six-bedroom farmhouse in the
south of France.

Not far from the London house is Mackintosh's main office. (There are others in
New York, Paris and Sydney, occupied by a total of about 45 employees, the
entire staff of Cameron Mackintosh Ltd.) It is at 1 Bedford Square, a very
British address near the British Museum, in a late-18th-century house designed
by the renowned British architect Thomas Leverton and considered one of the
great terraced houses of London.

Mackintosh has been quite skillful, in the midst of all the publicity
surrounding him, at keeping his private life private. He claims that the
circumstances of his public life have not changed his private ways. He has had,
he says, a long-term relationship -- nine years -- with one man, a London
photographer. Mackintosh is not a jet-setter who runs from party to party trying
to get his name and photograph into the gossip and society pages.

"I've never had a very great public life," he says. "I throw jolly good
first-night parties, the best, but I don't go to many show-biz parties. I'm not
interested in that. In the end, I have to make time for myself and my private
life, because without that what's the point of living?"

MACKINTOSH WAS BORN in north London, the son of a Scottish timber merchant, and
the story has it that he decided at the age of 8, after seeing his first show,
that he wanted to produce musicals. Not act in them, sing or direct, but
produce. Mackintosh says it's so. "It was a musical called 'Salad Days,' and I
loved it so much that I went back with my mother and my aunt to see it again
three weeks later," he says. A few years later, he heard the original Broadway
cast album of "The Sound of Music," "and it was like a magic world had been
opened up in front of me."

He got a grant to go to the Central School of Speech and Drama in the stage
management course, but lasted only a year, dropping out at 17. He walked around
the West End until he finally found a job as a stagehand. It was at the Theater
Royal, Drury Lane, where "Miss Saigon" is now playing. That job led to one as
assistant stage manager in a tour of "Camelot," and then came a similar job with
a tour of "Oliver!" Various jobs in various tours led to his first show as a
producer: a revival in 1969 of "Anything Goes," a flop that closed in two weeks.

He didn't give up, though, and the next years were spent raising money from
investors and producing shows in and out of London, with a concentration on
tours. A lot of shows, very little in the way of hits. Then, in 1976, came his
breakthrough: the London production of "Side by Side by Sondheim," a compilation
of songs from the composer's shows. "It was my first taste of seeing a show
become a smash hit overnight," Mackintosh says. "It was the first time people
started to think that maybe I'm going to be around and be a serious contender."

In 1978, he got a letter from the Arts Council of Great Britain asking him to
put together a tour of a musical revival, and he wound up doing "My Fair Lady,"
the show he considers the greatest musical of all time. "My Fair Lady" was
followed by "Oklahoma!" He had by then achieved a modest success, but he was
still very much a figure on the fringes of the British theater world. And then,
in January 1980, he got a call from Andrew Lloyd Webber, who was already a
superstar but had never met the producer, asking him to lunch.

"I didn't know what I was going to meet," Lloyd Webber says. "I thought he was
going to be this 62-year-old wizened old Scot. The lunch was scheduled to start
at half past 12, and I found this funny, very witty person who knew more about
musicals than I did. The lunch did not finish until 6 o'clock, and then we went
back to his office and I said, 'Look, I've got this idea about doing a musical
based on T. S. Eliot poems.' "

It was called "Practical Cats" at the time, but the title would soon be
shortened to "Cats." It was the turning point. "Until 'Cats,' " says Nicholas
Allott, Mackintosh's executive producer, "Cameron was never out of debt."

Mackintosh next did Lloyd Webber's "Song and Dance," which was a hit in London.
Then he invested in a small Off Broadway musical called "Little Shop of
Horrors," the show took off and more money entered the coffers.

It was at Christmas of 1982 that a Hungarian director brought Mackintosh a
recording of the French version of "Les Miserables," by Alain Boublil and
Claude-Michel Schonberg. "I fell in love with it immediately," Mackintosh says.
Trevor Nunn, the director of the Royal Shakespeare Company, who had directed
"Cats," was brought in to direct, with John Caird, and the show opened at the
R.S.C.'s Barbican to mixed notices. But the Mackintosh magic had begun to work,
and the public loved it.

IT IS 9:30 A.M. ON A sunny, unseasonably warm London Monday in mid-October.
Cameron Mackintosh has just arrived at the 200-plus-seat Tricycle Theater, the
home of a small theater company on the Kilburn High Road in a working-class
section of northwest London. Today is the first day of rehearsals for a new
musical, "Just So," based on the stories by Rud yard Kipling, that Mackintosh is
co-producing with the Tricycle troupe. The authors are two relative unknowns,
two men in their late 20's, George Stiles and Anthony Drewe, whom Mackintosh
first met five years ago and with whom he has been working on the show ever
since, through workshops and a staging last year outside London.

The show is the opposite of the typical Mackintosh megamusical. It has one set,
four musicians and a cast of 11. But to Mackintosh it is just as important. He
has brought in a top-level director, Mike Ockrent, who did "Me and My Girl" on
Broadway, as well as the "Follies" revival.

And even with "Just So," the Mackintosh mind is at work thinking of ways to make
the small big: representatives of the Disney studios in Hollywood are coming to
see it, he says, as is Steven Spielberg, who may be interested in it as one of
his animation projects.

(The show opened in late November to mixed reviews, with critics saying that it
was good Christmastime fun but not strong enough to be moved to the West End,
which was the original plan. Mackintosh now says he will take the show there
next November as a seasonal attraction. He is also producing the West End
transfer this month of "Five Guys Named Moe," another small-scale musical, which
got rave reviews recently at the Theater Royal, Stratford East. "Five Guys" is a
tribute by the actor Clarke Peters to the American rhythm-and-blues musician and
singer Louis Jordan and has an all-black company of six performers and five
musicians.)

The "Just So" rehearsal begins with everybody sitting around a table,
introducing themselves and describing their roles. When it is Mackintosh's turn,
he speaks softly, saying only three words: "Cameron Mackintosh, observer."
Everyone laughs.

Later in the day, final auditions are going on at the Palace Theater for
replacements for Eponine and Cosette in "Les Miz." Mackintosh takes a brisk
10-minute walk from his office to the theater, where six or seven staff members
are waiting. He has a staff he trusts implicitly, people who in many cases have
been with him for 10 to 20 years, but nonetheless no major casting decision can
be made without him.

"I'm a terrible interferer," Mackintosh says. "There isn't an element of the
show, from the design of the poster all the way through, that I don't have a go
at at some point."

Or as his assistant, Tee Hesketh, puts it, "He does like to have his thumbprint
on it all."

Even vacationing at his Provence home, Mackintosh every day sends his thumbprint
all around the world by means of the fax machine in his upstairs bedroom. On the
morning of the dinner for 15, a fax of an advertisement for the opening of "Les
Miz" in San Antonio arrived. The ad shows a drawing of Cosette, the young waif
who has become the show's emblem. She is wearing a Davy Crockett coonskin cap
and the type below the drawing reads, "Remember the Alamo." The producer is not
amused. "The Alamo," he says. "Everyone was killed there, weren't they? That's
tasteful."

He thinks of other possibilities, rejecting one after another. Finally, he
smiles. "A hit that can't Miz," he says. "That's it."

One thing the producer does not lack is faith in his theatrical abilities. "I
have a tremendous built-in divining rod," Mackintosh says later. "I sniff out a
problem area of a show and then I'm like a terrier with whoever's department it
is. I keep on them. And I'm always coming up with hundreds of gratuitous
solutions, which rarely are right but invariably prompt the authors or the
director or whoever to come up with the right solution, usually one I would
never have dreamt of myself."

Whether Mackintosh's associates think his way of working is an asset or a debit
depends on who's talking.  "Cameron pays exceptional attention to detail," says
Mike Ockrent. "He cares about all of it to an extraordinary degree. He'll come
back from Timbuktu to make sure we've sorted out a number."

Lloyd Webber, though, provides a slightly different perspective. "Cameron is
very quick on his feet about thoughts," the composer says, "and therefore he
needs strong people working with him. Because if he doesn't have a strong
director there's nobody ever to say no to him, and in musical theater no man is
an island."

And so does Claude-Michel Schonberg, the composer of "Les Miz" and "Miss
Saigon." "The only problem with Cameron is that he knows, or feels, something
wrong but he doesn't know precisely what it is. It can be a very small thing or
a very important thing, and his reaction is exactly the same. It is up to us to
understand what he is telling us and to improve it or to have an argument with
him about the point. That's how you work with Cameron."

"Many people think that Cameron's success came overnight," says Schonberg's
partner, Alain Boublil. "Very few people know about all the flops he had before.
But what we see today is really the result of years of flops, touring all over
England. He learned what he didn't want to do from the bad directors, from the
bad set decorators, from the bad costume designers, and from all this, he made a
synthesis."

The Mackintosh synthesis has been quite good for Schonberg and Boublil, of
course. The companies of "Les Miz" continue to proliferate. The show opened in
Stockholm in October. The opening in Montreal is set for January, the one in
Amsterdam is due in February, the one in Madrid in early May, Germany in the
summer of '91 and Paris in September at the Mogador Theater, of which Mackintosh
has just become part owner. There have also been discussions about the Kirov
Ballet in Leningrad performing the work as a ballet.

"By the end of 1992, I believe there will be 30 productions of 'Les Miz,' "
Mackintosh says. "No show in history has had that."

No show in history has also been involved in the kind of dispute that afflicted
Mackintosh and "Miss Saigon" last summer in New York. The battle with Actors'
Equity left everyone involved edgy and exhausted.

Back in August, Equity said that Jonathan Pryce, who had created the role of the
Engineer, a Eurasian pimp, in the London production and won an Olivier Award as
best actor in a musical for his performance, could not re-create the role on
Broadway. The actors union said it wanted more opportunities for minorities and
would not accept a Caucasian in the role.

Mackintosh immediately canceled the show, saying that according to the union's
contract the only thing Equity could rule on was whether Pryce was a star, a
status it had granted him in the past. The next day, more than 150 performers in
the 40,000-member union presented a petition asking the union's council to
reconsider. A week later it did so, reversing itself and welcoming Pryce. But an
angry Mackintosh then said that he would not reinstate the show unless he was
given a free hand in all casting decisions. Tough and sometimes bitter
negotiations followed, and finally in mid-September a compromise was reached.

During the battle, Mackintosh was called a bully and a racist, words that no one
who works with him has used to describe him, publicly or privately. More than a
year ago, he began a weekly "Miss Saigon" school in London for Asian actors,
providing free singing and dancing lessons. So far, eight performers from the
school have appeared in the London production.

Casting in New York is now almost done, and in a troupe of 44, 33 are members of
ethnic minority groups and 11 are Caucasians. The most important role yet to be
cast is that of Kim, the Vietnamese heroine. A Filipino actress, Lea Salonga,
created the role in London and shares it with another actress. Mackintosh's
first choice was to create a new star for Broadway, but he says he has been
having trouble finding two suitable actresses and may decide to bring Salonga to
New York. Such a decision may create a new dispute with Equity, whose approval
would be required because she is foreigner.

Mackintosh is not eager to get involved in another disagreement with Equity, but
says that if he decides he needs Salonga he will take the risk. "I know there
are a number of people who, if this happens, will say I wanted to bring her to
America all along," he says. "Well, they can think what they like. But I really
would prefer to find somebody new. The showman in me thinks it would be great to
find a new star."

MACKINTOSH IS KNOWN for his generosity to the theater world, paying back some of
what he has received. This year, he donated nearly $2 million for the National
Theater in London to use over a 10-year period to stage classic musicals, the
largest gift from an individual to the performing arts in Britain. The first
show to be staged, late next year, is Rodgers and Hammerstein's "Carousel,"
directed by Nicholas Hytner, the director of "Miss Saigon." And last year he
provided close to $4 million to Oxford University to endow its first
professorship in contemporary theater, a visiting position that was first held
by Sondheim and next goes to the British actor Ian McKellen.

Mackintosh has also been expanding his musical interests beyond producing: he
recently bought a substantial interest in, and has become a director of, Music
Theater International, a stock and amateur licensing agent for many musicals.
Its shows include "Fiddler on the Roof," "The Music Man," "Guys and Dolls," "The
Fantasticks," Lloyd Webber's "Evita" and "Jesus Christ Superstar," 12 works by
Sondheim and now "Les Miz" and "Miss Saigon."

The producer's loyalty to the theater, though, is about to undergo a change.
What lies ahead for the master of the staged musical -- after "Just So" and the
New York and Tokyo (1992) versions of "Miss Saigon" -- is the movie of "Les
Miserables." And after "Les Miz" is a celluloid "Miss Saigon," possibly by 1995.

What lies behind this sudden interest in the cinema? Money, of course. The
screen can mean even bigger profits than the stage. But there's something else,
too. "I'm not going to do anything new in the theater until 1993 or 1994,"
Mackintosh says. "I decided about two years ago, shortly after 'Follies' opened,
that whatever happened to 'Miss Saigon' I did not want to take on another big
new musical for some time. If there's too much of you around, people can get
tired of you."

The trick, he says, is never to become self-satisfied.  About a year ago, there
was a newspaper article that described him as "the man with the Midas touch."
"And Claude-Michel read the article, and he said to me, 'Cameron, it's a very
nice article, but just remember one thing: Midas choked on the golden apple.' "

Mackintosh smiles a boyish smile. "I'm not afraid I'll do that," he says. And
he's probably right.

"And anyway," he adds, "if I do, I'll deserve it."

NAME: Cameron Mackintosh

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Cameron Mackintosh, left, and colleagues discuss the New York
staging of "Miss Saigon." (Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times); Lea Salonga
and Jonathan Pryce in the London production. (Michael LePoer Trench)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 9, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Rolling Boyle

BYLINE: Tad Friend; Tad Friend is a contributing editor to Esquire and Vogue who
frequently profiles fiction writers.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 50; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4646 words


THE PRETTY WOMAN IN THE FRONT ROW LISTENING to T. Coraghessan Boyle read his
short story "King Bee" is the ideal listener: rapt, her hands in her black
blazer, she laughs in all the right places. Tom Boyle, her focus, is on a
three-week tour to promote his fourth novel, "East Is East," reading to 50
people at Butler/Gabriel Books in West Los Angeles.

Boyle paces about with the stoop-shouldered walk of the tall and skinny, wagging
his left index finger to indicate a change of authorial mood, as he performs the
story of Anthony, an adopted boy who doesn't get along with his well-meaning new
parents, Pat and Ken. Boyle's taut, wised-up, simile-drunk prose is even
livelier when he reads it, charged with the jaunty fierceness and Catskills
timing of a born entertainer. Giggles fill the room and the mood is gleefully
expectant.

Then the story unexpectedly pivots when Pat and Ken question Anthony about the
missing family dog, Skippy.

" 'I put him in his cell,' Anthony said finally.

" 'Cell?' Ken echoed.

" 'In the hive,' Anthony said. 'The big hive.' "

Boyle glances up quickly and reads on: "It was Ken who noticed the broomstick
wedged against the oven door, and it was Ken who buried Skippy's poor singed
carcass. . . . " The woman in black jerks back, appalled. "King Bee," it now
appears, is about a psychopath. Uh-oh.

The woman eventually leans forward again, but warily now, sensing menace beneath
Boyle's odd magnetism. Boyle stands 6-foot-3, weighs 160 pounds, sports a black
Vandyke beard and a sheaf of hair that in certain lights resembles strained
apricots and in others steel wool, and is upholstered in his public finery -- an
alarming black rayon suit, a strange red shirt with vertical-hold problems, a
bolo tie, red sneakers and two steel earrings. His smile lies somewhere between
droll and demonic.

"Tom is a quintessentially American figure," says his friend Griff Stevens. "He
looks like Ichabod Crane, acts like a combination of Jack Benny and Daniel Boone
and covets the power of Ferdinand Marcos."

The next day Boyle says, "I really like the power of stopping the laughter and
turning it to horror." He is sitting in the den of his serenely prosaic gray
clapboard house in Woodland Hills, a quiet suburban section of northern Los
Angeles. He slouches on the sofa in a torn green T-shirt and black jeans,
smiling at 11-year-old Kerrie, the eldest of his three charming children, as she
dances in and out.

"It's very powerful when the safety net drops away from the comic universe where
nothing can go wrong, and there's this overpowering, terrible violence," Boyle
continues. "I love Flannery O'Connor's 'A Good Man Is Hard to Find' and Evelyn
Waugh's 'A Handful of Dust' because they suddenly violate the familiar comic
balance. I once read 'King Bee' to a women's group in Iowa City -- very genteel
-- and they were horrified. None of them spoke or even looked at each other for
five minutes afterward." He snickers. "It was great!"

Boyle has at age 42 come into his own. His intoxication with words, both in and
out of the dictionary ("porcipophagic," "clerestory" and "testudineous" emerge
from the mouths of unschooled narrators), meticulous historical research and
facility with a spectrum of narrative voices and situations -- in short, his
antiminimalism -- have long won plaudits. But in his last two novels Boyle
finally yoked his arrogance of talent and his wintry outlook to characters who
weren't mere toys but men and women bouncing with emotional depth and ferment.
Critics' comparisons of Boyle to his polestars William Faulkner and Gabriel
Garcia Marquez, formerly hyperbolic, suddenly tiptoed into the outskirts of
plausibility.

"World's End," which considered the ill-omened strivings of three Dutch and
American Indian families across 300 years, was an ambitious attempt to do for
Boyle's native Hudson River Valley in one novel what Faulkner did for his
fictional Yoknapatawpha County in 14, and it won the PEN/Faulkner award for
American Fiction in 1988. The novel begins with a lofty echo of Marquez, then
swiftly veers toward the prosaic and the downright silly, a modulation that
recurs throughout the book: "On the day he lost his right foot, Walter Van Brunt
had been haunted, however haphazardly, by ghosts of the past. It began in the
morning, when he woke to the smell of potato pancakes, a smell that reminded him
of his mother, dead of sorrow after the Peterskill riots of 1949, and it carried
through the miserable lunch break he divided between recollections of his
paternal grandmother and a liverwurst sandwich that tasted of dead flesh and
chemicals. Over the whine of the lathe that afternoon he was surprised by a
waking dream of his grandfather, a morose, big-bellied man so covered with hair
he could have been an ogre out of a children's tale, and then, just before five,
he had a vague rippling vision of a leering Dutchman in sugar-loaf hat and
pantaloons."

Says the novelist Russell Banks, one of the PEN/ Faulkner-prize judges: "What
knocked me out was the book's ambition. It took him out of the category of
witty, clever social satire and put him in another league. He reached for the
moon, and maybe he didn't get it all, but he risked the talent, and that's a
scary thing to do."

"East Is East," Boyle's seventh and perhaps most accomplished book, is an
account of Hiro Tanaka, an outcast Japanese sailor who jumps ship off the coast
of Georgia to seek the American dream. Hiro is touchingly eager to assimilate,
"to get to Beantown, the Big Apple, to the City of Brotherly Love; he had to
blend in with the masses, find himself a job, an apartment with Western
furniture and Japanese appliances. . . . " Instead he must flee from swamp to
swamp, tormented by mosquitoes and leeches and hounded by a rogues' gallery of
crackers and immigration agents. Hiro finds brief shelter at a writers' colony,
but that soon proves even more cutthroat than the swamp, and he pelts back into
the bog and toward the novel's harrowing ending.  With "World's End" and "East
Is East," Boyle's critical notices, almost always glowing, achieved
incandescence. Gail Godwin's review of "East Is East," on the front page of The
New York Times Book Review, declared it "an absolutely stunning work, full of
brilliant cross-cultural insights, his usual virtuoso language and one marvelous
scene after another." The novelist Ann Beattie speaks with an admiration shared
by many writers when she says Boyle "is wonderful at casting a cold eye on
things; at being smart; at taking the present moment, in all its grandness and
combatant weirdness, and finding in it metaphoric resonance. He's just a
terrific writer." Sales of Boyle's books, at first in the dispiriting low four
figures, rose to 16,000 hard-cover and 52,000 paperback for "World's End"; "East
Is East," with 45,000 copies in print, quickly made The Los Angeles Times and
Washington Post best-seller lists.

But to Boyle, that's not enough. He tells interviewers he'd like to achieve the
glamorous success that Kurt Vonnegut had in the 60's and that John Irving
achieved with "The World According to Garp"; he tells friends, in the glinting
deadpan that masks his serious jokes, that he wants to be the most famous writer
alive and the greatest writer ever.

Boyle believes this entails frank self-promotion, and unlike many writers who
prefer to let the works speak for themselves, or at most to read in a grudging
monotone before sprinting for the sherry, he lives to perform. He tells
preposterous stories to warm up the crowd ("You may recall that when I was here
in New York two years ago I achieved cold fusion in a pair of mayonnaise jars in
my hotel room . . . "), is at ease on the "Today" show and "Late Night With
David Letterman" (Letterman: "Do you do research?" Boyle: "Well, I'm no James
Michener . . . ") and never, ever overestimates his audience's attention span or
intelligence ("I feel like I'm the only egghead in a world of morons").

Boyle is not unusual among serious writers in believing television to be his
enemy; he is unusual in appropriating its sensibility, in choosing to perform
only stories that are lurid, funny or violent and, most of all, very short.
Though 90 to 120 minutes is the norm, Boyle rarely reads for more than 50 --
which, at his current fee, is $50 a minute. Weeks after the Butler/Gabriel
reading in Los Angeles, Boyle is still fretting about the poor acoustics, the
poor lighting and, most of all, the poor attendance. "I don't want to sound like
a prima donna, but everything has to be just right," he says. "There should be
just you bathed in a spotlight, reading into a huge crowd in the darkness. I'm
used to reading for 500, not 50, and it made me think, Jesus, my life is a
failure."

"He wants to be a rock star and win the Nobel Prize," says Frank Conroy,
director of the University of Iowa Writers' Workshop and an admirer of Boyle's.
Conroy and other writers have chided Boyle for reading the same "greatest hits"
over and over, even to literary audiences. Boyle responds: "That's the old
school, where a reading is a dignified sharing of new work, challenging work.
Well, I don't care if the audience is 600 Saul Bellows, I'm going to knock them
dead with a comedy routine. I'm out there as a missionary for literature,
because if people laugh and enjoy themselves, they might actually do something
as bizarre as reading the book."

When Boyle accepted the PEN/Faulkner award at Washington's decorous Folger
Shakespeare Library, instead of the customary novel excerpt he read "Hard Sell,"
a knockout piece about a public relations man trying to improve the Ayatollah
Khomeini's image. "They went crazy," Boyle says. "Someone sent me a picture that
shows Russell Banks and Susan Stamberg [the moderator] helpless, drooling with
laughter, and nearby the runners-up are looking grim as hell, thinking, What's
this idiot going to do next?"

"Every writer needs to create a myth about himself," Frank Conroy says. "It's
like an Indian running around the fire before going into the woods, shouting,
'How brave I am!' Tom is just a lot more public about running around the fire
than everyone else, and Tom's myth -- the way he embraces the dynamics of pop
culture, of MTV -- is new and strange."

Boyle's close friend Alan Arkawy says: "Tom does want to become the greatest
writer ever. But he also really wants to be famous the same way Zsa Zsa Gabor
wants to be famous."


"THE PUBLICIST AND the audience like the idea of this literary rebel," Boyle
says, trying on the done-it-all scowl that graces his book-jacket photos. He
sits in the wooden gazebo high on the slope behind his house, staring out at the
San Fernando Valley. Sometimes, at the end of one of the carousing evenings that
burnish Boyle's legend of hipness, he and his friends come up here to urinate
over the side.

Boyle and his buddies like to get drunk; speculate about the feminine mystique
in terms unlikely to amuse Betty Friedan; wake up at 7 A.M. on strangers' floors
in Flagstaff, Ariz., and burn dolls' heads in fireplaces. (For the record, Boyle
unconvincingly denies that he blew up one pub's toilet but cheerfully admits
that he and Griff Stevens recently absconded with the management's "jacket
required" jacket from New York City's Algonquin Hotel.) Sometimes, alone and
stone drunk, Boyle cranks Bruce Springsteen or plays his saxophone at
neighbor-vexing volume, recalling the glory days a few years ago when he sang
for a band called the Ventilators, his voice vaguely reminiscent of the Animals'
Eric Burdon. Very vaguely.

"The audience thinks, 'He's bad,' " Boyle says. "They want me to be running
wild, to die young. But you could also present me as the family man with a Ph.D.
who's been with his wife for 20 years, loves his three kids, is a tenured
professor at U.S.C., lives in the suburbs and plants trees in his backyard."

Russell Banks says: "This hipster that we greet and interview is really a total
invention of his. It will be interesting to watch him in the coming years,
because it's a hard persona to project when you're 65 and bald."

Boyle's wife, Karen, noting that her husband writes methodically from 9 A.M. to
1 P.M. seven days a week, says that secretly "Tom is more like a workhorse than
a thoroughbred." Though Boyle still kicks over the traces occasionally, vanished
is the young drugstore cowboy who used heroin and tangled with the law, heading
nowhere but the graveyard.

Until he found writing. Then, like many of his generation, Boyle backed from the
edge of the abyss into the relative safety of family life. Asked if he ever
thinks of Flaubert's remark -- "One's existence should be in two parts: one
should live like a bourgeois and think like a demigod" -- Boyle nods vehemently.
"I subscribe to Flaubert's dictum totally. It saved my life."


"YOU SIT HERE, READING endlessly," says George Plimpton, editor of The Paris
Review, "and you wait two or three years before something makes you leap out of
your chair. Boyle did that to me."

The galvanizing story -- "Descent of Man," which Plimpton published in 1977 --
was the first of two Boyle stories about love affairs between women and
chimpanzees. In one memorable scene, Jane and her unnamed human lover (not,
presumably, Tarzan), go to a restaurant that serves live monkey brains. The
monkey is placed under the table, with its exposed brains poking up through a
hole: "Jane laughed, and plunged her stick into the pink. Beneath the table, in
the dark, a tiny fist clutched at my pant leg."

But Boyle is hardly limited to Grand Guignol. His story "Stones in My Passway,
Hellhound on My Trail" ends with a gut-punch evocation of a blues guitarist
who's been fed rat poison by a jilted woman: "And then suddenly the voice chokes
off, gags, the guitar slips to the floor with a percussive shock. His bowels are
on fire. He stands, clutches his abdomen, drops to hands and knees. 'Boy's had
too much of that Mexican,' someone says. He looks up, a sword run through him,
panting, the shock waves pounding through his frame. . . . "

The most familiar Boyle persona is the wise guy who conjures up his characters
with lapidary prose, then drops them on a whoopee cushion. In "World's End" he
evokes a marriage as follows: "He loved her, too, in his way. She was a striking
woman, with her startled eyes, her fine bones and the way she carried herself
like a gift on a tray, and sometimes he found himself longing for her as she
used to be. There were times, though, when he let his mind wander and pictured
her fatally injured in an auto accident or the victim of a malignant virus."

Yet the story "If the River Was Whiskey" straightforwardly considers Tiller, a
boy trying to befriend his idle, alcoholic father. The two go fishing for pike,
and his father, after a rousing struggle, boats a fish and exults. Tiller looks
at it: "It wasn't a pike. Tiller had watched Joe Matochik catch one off the dock
one night. Joe's pike had been dangerous, full of teeth, a long, lean, tapering
strip of muscle and pounding life. This was no pike. It was a carp. A fat,
pouty, stinking, ugly mud carp. . . . Tiller looked at his father and felt like
crying."

Boyle's ease of movement among voices and subjects -- "Water Music" was about
18th-century English explorers on the River Niger; "Budding Prospects" portrayed
a California marijuana farm; and his next novel will be about the origins of the
health-food craze in turn-of-the-century Battle Creek, Mich. -- often confounds
his critics. But Boyle himself seems almost clinical when discussing his
hydra-headed prose: "It's not that I have 10 options for a voice and I check
them off," he says. "It's more a question of modes than voices. I think, This is
a satiric piece about the foibles of my fellow men, or This is a tall tale or
This is a moving piece with a strong resolution, and the voice emerges."

"You can't pin him down," says Amanda Vaill, Boyle's editor at Viking Penguin,
"and that infuriates some people. There's one group that only likes the satire
and humor, and they want him to be wicked, ironic and lean. Then there are the
ones who like Barthian complexity, who like it operatic and long. And now there
are the ones who prefer his so-called New Maturity and Vulnerability, who see a
progression in soulfulness and deplore what they see as his easy, cheap-trick
laughter."

The last school may number the most adherents. Katherine Kearns, reviewing
Boyle's first book of stories, "Descent of Man," in the Carolina Quarterly,
presciently saw "a gargantuan irreverence . . . that refuses to acknowledge the
profound complications of living and being human; [that] irreverence is Boyle's
weakness and his strength." Benjamin DeMott, writing in The New York Times Book
Review, declared "World's End" a turning point in a "career that seems now to
have no clear limits" but noted that in Boyle's previous work "caprice and
mugging were the norms, and the career seemed to point in the direction of
superior literary horseplay, not heft."

Boyle used to respond to such critiques by muttering, "Oh, those idiots, can't
they see that I'm writing a beautifully designed story?" For a long time, Boyle
says, "I was more interested in stories as a formal structure -- the only
emotion was a kind of black comedy, a hipper-than-it-all laughing at everything.
But I began to realize the critics might be right. I want to do emotions, and I
think I've demonstrated that I can. I even wrote a human love story recently,
just to see if I could."

Then, as he ticks through the unsavory characteristics of his novels'
protagonists -- one insufferable, one a scamp, one callow, one naive -- Boyle
shamelessly reverses field. "Well, it's true that none of my characters are
admirable," he says. "But maybe I'm primarily a satirist, and a satirist needs
to hold up what's not admirable. The reviewers -- and my editor, too -- seem to
like what's safer, what they're comfortable with. Many American writers could
have written the familiar familial empathy in 'If the River Was Whiskey,' but
only one -- me -- could have written stories like 'The Human Fly' or 'Sorry
Fugu' [stories about, respectively, an insanely plucky daredevil and a
restaurateur who seduces a hard-to-please food critic]. If I'm to have a lasting
impact on literature, it will probably be for the more bizarre material that is
natural to me."


BOYLE SHIFTS DIRT in his backyard, widening the paths that wind through the
oleander, pine and coyote brush he has planted to hold the arid hillside in
place. As he trundles the wheelbarrow to and fro, he contemplates further
mischief in an escalating war with the pocket gophers. "They're just like
starfish," he says. "You cut them to pieces and their limbs regenerate new
gophers." Sweating in the sun, he seems momentarily tranquil.

But when the conversation turns to the Hogarthian undercurrents in his work,
Boyle is forthrightly bleak. "I'm as depressed deep down as Samuel Beckett is on
the surface," he says. "I'm not looking ahead joyfully to the rest of my life or
the future of the human race. I've always written about man as an animal species
among other animals, competing for limited resources. Our population is
exploding, our environment is dying, science has debunked God. When there are
too many rabbits, they all get tularemia and die off, and that's the way we're
heading. Somebody's dying, somebody's getting a brain tumor right now -- why
isn't it you? It could be you, and, as it's an awful universe, it probably will
be you tomorrow." He snickers, his knee drumming now with nervous energy.

"That all life is decay may strike some people as pessimistic," says Boyle's
friend Griff Stevens, "but for Tom it's a hilarious joke." Emblems of man's
corporeal nature -- a morbid fascination with the food that goes in one orifice
and the fluids that come out the others -- are a recurrent memento mori in
Boyle's work. Fetid images of mud, lice and pus haunt the air around his
Olivetti typewriter and eventually seep onto the page.

But Boyle's scorn for man's "doltishness, racism, unconsciousness toward the
environment and history, gluttony and greed" is coupled with a febrile interest
in the etiology of those flaws; he is that rare cynic who remains alive to the
world. "He's a perpetual child," says Griff Stevens. "If there's something out
there wiggling, he'll poke it with a stick."

"The most valuable thing about the whole human experience is innocence," Boyle
says, "and you get disabused of it in childhood." In his novels Boyle always has
"a monumental character who embodies fate, who you throw your character up
against, a supermaniac who punishes naivete by giving no quarter." Life imitates
art: Boyle recalls taking his family down to the river when Kerrie was 3. "She
was a totally sweet child, supremely innocent, and then this monstrous kid began
rubbing sand in her face and eyes. She cried and appealed to me, but I didn't
interfere, because I wouldn't always be there to stop the monstrous kids. It has
to happen to all of us."

Boyle's own innocence died young in Peekskill, N.Y. His father, a school-bus
driver, and his mother, a secretary, were alcoholics. "His father was basically
not there, even when he was there," says Gordon Baptiste, a childhood friend.
When he was 17, Boyle foresightedly changed his name from Thomas John Boyle --
his father's name -- to the memorable battle cry T. Coraghessan Boyle, the
trumpeting "Coraghessan" (pronounced cor-RAG-a-sen) taken from his mother's
family. Boyle recalls, "My mother would say to me of my father: 'What he does is
crap. You can be better, do better than working with your hands.'

"I tried to understand him, but he was usually extremely morose and insensibly
drunk, like his father before him. He'd grown up in an orphanage because his
father couldn't take care of him. My mother always wanted us to go to church,
and he'd say, 'I went to church every day for six years in St. Joseph's Home.'
She also always wanted us to go camping, and he'd say, 'I camped for a year and
a half in France during the war.' So we never went out much as a family. My
mother told me he had had a personality like mine, very lively and funny, but
the war disarranged him somehow. . . . " Boyle's voice dwindles, and he jumps up
to move some dirt. His last two novels have featured a foredoomed search for a
missing father.

Placed in a class for slow learners in second and third grades, Boyle gradually
fell in with a set of excitable boys, many of whom remain close friends. In high
school they drank hard, wore torn leather jackets, peeled out in the family
station wagon and busted up churches. They once stole a three-foot-high statue
of Jesus Christ and placed it on Peekskill's main street so it appeared to be
directing traffic. Boyle characterizes his role in this vandalism as "mainly
being led by friends who had a lot of anger to get out -- when you're young and
you have hormones racing around, you break things." In spite of his father,
Boyle has become an avid outdoorsman, but to this day he won't go into a
cathedral, even as a tourist.

Boyle went to the State University of New York at Potsdam with the idea of being
a music major, skated through with about a 2.0 average and taught high-school
English at his alma mater to avoid the Vietnam draft, drifting into a weekend
smack habit and a grungy life outwitting police searches. He was a
self-described "dilettante of heroin" for two years: "We were killing pain in
our bodies before we had any pain to kill."

A friend's near-fatal overdose and his mother's concern finally made Boyle face
the question lurking beneath youthful nihilism: how much do you really want to
die? Boyle kicked the habit and -- though he remembers no epiphanic arrival at
the typewriter -- began to write. He had had one creative-writing class at
Potsdam, and he admired the work of John Barth, Thomas Pynchon and Robert
Coover, but it wasn't until The North American Review published his story "The
OD and Hepatitis Railroad or Bust" that he embraced writing as a vocation. In
1972, a few months before his father died, Boyle was accepted by the prestigious
Iowa Writers' Workshop, solely on the strength of his writing samples. "If
they'd considered my academic record and such niceties as peer and teacher
recommendations, I'd still be in Peekskill," Boyle says. He left five years
later with a perfect 4.0 average, a Ph.D. in 19th-century British literature and
his bent for macabre tales honed into a salable skill.

Since then Boyle has made his living writing and teaching writing at the
University of Southern California. The big changes in the last decade have been
the arrival of children and the not coincidental filtering of genuine empathy
into his writing.  "His earlier stories, to me, had a real problem with women,"
Boyle's wife, Karen, says. "But they're less threatening now."

"East Is East" has a female character -- Ruth Dershowitz, an ambitious but
undertalented writer -- who, in her zest for fame, her yearnings for love and
bursts of altruism and her ultimate self-deceptions, quivers with the
contradictions and sadness of a real person. Boyle believes she is his pinnacle
in character development. "Ruth Dershowitz," he says, "and I've been saving this
for these interviews -- c'est moi, as Flaubert said of Emma Bovary. I had all
her anxieties and petty jealousies when I was young and at Iowa."

The anxieties haven't entirely disappeared. As he walks me around his palm-lofty
neighborhood, holding forth on overdevelopment and declining real-estate values,
Boyle talks about his fears. "I used to be worried about children and how they'd
cut down my freedom. I took Kerrie to see 'King Kong' when she was 2 days old,
and we sat in the front row, and afterward I had no idea how to feed her with
the bottle. I had never seen a baby in my life, and I was terrified and drunk
and crazy. Now I've got my life in order, mostly. I'm not Bukowski, I'm not
going to be giving readings drunk for the rest of my life. That possibility
frightens me, terrifies me, because my parents died drunk. I've been drinking
too much lately, but I've stopped now, and it's O.K.

"The strange thing is," he continues, scuffing his black boots on the sidewalk,
"that though I may sound cocky and self-confident a lot, and that puts some
interviewers off, I don't have any fears of being a glib talk-show guy in a
funny jacket. I mean I'll do it, and I'll enjoy it, going up there to look like
a Christmas tree ball on TV, but I'm never going to become Truman Capote. The
work, finally, is most important."

We walk on in silence, and then he laughs. "And it's going pretty well, right? I
mean, here I am in headlong pursuit of fame, just racing toward it, arms
outstretched, and so far it's great, because I'm at the first stage, where
people recognize me and say, 'Hey, Tom Boyle! I liked your last book!' Stage 2
is 'Hey, Tom Boyle! You sunavabitch!' " He mimes an angry fan throwing an upper
cut. "Stage 3 is Jerry Salinger, where you live behind a big fence and don't
answer the phone."

"O.K.," I ask, "would you rather be Emily Dickinson, where nobody knows who you
are when you're alive, but 100 years after you're dead you're read by every
college sophomore in America----."

"Choice B!" Boyle interrupts. "Choice B, whatever it is! Choice B is where
everyone reads me now but after I die I'm forgotten, right?"

"Well, yeah, but to make it harder, Choice B is that everyone reads you but you
sell best in drugstores -- you're not really respected."

Boyle says instantly, "Then I'd take Choice C, where I lose both legs and have a
brain tumor, but everybody reads me and respects me, both now and after I'm
dead. Perfect."

NAME: T. Coraghessan Boyle

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: T. Corraghessan Boyle (Alon Reininger/Contact for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Gulf Analogy: Munich or Vietnam?

BYLINE: By Alexander M. Haig Jr.; Alexander M. Haig Jr., Secretary of State from
1981 to 1982, was Supreme Commander of NATO from 1975 to 1979.

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1269 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


International conflicts attract historical analogies the way honey attracts
bears, because the "lessons learned" from such analogies are supposed to help us
avoid past mistakes. The Persian Gulf crisis is no exception, and two analogies
in particular -- Munich and Vietnam -- might have something to tell us.

The first, more familiar to older Americans, is Munich -- the story of the
disastrous appeasement of Hitler, redeemed later only by horrible loss of life
in a terrible war. The second, more familiar to younger Americans, is Vietnam --
the story of disastrous American military involvement, never redeemed despite
its costs.

Which analogy, Munich or Vietnam, the 1930's or the 1960's, has more to tell us?

Munich symbolized the failure of the international community to defend basic
values: freedom, sovereignty, the settlement of conflict without resort to
force. Throughout the 1930's, Japan, Italy and Germany successfully challenged
those values.

Spurious historical claims, geopolitical "interests," ethnic and racial theories
were invoked by aggressors to justify their conquests. Victims included both
neighbors, such as Czechoslovakia or Manchuria, and distant lands, such as
Ethiopia.

That some of the states conquered were primitive or, in any event, remote from
the concerns of the democracies were facts used by the aggressors and their
apologists to argue that their actions "did not matter" or did not "affect vital
interests." But each conquest strengthened the aggressors until finally vital
interests were unambiguously threatened.

Yet, the important difference between 1935 and 1939 was that the military power
of the aggressors grew. When war ultimately became the only effective means of
resistance, the odds did not favor the defenders of freedom, and the costs in
blood and national treasure mounted dramatically.

Saddam Hussein and Iraq fit important parts of this metaphor. His stated reasons
for assaulting Kuwait are spurious history, a claim of economic necessity and a
vaulting ambition to "lead" the Arabs. These are excuses he can use over and
over again to justify further aggression.

Like Nazi Germany, Saddam Hussein's Iraq can only enjoy the benefits of its
conquest if the international community acquiesces. Armed with the benefits of
aggression, including oil, Iraq will surely be much the stronger, much better
able to buy and perfect the weapons of mass destruction that its leader craves.

In short, the appeasement of Saddam Hussein, like that of his forebearers in the
30's, would favor a greater crisis later and enlarge Iraq's capability to
prevail in such a crisis. Saudi Arabia, Jordan, the United Arab Emirates,
possibly Egypt, surely Israel, would be drawn one by one into either submission
or conflict.

After an Iraqi victory in the gulf, it is all too easy to foresee the U.S. and
Israel standing together against a hostile Iraq-led Arab world. It is almost as
easy to see Israel standing alone against an international coalition intent on
forcing it to take actions against its vital interests, the better to avoid a
test of strength with Saddam Hussein and the Arabs. In short, a real Munich.

The Munich metaphor, however powerful its appeal, must compete with another
striking American memory: Vietnam. The Vietnam metaphor appeals to two very
influential groups, the moralists and the pragmatists.

The moralists saw Ho Chi Minh's Vietnam as a victim of imperialism; some also
condemned the war as illegal because it had never been declared by Congress. But
both will find Iraq hard to fit into these categories.

No one seriously suggests that Saddam Hussein is a misunderstood victim rather
than a willful criminal. And as for the legalities, the worst distortion of the
Vietnam metaphor is to believe that a declaration of war would have mattered.
The Tonkin Gulf Resolution served well until the war went badly. A declaration
of war would have been overtaken by the same loss of popular support.

The same would apply in the gulf crisis. Prompt military success or failure, not
a Congressional declaration or lack thereof, will determine the decisive level
of popular support. Prudent and meticulous consultation, rather than endless
uninformed debate and authorizing votes makes far better sense.

It is not misplaced morality or misunderstood legalism that matters most but a
far more potent Vietnam metaphor: success or failure. Today, most Americans
remember U.S. policy in Southeast Asia as self-defeating. It was a war without
clear political purpose or definable military objective.

Most Americans eventually joined this pragmatic group, forcing the U.S. to
withdraw. Their question today is, Do we have a gulf policy with clear and
justifiable purpose? If we go to war, is there a definable and achievable end?

The President has in fact defined clear purposes: unconditional Iraqi
withdrawal; restoration of the legitimate Kuwait Government; protection of
American lives, and peace and stability in the gulf.

He has justified these demands on several grounds: the stakes for international
peace in the post-cold-war period; the danger that Iraq might lead the gulf and
the Middle East into even greater conflict later and the dangers to the
international economy of Iraqi domination of the oil supply. And he has said
that the conflict can be resolved peacefully if Iraq cares to do so -- that is,
resolved in accordance with the Security Council resolutions, not through
so-called "partial solutions" that reward Iraq for its aggression.

Some "pragmatists" are troubled by the thought that this leaves no face-saving
way for Iraq to get out. But we have no reason to help Saddam Hussein unless we
believe that by doing so we avoid something worse, such as war. But if we
believe that Saddam Hussein eventually must be rewarded to avoid war, then our
current military efforts are essentially a bluff and that bluff will be called.
Such a display of strategic ineptitude would certainly bring evil consequences
for our friends and interests throughout the region and beyond.

If war comes, is there a definable military objective? Here is where the Vietnam
analogy does offer a valid lesson. When purposes are clear, means must serve
them. If we are forced to military action, we must know that to expel Iraq from
Kuwait and to assure the peace in the gulf, we will have to destroy Iraq's
capacity to make war.

We should not accept the fallacy that because we want Iraq out of Kuwait, the
war should be confined to Kuwait. Nor should we succumb to a war fought by
degrees in the belief, as in Vietnam, that a few good men, big ships and loud
noises will frighten the culprits.

War, Clemenceau said, is too serious to be left to the generals. By that he
meant that military force must be governed by the ends to which it is applied.
The Vietnam codicil is that war is also too serious to be left to the
politicians. By that I mean that when ends are set, the military forces
available must be used in a professional and decisive way.

Thus, the Munich and Vietnam analogies both have application to the gulf but not
exactly as many would use them. The Munich analogy teaches us not that Saddam
Hussein is already a Hitler but that we must act now to prevent him from
becoming one. The Vietnam analogy instructs us not that we should refrain from
using force but that if our purposes are just and clear, we should use it
decisively.

Perhaps if this is well understood in Washington, it may be understood well
enough in Baghdad for Saddam Hussein or someone else to abandon this aggression
without war.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

For Students in an Electronic Age, Lessons on Watching Television

BYLINE: By RANDALL ROTHENBERG

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1410 words


John Sivert was surprised recently when his 7-year-old daughter, Laura, returned
home from her second-grade class at the Fulton School in Minneapolis and
announced, "You shouldn't accept everything you see on television commercials as
truth."

But Mr. Sivert should not have wondered at his child's precociousness. Like all
public school students in Minneapolis, she is learning to be "media literate."

Long the bane of teachers who denounced its hypnotic allure and saw it competing
with books for children's time, television is slowly but surely entering
American classrooms as a subject. In courses that bear the unwieldy names "Media
Literacy," "Visual Literacy" or "Critical Viewing," students from kindergarten
through high school, from Oakland, Calif. to Norman, Okla., are learning to
analyze television and the other media that pervade their lives.

Understand What They See

Children are learning to distinguish between political commercials and news
stories, writing their own television scripts and reviews, even studying how
television programs are aimed at different demographic groups.

Advocates argue that media literacy courses help children, who watch television
at home and at school anyway, understand that everything they see is not true.
Moreover, these educators contend that the courses are another way of reaching
students who are bored by traditional methods of teaching.

The A. C. Nielsen Company says American children watch an average of four hours
of television at home each day. In addition, by dangling the lure of free video
equipment, Whittle Communications, a Tennessee marketing and media company, says
it has persuaded 5,761 schools in 45 states to show its daily,
advertiser-sponsored news programs in their classrooms.

But many educators believe that media literacy is merely a fad that will take
time from teaching more important subjects. Even Bill Honig, California's
Superintendent of Education, who believes that children should be taught about
"propaganda techniques," shies from recommending a media literacy requirement.

"We're still struggling through math, history and science," he said.

Most media literacy courses originated as television-production classes when
schools, with Government aid or through negotiations with local cable television
companies, were given video cameras and other equipment. But many school
districts were not content just to teach students how to produce programs and
began showing their students how to "read" television and other communications
media.

American schools are following the lead of several other countries. Since 1986,
all students from the seventh through the 12th grades in Ontario have been
required to study the conventions and messages of television. This year, media
studies became a required part of the national curriculum in Britain.

One common thread runs through the new media literacy programs: all were created
in response to specific local needs. In Minneapols, a teachers' contract
granting elementary school teachers daily preparation periods away from class
led to the hiring of media specialists to keep children occupied and, later, to
a formal curriculum, said Lyn Lacy, an elementary school media specialist there.

Today, she said, students are taught the differences between news reports,
editorials and commercials in the first and second grades. The school system's
media curriculum, adopted in 1987, also calls for fourth, fifth and sixth
graders to study how color, focus and camera angle influence the appeal of
television messages, and how the length of a presentation and the type of
information included can distort a viewer's understanding of an event.

From Game Shows to Talk Shows

In Norman, the home of the University of Oklahoma, negotiations between the town
and the local cable television company resulted in the building of a
sophisticated television production studio for the school district. In high
school, this has meant elective courses in television production -- but only
after the youngsters take mandatory media courses in their elementary and middle
schools, said Gary M. Kramer, the studio's director.

In the seventh grade, for example, all students in Norman take a three-week
course in communication and research skills, which includes a segment on
television. Students are taught about various television formats, among them,
soap operas, situation comedies, game shows, talk shows and news programs. They
are also introduced to the concept of target audiences, which they are told
include yuppies, retired people, pre-schoolers, housewives and new parents.
After homework assignments that include matching real programs, like "Wall
Street Week," to real audiences, like business people, the youngsters break into
small groups, pick a subject, a format and a target audience, and then write and
produce a television program.

This year, students at the Whittier Middle School in Norman who were studying
the environment did a fictional television news report with an anchor person and
live reports from the field, where they covered the destruction of a tree in a
rain forest.

"In this course, the kids become aware that they are consumers of television,
which they've been all their lives without realizing it," Mr. Kramer said. "It's
supposed to make them less susceptible to manipulation by the media, because
they know what's going on."

In several cities, including New York and Washington, media studies are taught
at special public high schools, which combine production classes with media
literacy courses.

With support from the Scripps-Howard Foundation, Cincinnati opened a High School
for the Communication Professions in September 1989. The school's aim is to
teach professional skills in print journalism, television news, advertising and
public relations and photography. But it is also integrating media studies into
other parts of the curriculum, including seminars on contemporary issues.

"In our first seminar," said Jene M. Galvin, the school's dean, "we are going to
pair the Pulitzer-Prize-winning news photo of the South Vietnamese general, with
his arm outstretched, shooting the suspected Viet Cong guy, with another photo
of a homeless man from Cincinnati, a bum, who was killed under a bridge.

"That picture never ran," he continued. "The editor of the local paper said no.
But the Vietnam picture, as we all know, ran worldwide. Both are violent; both
have blood and gore. The kids will be challenged to analyze a core question,
about why one ran and the other didn't."

Aimed at Potential Dropouts

In Oakland, educators are looking to media studies as a way of keeping potential
dropouts in school. In 1985, the district started a "media academy" at the John
C. Fremont High School, which combines vocational training in print and
broadcast journalism with classes that use the media as an avenue to teach basic
skills. In their language-arts classes, for example, sophomores write and
videotape their own commercials to help teach writing and speaking.

"You base it on what they know, and these kids know commercials," said Steve
O'Donoghue, the academy's director. "Having to sell something is a real good way
to develop verbal skills. They have to be real specific about the language they
use and the images they're portraying. We also want them to be conscious that
this is an artifice, that it's a skill you learn, not magic, and that you don't
have to believe everything you hear or see."

Sixty-six of the 70 students in its first two classes, in 1989 and 1990,
graduated from the academy, and the remaining four received their equivalency
diplomas, Mr. O'Donoghue said.

'What Are We Displacing?'

Media literacy education is not being welcomed by all. Many educators see media
literacy courses as a capitulation to popular tastes that steals valuable time
from teaching literature and other important subjects.

"Do we teach it instead of or in addition to books and literature?" asked
Chester E. Finn Jr., a former assistant Secretary of Education in the Reagan
Administration who now teaches education at Vanderbilt University. "If it's in
addition, then we need to add to the time schools have. If it's instead of, what
are we displacing? Shakespeare or Dickens?"

Dr. Finn went on: "I don't object to this as part of the mission of schools. I
just have a hesitancy to replacing other important content."

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Missiles Give Salvador Rebels a New Advantage

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1677 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Dec. 9


The stubby-winged AC-47 circled the hilltop village of La Laguna, ready to
support advancing troops with a blanket of fire from its three .50-caliber
machine guns. But the crew never had a chance to fire, Salvadoran military
officials and rebels say.

They say a Soviet-designed SA-14 surface-to-air missile slammed into the wing.
The plane went into a spin and crashed into the hill, reportedly killing the
captain and five of the six other crewmen.

The AC-47, one of three in the Salvadoran Air Force, was downed last Tuesday. It
was the first shot down in more than a decade of war and the second plane downed
by a SA-14 missile in 11 days. Their destruction marks a shift in the military
balance of power, Salvadoran commanders and Western diplomats say.

'Rebels Have Clearly Gained'

They say the missiles are on the verge of neutralizing the armed forces' command
of the air, the Government's primary advantage. That would allow the insurgents
to form larger units and to battle the army with matching manpower for the first
time since the early 1980's.

"The rebels have clearly gained," said a senior Western military specialist, who
spoke on the condition that he not be identified. "This is definitely a plus for
them, absolutely no question about it. They've changed the level of the playing
field. To what degree, however, remains to be seen."

The insurgents are showing previously unimaginable bravado. On Thursday, a
column of more than 75 rebels pursued an army unit along the main coastal
highway near Jiquilisco, 55 miles southeast of the capital. Angry army
commanders there said they retreated because pleas for air support were in vain.

Air force commanders acknowledge that they are being more cautious. Planes that
used to circle combat areas while coordinating with ground troops are now
immediately recalled if there is a communications problem. That is creating
infantry complaints about the lack of air support, air force commanders say.

Rebel May Have More Missiles

There is no way to know how many missiles the insurgents have. Western diplomats
estimate that they have fired 7 to 12 in the last three weeks and the assumption
is that their arsenal remains well stocked. "They have more," said Col. Manfredo
Koeningsberg, the fourth-ranking air force commander.

A State Department official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said in
Washington that the missiles had come "almost surely from Cuba or Nicaragua or
both," although he said the Administration did not have hard evidence.

The United States, the Salvadoran armed forces' main supplier, has repeatedly
vowed to respond in kind to the introduction of advanced rebel weapon systems.
The aquisition of missiles by rebels helped change the balance of forces in wars
in Afghanistan and Nicaragua.

Calling the missiles' introduction a "signficant escalation," the State
Department announced on Friday that the United States would speed the delivery
of $48.1 million in military aid.

The American announcement came after three weeks of fierce fighting that caused
about 700 casualties, including hundreds of civilians, and left much of the
country without electricity or water. The rebel drive comes at a particularly
difficult moment for the army, which is stretched thin protecting the harvest.

But few officials doubt that the insurgents could maintain their military
campaign almost indefinitely. Some Western diplomats have begun to ask whether
the rebels could be on the verge of a military breakthrough.

The Road to Peace Talks

The campaign comes almost exactly a year since the largest rebel offensive of
the war.

At that time, the rebels failed to ignite an insurrection, suggesting that their
claims of overwhelming support from Salvadorans were overstated. Some residents
helped build barricades, but they became less cooperative as the fighting
intensified.

Still, the offensive showed that the army and its American advisers, who had
claimed that the insurgents were in decline, were victims of their own
propaganda. The fighting forced the Government to recognize that its ambitious
development plans depended on the guerrillas, and it paved the way for peace
talks.

The major military lesson of the fighting was that the guerrillas were a match
for the army except for air power. The army did not gain the upper hand until
the air force began strafing and rocketing the rebels. The air force has about
80 planes and helicopters, split evenly between transports and attack craft.

The offensive also showed that the insurgents had rebuilt the urban arm crushed
by Goverment repression in the early 1980's. They brought the war into San
Salvador, long an oasis of calm, and forced the armed forces to devote a large
part of their resources to a static defense of the capital.

Soldiers Killed in an Ambush

That set the stage for a rural campaign that erupted in earnest last month.

The guerrillas entered the village of San Agustin in the eastern department of
Usulutan on Nov. 16 disguised as soccer players. They cut several soldiers'
throats, witnesses who saw the bodies said, before withdrawing in the face of a
counterattack.

But the retreat was a trap. The army has acknowledged that 7 soldiers were
killed in an ensuing ambush. One soldier said 33 died, while an officer's wife
said the entire company of 69 men had been wiped out in one of the armed forces'
worst defeats in recent memory.

The incident is one in a series of signs that the insurgents have learned to
counter the army's advantage in firepower and that their command structure
remains superior. Despite some improvements, the armed forces promote largely by
old-school ties. Some units have earned even the rebels' admiration, but others
are little more than private profit centers for corrupt but politically
well-connected commanders.

Rebel troops are also more highly motivated than Government soldiers, most of
whom are taken off the streets and fight for little more than a monthly stipend
-- $80 a month for raw recruits -- that is often their families' only income.
Many soldiers are little more than publicly paid servants for the country's
newest and most powerful elite, carrying the packs of their commanders and
shining their boots.

Ambushes Come Regularly

Gen. Maxwell Thurmond, the former commander of the United States Southern
Command, told the army last year that it should take the war to the rebels. The
armed forces responded by regularly dispatching units to guerrilla strongholds.
But usually patrols still enter the areas as raiders. And the army still ignores
a basic tenet of counterinsurgency: it sends columns with as many as 300
soldiers. They are quickly detected and regularly ambushed.

"Those operations don't really disturb us," Haroldo, a senior rebel officer,
said last month as a large army unit circled nearby. "The peasants warn us when
they come. We hide and when they have passed, we return to our positions."

When heavy shooting erupted on Feb. 26 in Perquin, the guerrillas' de facto
capital about 100 miles northeast of San Salvador, rebel supporters fled into
the surrounding hils convinced that the army had launched a suprise attack.

When they stopped to regroup, they noticed there was no return fire. They
returned and found that guerrillas were shooting into the air out of frustration
over the overwhelming defeat of their Sandinista allies in Nicaragua's election
on Jan. 25.

A Psychological Setback

The victory of Violeta Barrios de Chamorro not only crushed the region's most
influential revolutionary movement, but served to repudiate the guerrillas'
leftist ideology. A severe psychological setback, it was also a major logistical
blow to the rebels, who have long used Nicaragua as a safe haven.

The guerrillas, who had once proudly proclaimed themselves Marxists, said Mrs.
Chamorro's ascension proved that leftist movements were not necessarily
dictatorial and strengthened their claims of being democrats. But the rapid
switch angered many rank and file troops, who had long used "democrat"
disparagingly. Many lower-ranking rebels also opposed concessions made by their
commanders at the continuing peace talks. They say they now have the military
advantage and want to press it.

"The left is in a crisis of development," said Hector Recinos, a leftist labor
leader who was released from jail in a prisoner exchange seven years ago.

Attacks Create a Backlash

The rebels also face a paradox: attacks on the army's main positions, most of
which are in heavily populated areas, cause civilian casualties, creating a
political backlash and handing the Government a potent propaganda tool. In a
recent example, a rebel ambush on Los Chorros, a popular fresh-water spring
outside the capital, last week killed an 8-year-old girl and a 70-year-old
woman. Film of a soldier carrying the dead child is now shown regularly on
national television.

But the 55,000-man armed forces also are facing growing constraints. The
American Congress, which has given the army almost $1 billion in the last
decade, voted two months ago to halve American military aid to $42.5 million.
The cut is particularly painful because Washington had for years declined to
modernize the military, keeping it on what amounted to a maintenance program.
Much of the armed forces' equipment, especially its air arm, dates from the
Vietnam War.

So far at least the effect of the cut has been largely psychological, although
it now appears to have begun to pinch militarily. Soldiers at the brigade
headquarters in Chalatenango, the key to the north, complain they are sent into
battle with less ammunition than the guerrillas. They were equipped with a
bundles of homemade explosive charges -- one pound charges of TNT -- during an
attack on the city last month. A Western military official said the soldiers had
to fight without grenades, a key weapon in urban combat.

"It's a sign of an army husbanding its resources," a Western military specialist
said.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 11, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about the war in El Salvador misstated the date of the
Nicaraguan election. It was Feb. 25, not Jan. 25.

GRAPHIC: Map of El Salvador highlighting La Laguna

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1229 words



INTERNATIONAL A3-13

Over 1,000 foreigners flew out of Iraq after months either hiding in Kuwait or
being held by the Government of Saddam Hussein. The number included 163
Americans. A flight for the estimated 580 Americans remaining is planned for
Tuesday.  Pape A1

Freed hostages speak of ambiguities of their captivity A12

The cost of the military deployment in the Persian Gulf may force the Pentagon
to seek $10 billion to $20 billion in new spending authority from Congress,
senior officials said. A1

Iraq is attempting to delay a meeting with Secretary of State Baker as long as
possible to give Baghdad an excuse for not withdrawing from Kuwait by the Jan.
15 U.N. deadline, the Bush Administration charged.  A12

Hawkish coalition is forming A12

Recruiter's new obstacle: war fear A13

Iran's leader has taken advantage of the Persian Gulf crisis to isolate radical
foes of his policies, to improve relations with Arab Governments and to expand
political and economic ties with Western Europe. A13

The Palestinian uprising in Israel began its fourth year in a climate of
suspicion, hatred and fear. Many Jews are beginning to agree with the Arabs that
the only solution may be permanent separation. A8

Lech Walesa won a landslide victory in Poland's first direct presidential
elections, according to exit polls and early returns. The charismatic
Soli-darity leader soundly defeated his opponent in the runoff election. A1

Students in Albania initiate an unparalleled political protest A5

Ex-Communist chief takes the lead in Serbia's election A6

Kasparov wins 18th game for a one-point leadB4

The rebel forces in El Salvador are on the verge of neutralizing the
Government's command of the air through the use of an anti-aircraft missile. The
balance of military power there is shifting, experts say.  A10

Former rebels in first place in Colombia election A11

Control of Mexico's phone company will be sold for $1.76 billion to a consortium
made up of Mexico's Grupo Carso, the Southwestern Bell Corporation and France
Telecom, the Government announced. D1

Military officers in Bangladesh who were reported to be loyal to the deposed
President, H. M. Ershad, were being moved out of their commands as the army
chief sought to prevent any armed intervention in politics.  A3

Muslim-Hindu riots in India leave 93 dead in three days A3

Mombasa Journal: A port waits with open arms for sailors A4

NATIONAL A14-17, B8-10

Political memo: The issue of race reverberates in American politics like few
others. That helps explain the furor between Democrats and Republicans over job
quotas, which will be at the heart of the renewed debate over civil rights
legislation.  A1

Television is now taught as a subject in classrooms across the nation. With
names like "Media Literacy," the courses teach children to analyze and
understand television and the other media that pervade their lives. A1

A strike against a catfish plant in Mississippi highlights working conditions
some say are more offensive than when people picked cotton. Most managers are
white, most workers are single black mothers and even bathroom breaks are
rationed.  A1

Episcopal dioceses in New York, Washington and Atlanta are urging the church's
leader to cancel plans for a general convention in Arizona, where voters
rejected a holiday honoring the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. A14

King's daughter cancels Arizona appearance A14 Helena Journal: A Montana
stopover? Tutu sees a reason A14

An investigator of airline crashes said some element of human performance is
involved in most such accidents. John K. Lauber said the air traffic control
system must be able to recognize and trap errors so accidents can be prevented.
A17

Plumbing fixed, shuttle still faces an early return A14

Deputies are investigated over a mail booby trap A16

New council setup spurned in Dallas A16

Fewer people are seeking adoption than had been previously thought, a new
Government study has found. The survey found that 200,000 women tried to adopt a
child in 1988, one-tenth the number usually cited. B10

The discount rate will probably drop as part of the Federal Reserve Board's next
step to ease credit conditions. The discount rate, the interest rate banks pay
to borrow from the central bank, has been at 7 percent for two years. D1

REGIONAL B1-6

Mounds of garbage began piling up in front of New York City businesses as the
2,100 members of the teamsters union who collect trash went on strike for higher
pay. Pickup of residential trash will not be affected. B1

The Daily News's parent company convenes a quarterly board meeting tomorrow.
There is an air of suspense about what may happen, as some analysts speculate
the company may cut losses and close the paper.  B1

Dinosaurs are disappearing again, this time from the American Museum of Natural
History. The fossil collection that has fascinated generations will be
remodeled, but nobody wants to see them go yet.  B1

The Republican majority leader of New York's State Senate is not known for
making bold statements. But after an impressive party victory, Ralph J. Marino
is feeling confident enough to exert his power more strongly. B1 The agency that
cares for the poor and homeless in New York City is under increasing criticism.
Assessments of the recently-appointed head of the Human Resources Administration
are a mix of praise and warnings that too little has changed. B3

A bus service to state prisons in New York is growing with the increase in the
inmate population. The service's owner said 100,000 people visiting friends and
relatives in jail took his buses last year. B3

A white-tail deer carcass and a fine for $250 B2 They were young refugees of war
when they last met, children who were brought to the United States from France
during World War II. Now in their 50's and 60's, they gathered in New York to
honor the woman who saved them. B4

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

SportsMonday

Basketball: Nets' Coleman loving the limelight C1

Mounting concerns for Knicks C4

Trail Blazers go on a tear C4

Boxing: Iron Mike Tyson returns C2

On Your Own C11

Football: Giants clinch division title C1

49ers edge Bengals C5

Bills rout Colts C5

Redskins top Bears C5

Parcells undeterred by kidney stone C6

Golf: Presssure-filled prelude to big time C2

Hockey: Brown and Conacher spark Devils C3

Olympics: I.O.C. and South Africa set talks C3

Schools: Wagner takes P.S.A.L. football title C7

Arts/Entertainment

The "American Psycho" furor C13

Success of "Home Alone" C13

Reviving big-bang improvisation C13

Threat against Salman Rushdie reconfirmed C14

Theater: Monologues based on Joyce Carol Oates works C14

Word and Image: A Gorbachev biography C20

Obituaries B12

Deane Chandler Davis, former Governor of Vermont

Obituaries: John Alexander, tenor

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A18

Regulate banks: less and more

Freedom soon for the Baltics

Voting Haiti out of the shadows

Pain avoidance in Albany

Letters A18

William Safire: Forming public opinion A19

Anthony Lewis: Will there be war?  A19

ALexander M. Haig Jr.: Gulf analogy: Munich or Vietnam?  A19

Michael Scanlon: Doubting a union, betraying my dad A19

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Deane Chandler Davis Dies at 90; Vermont Governor for Two Terms

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section B; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 466 words


Deane Chandler Davis, a two-term Governor of Vermont and an insurance executive,
died Saturday at Central Vermont Hospital in Berlin. A resident of Montpelier,
he turned 90 years old last month.

Mr. Davis died of complications after gall bladder surgery, the hospital
reported. Active to the end in yet another career, as a writer, he was
hospitalized Nov. 19.

Mr. Davis won the governorship in 1968, when Gov. Philip H. Hoff chose not to
run for a third term. Deemed a conservative, he soon became embroiled in a
well-publicized quarrel with his own Lieutenant Governor, Thomas L. Hayes.

Mr. Hayes, in the tradition of Vermont's liberal Republicanism, challenged Mr.
Davis's priorities and the Governor's support for the Nixon Administration's
Vietnam policy. By 1970, Mr. Hayes announced his own candidacy for the
Republican nomination for Governor, and Mr. Davis turned to the Legislature with
proposals he hoped would give him a strong platform.

Criteria for Builders

The heart of his program became Act 250, a sweeping law on land use that turned
Vermont into the envy of environmentalists across the nation. Like neighboring
states, Vermont was under pressure from housing developments. Law 250 subjected
them to 10 criteria applied by a state commission, including things as specific
as water pollution and as general as "economic impact."

Mr. Davis, then the country's oldest governor, also won more money for
education, welfare and health care, penalties for the polluters of rivers and
lakes, open state primaries, a liberalized divorce law and far-reaching
revisions of state government. With his program in place, he easily defeated Mr.
Hayes in the Republican primary and turned back a Democratic challenge in
November.

In 1972, he decided against seeking a third term and left office at the end of
the year.

An affable man with a thin mustache, Mr. Davis then turned to writing books on
life in Vermont, including his memoirs, which are scheduled to be published in
the spring.

Legislator, Prosecutor, Judge

Mr. Davis was born in East Barre, Vt., the scion of a farming family. He
graduated from Boston University Law School in 1922, became a Barre City
Councilman the next year and went on to serve as a city and state attorney and
Superior Court judge.

In 1940, he joined the Montpelier office of National Life Insurance Company, one
of the country's larger underwriters, as general counsel. He became president in
1950 and was chairman when he was elected Governor in 1968. He also was a past
president of the Life Insurance Association of America and board chairman of the
Institute of Life Insurance.

Mr. Davis's first wife, the former Corinne Eastman, died in 1951. The following
year he married Marjorie Smith Conzelman, who survives.

NAME: Deane Chandler Davis

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Deane Chandler Davis (United Press International, 1973)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Says Cambodia Casts Doubt on Accord

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 201 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 10


A Bush Administration official warned at a congressional hearing today that
recent statements by the Cambodian Government cast doubt on a peace framework
proposed by the United Nations that Phnom Penh had accepted in September.

The United Nations must have a broad mandate to lay the groundwork for a final
peace settlement in Cambodia, Assistant Secretary of State Richard Solomon told
a House Foreign Affairs subcommittee.

He said Phnom Penh leaders had called for a United Nations presence lasting less
than a year and limited to organizing an election, leaving the current regime's
powers unaffected.

"A fair and workable settlement cannot be achieved on this basis," Mr. Solomon
told the subcommittee.

Under a plan approved by the five permanent members of the Security Council last
month, a large contingent of United Nations peacekeepers and administrators
would monitor a ceasefire between Cambodian factions and virtually run the
country until free elections could be held.

Mr. Solomon said some officials in the Vietnamese Government, which backs the
Phnom Penh regime, had made ambiguous statements on the peace process or had put
forward positions opposing the United Nations plan.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
Who's a Partisan?

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 749 words


Milton Berle is back on television and Dan Quayle is back in action. In his
appearance before the Republican governors, however, Mr. Quayle was funnier than
Uncle Miltie.

"By portraying themselves as the party of peace, and the Administration as the
party of war," the Vice President solemnly declared, some Congressional
Democrats "seem to have placed partisanship above statesmanship."


This surely was the greatest flipflop since George Bush forgot to read his own
lips. At least since the third Administration of F.D.R., Republican orators have
castigated the Democrats as "the party of war" because they were in office when
World Wars I and II and the Korean War began -- an exercise in partisanship that
should make a precinct captain blush.  With more justice, Vietnam later was
added to the litany, which some Republican candidates still recite.

Now, to a partisan audience, in a speech dripping with partisanship, a
Republican Vice President accuses the Democrats of "partisanship" and lack of
"statesmanship" -- whatever that is -- for "portraying" the Republicans as "the
party of war." The pot calls the kettle black, and fails to recognize the irony.

Mr. Quayle's remark did serve to make a serious point he did not intend. Since
the Republicans came to the White House with Ronald Reagan in 1980, they have
been the more warlike of the parties -- in Nicaragua, Lebanon, Grenada, Panama,
now in the Middle East; and they boast that their military buildup brought the
end of the cold war (a plausible argument that nevertheless overlooks the Soviet
Union's now-apparent internal problems).

The last point is ideological, reflecting a more virulent anti-Communism.
Others on the list are at least partly attributable to being in power; Democrats
and Republicans, depending on who was in the White House, have been addicted to
military intervention in the Caribbean and Latin America. Since World War II,
Presidents of both parties have shown themselves willing, sometimes eager, to
"project American power" abroad.

In part this has been the necessity of responsibility, at least as Presidents
have seen their responsibilities.  One of any administration's prime duties is
to conduct a strong foreign policy and safeguard the perceived national interest
-- as Harry Truman, Democrat, tried to do in Korea and as George Bush,
Republican, is doing in the Middle East.

In part, also -- often in larger part -- Presidents have succumbed to what
former Senator William Fulbright called "the arrogance of power." They had it,
so they used it, sometimes with results ranging from unhappy to disastrous -- as
with President Kennedy at the Bay of Pigs, Johnson and Nixon in Vietnam, Reagan
in Lebanon and Bush in Panama. Two Democrats, three Republicans; more important,
five Presidents, five Commanders in Chief.

Mr. Quayle, regaling the Republican governors with the lack of statesmanship of
the other party, made still another point not in his prepared remarks:
Presidents tend to confuse their policies with the will of the people, and to
cloak their decisions in the stars-and-stripes of patriotism.  "The fact of the
matter is," the Vice President claimed, "that the American people support the
President."

The American people did support the deployment of U.S. forces in Saudi Arabia to
stop Iraqi aggression and the threat to oil supplies; so did most Congressional
Democrats. But the fact of the matter really is that every poll, and any
man-on-the-street investigation, discloses that the same American people have
deep qualms and many reservations about launching a war against Iraq -- for the
above purposes or any Mr. Bush has been able to make clear.

"A Congress solidly united behind the President would strengthen our chances for
peace," Mr. Quayle argued. So it might, if it's assumed that Mr. Bush's policies
"strengthen the chances for peace." Or Congress might unite behind him if
Presidents were immune to challenge, or if, in fact, their policy decisions in
some mysterious way did reflect, or become, the will of the people.

But Americans have no reason any longer, if they ever did, to assume Presidents
know best. In a democracy, even Presidents never can or should be freed from
challenge. And if George Bush takes the nation into war in the Middle East,
without further cause -- particularly since the hostages have been freed -- he's
likely to find out that its people will be anything but united in his support.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Founders Gave President Lead in War Making

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 501 words


To the Editor:

As a scholar researching the President's Commander in Chief power, I must
comment on "The Framers, on War Powers" by Leon Friedman and Burt Neuborne
(Op-Ed, Nov. 27).

Their assertion that the intention of the Founding Fathers on matters of war and
peace "could not be clearer" is a misinterpretation of constitutional war
powers. Although Congress was granted several war powers, among them "to declare
war," the records and notes of the 1787 Constitutional Convention also indicate
that the delegates, perhaps reluctantly, but nonetheless jointly, acknowledged
the President's war-making interests and responsibilities as Commander in Chief.
Perhaps they hesitated to vest unspecified war-making authority in the
Presidency; yet the approved Commander in Chief clause is vague and unspecified.

I believe the framers relied primarily on the Constitution's basic thrust to
divide and share power to prevent authoritarian war-making activities. Congress
thus acquired several delegated powers in political-military affairs. But the
framers really avoided the issue about the nature and scope of war-making power
by shifting terms regarding Congressional authority ("to declare war" in lieu of
"to make war") and then failing to clarify and structure the Commander in
Chief's war-making functions.

The role of the Commander in Chief is peculiarly ambiguous, but this does not
mean the President lacks or illegitimately wields war-making powers. It grants
supreme command and control over military organizations and functions, and the
chief executive-chief diplomat roles further enjoin the President to direct
foreign policies that may best secure perceived national interests. These
constitutional provisions imply legitimate inherent Presidential interests,
influence and even direction in war-making activities, especially waging war.
Though both President and Congress possess war powers, the President
traditionally executes discretionary war-making powers.

Presidents may make unwise policy decisions or may usurp war-making powers
through broad interpretations of command and control functions, and Congresses
may excessively accommodate a President's will and policies (as in the Vietnam
War policies). But these are political conflicts that have nothing to do with
questioning the constitutionality of Presidential war-making authority.

"Matters of war and peace," therefore, are neither clear nor easily addressed or
resolved -- whether in the Constitution or in practical politics. Professors
Friedman and Neuborne, then, should acknowledge that the concurrent
constitutional war powers of Congress and President have created a twilight zone
in national security affairs that historically has favored executive
constitutional authority and prerogatives. As Alexander Hamilton declared, the
President, above all, must respond to "national exigencies."

JAMES D. WEAVER
Tarrytown, N.Y., Dec. 4, 1990
The writer is a professor of political science at Marymount College.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Founders Gave President Lead in War Making;
Saving Bush's Face

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 225 words


To the Editor:

The adage about generals always fighting the last war proves true again. Having
learned from Vietnam the importance of deploying sufficient troops to do the
job, the Administration has put so many troops in Saudi Arabia that the sheer
size of the forces is dictating policy.

The lesson that the Administration seems to have forgotten is that of the Cuban
missile crisis: When your adversary gives mixed signals, respond to the
conciliatory signals and ignore the bellicose noises.

The public seems to be way ahead of President Bush in understanding the need of
Saddam Hussein to save face if diplomacy is to succeed over war. What we, the
American public, need to do is allow Mr. Bush to save face so that he can back
down without losing his political future.

He can do that by encouraging full debate in Congress on what direction United
States foreign policy in the Middle East ought to take. If, as now appears
likely, the conclusion is that we should give sanctions more time, the President
can bow gracefully to this decision, declare our mission of stopping an invasion
of Saudi Arabia successful and bring home most of our troops. We can then turn
the problem over to the Arabs, because solutions are lasting only when they are
arrived at by the disputants themselves.

HEATHER STERNER
San Francisco, Dec. 3, 1990

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Founders Gave President Lead in War Making;
'Surgical Strike'

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 148 words


To the Editor:

Every time I see the term "surgical strike" in reference to the possibilities
proposed for dealing with Iraq, I find myself disturbed by the lack of
historical memory.

Every bombing survey after the fact has demonstrated that the term surgical
strike is an oxymoron. Air power has been ineffective against enemy ground
forces and logistical capacity. It has not achieved the anticipated negative
effect on military or civilian morale.

I was reminded of this when I visited Hanoi last August. The craters left by the
carpet bombing around Hanoi are now fish ponds. I traveled across the bridge
over the Red River that was repeatedly bombed and repeatedly put back into
operation within a few hours during the Vietnam War. Somebody should review the
record of previous bombing surveys and write an objective appraisal.

VERNON W. RUTTAN
St. Paul, Nov. 28, 1990

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

That Rara Avis at Owl Farm

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1931 words

DATELINE: WOODY CREEK, Colo.


A brisk wind is blustering down from the snow-capped Rockies as Dr. Hunter S.
Thompson, clutching a Bloody Mary, shifts his red Chevrolet Caprice Classic
convertible into high gear. The crazed renegade of American letters, self-styled
"lazy drunken hillbilly" and Gonzo journalist supreme has decided to "stretch
the Chevy out a little bit," with the top down.

As the speedometer jumps toward 95 miles per hour, he explains through the icy
gusts and the frenetic crackle of a pathetic radio that "driving is one of my
favorite things because I'm good at it." Then, noticing an ominous red light
flickering on the dashboard, he roars, "If the gauge says the car is going to
blow up, then the gauge is wrong!"

By any gauge, Dr. Thompson has had a rough year. Indeed it has been the most
scabrous in more than two decades of country living at Owl Farm near Aspen, a
sprawling log cabin watched over by two metal buzzards perched on poles above
his gate. "The intolerance of the new Aspen of the super-rich caught up with
him," says Robert C. Braudis, the local sheriff.

Totaling His Legal Troubles

In the space of 10 months, Dr. Thompson has faced, and successfully fought off,
five felony and three misdemeanor charges that could have landed him in prison
for 16 years. The charges included possession of LSD and tweaking a woman's
breast (third-degree sexual assault). He has also come close to a legal battle
with a neighbor, a rich Aspen newcomer, over the mysterious death by poisoning
of the myriad trout in the neighbor's pond.

"It's been the most brutal assault on an American writer, perhaps ever," the
author of "Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail '72" (Warner Books) declares.

All this has happened in a year in which Dr. Thompson has had to confront a
rigid deadline from Summit Books for his seventh book, "Songs of the Doomed," a
generally pessimistic collection of writings published in November.

The book, which received generally good reviews and is selling well, amounts to
a miscellany of Dr. Thompson's work over the past 30 years, ranging from an
extract from an early unpublished novel called "The Rum Diary" to letters and
other documents linked to his recent legal travails. It is a staccato work, full
of rage, maddeningly incomplete thoughts, a ferocious humor and startling bursts
of fine writing, which reveal the frustrated novelist lurking inside Dr.
Thompson.

The Images Still Flow

His frenetic persona -- part real, one suspects, and part icon -- does not lend
itself to long hours at the typewriter. But he is still a masterly conjuror of
images, as when he describes a group of politicians harassing a woman in a bar
as having "a vaguely seedy look about them, as if they had slept in their suits
on a musty couch in some lobbyist's condo with a condom machine in the lobby and
rubber palm trees in the elevators."

Despite his legal battles, Dr. Thompson seems unbowed. At the age of 53, he is
still looking for the main nerve and is still, as he wrote 20 years ago, a true
"connoisseur of edge work." Right now, as the wind builds to a roar, a white
Olympics cap emblazoned with the words "Atlanta 96" is pulled low on his
forehead and a T-shirt of his lawyer's that reads "Reasonable doubt for a
reasonable fee" covers the upper half of his gangling, six- foot- three- inch
frame: a body that has been the object of more or less savage abuse for close to
three decades.

"His doctor here refused to treat him, because he has defied medical science,"
says a friend, the journalist Loren Jenkins.

But, in the gathering twilight, it is the state of the nation rather than his
dubious health that torments him. "Hell," he says, as he fumbles maniacally with
the radio, "I even miss Nixon. He was a worthy adversary. At least he brought a
sense of real evil!" He shakes his head. "What has happened to the sense of
possibility in this country, that feeling, what the hell, let's give it a roll?"
His prediction for the 90's: "It could just be the 80's without money, a long
grim slide and a time of trials, which is a pretty horrible idea."

Interlude With Wildlife

Two deer spring out across the road. Dr. Thompson brakes suavely. Beneath the
bravura, he cares about his car. This Chevy is, after all, an exact replica of
the Great Red Shark, the "fireapple-red convertible" that he drove across the
California desert in a mescaline-and-ether-whipped frenzy two decades ago.

He was casting around then for the American Dream, "that vision of the Big
Winner somehow emerging from the last minute pre-dawn chaos of a stale Vegas
casino"; and his quest produced a 1971 book, "Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas"
(Warner Books), which became a landmark.

It turned him into a cultural icon for 60's survivors, defined a freewheeling
blend of fiction and fact he called "Gonzo journalism," and enshrined him as a
luminary for anyone hankering for a sense of the momentous, society-changing
decade that ended in 1970. Twenty years later, he still carries this weighty
mantle. But in a world where some know him only as the model for Duke, the
dope-addled character in "Doonesbury," he feels isolated. "The cartoon's a bit
of a cheap shot," he says.

A decade of Republican rule and a generally conformist America, whose youth
works rather than protests, have left him marooned. So too has his difficulty
with deadlines. He has had a falling-out with Rolling Stone, which he accuses of
selling its soul to big business, although he still appears on the magazine's
masthead as chief of the National Affairs Desk. And his columns no longer appear
in The San Francisco Examiner.

The Question of Potential

"Hunter's problem is discipline," says Jann Wenner, the editor of Rolling Stone.
"He had the potential to be a modern-day Mark Twain, but it's several years now
since he produced his finest work. The question is: can he knuckle down again?"

"I started off as a novelist and used journalism as a way to pay the rent," Dr.
Thompson says. "For a left-handed occupation, journalism has been pretty good to
me. But they don't like me today. I get accused of writing fiction when I'm
writing the truest stuff, and when I'm writing fiction, it's taken the other
way,"

Downing the last of the Bloody Mary and fumbling for a pipe as the Chevy eases
in to a sharp bend, he goes on: "Kids in college now think sex is death, rain is
poison, and everything is bad for you. We have more than 50 percent of the
people that don't vote, and that's a lot of power left lying around. What
interests me most is whatever's in that vacuum."

Dr. Thompson adds: "Young people are looking for somebody else to light their
fire, but without any memories, any ideas. The feeling today is you can't fight
City Hall. But sure you can -- and win."

The Doctor Attracts Notice

City Hall -- in the form of the local District Attorney's office and the new
Aspen Establishment of super-rich -- came down heavily on Dr. Thompson this
year. For many, this reflected the dramatic transformation of Aspen from a
rather bohemian mountain village into an ultra-chic vacation spot littered with
$700-a-night hotel rooms. In this environment, chock-a-block with characters he
tends to call "poison lizards," and "low-rent fascists," Dr. Thompson inevitably
became more conspicuous.

He is, after all, a man who hardly sleeps, breakfasts on a slug of Chivas Regal
at 8 P.M., and keeps a rubber model of a dead rat spilling its bloody innards on
his bathroom floor.

Moreover, Dr. Thompson, who is divorced and has a grown-up son, loves guns and
explosions, watches four-part videos on the world's tanks, and writes at a
kitchen counter littered with cartridges and seven remote-control panels. He is
likely to greet a visitor by showing off a particularly fine assault rifle with
a laserscope that projects a small red light onto the point where the bullet
will hit, and asking:

"How do you think it would feel to see that little red light on your chest?"

Burden of Being Different

Says Sheriff Braudis: "Hunter represents an era of more tolerance than today. As
this town has grown, it has become less tolerant of eccentricity and more
regulatory. Now, if he fires a gun at midnight, we get several calls. Look, he's
a great American writer, a local and national treasure, and I just hope this
place doesn't become so uptight that he and others like him feel they have to
move away."

But Bill Dunaway, the owner of The Aspen Daily News, says, "Dr. Thompson's so
zonked out, it's pathetic. People laugh at him, and take him with a large grain
of salt."

Last April, Milt Blakey, the local District Attorney, went further, attempting
to take Dr. Thompson to jail. He filed a barrage of charges against him after a
former producer of porno movies charged that during a visit to Dr. Thompson's
house on Feb. 21, he tweaked her breast when she refused to join him in the hot
tub.

Following these allegations, 7 officers spent 11 hours searching Owl Farm, an
invasion that has prompted the journalist to begin a campaign to reinforce the
Fourth Amendment, which guarantees the right to be secure against unreasonable
searches and seizures.

Triumph and Counterattack

On May 30, after a court hearing, the charges against Dr. Thompson were dropped.
Dr. Thompson's lawyers, Hal Haddon and Jerry Goldstein, have now filed notice
that they intend to bring a $22 million civil lawsuit against the District
Attorney's office for "malicious prosecution, gross negligence and criminal
malfeasance."

"Hunter is a lightning rod," says Mr. Goldstein. "He is so popular because in
some way he represents something buried inside us all."

Rage, for example. "Hot damn! Swine!" curses the "good Doctor," as his search
for a lighter for his pipe reaches catatonic intensity and the Chevy careens
along the highway. He reaches in the back for a searchlight, which gives off a
beam similar to that of a 747 coming into land. "Swine! Search the glove
compartment," he orders. Inside, there are some matches, of the kind designed
for use by Arctic explorers in gales. When a match is struck, producing a
five-inch flame, he sucks furiously on the pipe, whose intoxicating scent
mingles with the whiff of singed fingers.

Calmer now, Dr. Thompson pulls into Owl Farm, a house that reflects Dr.
Thompson's obsessions and contradictions. There are guns beside works of
literature. The place is at once a museum of the 60's and a palace of modern
technology. An American flag is displayed because, despite everything, Dr.
Thompson is a patriot who loves football and beer and believes in what he once
called "the fantastic possibilites of life in this country -- but only for those
with true grit."

'Polo Is My Life'

To spend time with him is to understand his frustrations. He finds it difficult
to keep an assistant. He loses things and takes hours to get going.  He now
wants to complete a novel called "Polo Is My Life," but finds it hard to keep
still for more than a few minutes.

He says he is still a journalist. But in an era whose lack of motivating passion
confounds him, there are now limits to Dr. Thompson's journalistic enthusiasm.
He went to Vietnam to witness the fall of Saigon in 1975, "with 10 hits of
extremely powerful blotter acid taped to the back of my press card for use in a
terminal emergency." So it might seem natural that he would cover the possibly
looming war in the Middle East.

But his response is emphatic: "Cover a war in a place where you can't drink beer
or talk to a woman? Hell, no!"

NAME: Hunter S. Thompson

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Hunter S. Thompson in his red Chevrolet convertible near his
home in Woody Creek, Colo. (Jeffrey Aaronson for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Forrest S. Petersen, 68, Retired Vice Admiral

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 21; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 139 words

DATELINE: OMAHA, Dec. 12


Forrest S. Petersen, a retired vice admiral who was decorated for test flights
in the X-15 rocket plane, died of a brain tumor o Saturday at a hospital in
Georgetown, S. C. He was 68 years old.

In the late 1950's, as a Navy lieutenant commander, he was one of a handful of
pilots assigned to the X-15 test program, forerunner of the space program. He
made five flights in the plane from 1960 to 1962.

President John F. Kennedy awarded him the Distinguished Flying Cross.

Admiral Petersen became the executive officer and then captain of the
nuclear-powered aircraft carrier Enterprise in the Vietnam War and later headed
the Naval Air Systems Command. He retired in 1980.

Survivors include his wife, the former Jean Baldwin; three sons by his first
marriage to the former June Berkshire, who died in 1977, and two brothers.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
Senate Hearings on Iraq as a TV Drama

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 22; Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1011 words


When Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d appeared before the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee last week, Senator Jesse Helms registered his disdain for
the open hearings as "television theater" and proposed that the Secretary be
heard in executive session. The description, if not the prescription, was on the
mark.

The presence of a camera does have a way of bringing out the theatrical in
everybody within range, and in this case the conventions of television drama ran
strongly against Mr. Baker. While the Democratic senators who challenged the
Administration's deadline for war against Iraq took the roles of tribunes for
the mothers and fathers whose children were being put into jeopardy, Mr. Baker
found himself playing the Texas heavy in a television drama.

Trying to be the good guy, the Secretary, no master of warming prose, sounded a
little like the Rev. Jesse Jackson as he called for a world run by
"international laws, not international outlaws." Yet possibly sensing that the
big picture might not come across very dramatically on the small screen, Mr.
Baker and some of the Republican senators fell back on comparing President
Saddam Hussein to Hitler; now there was a figure who could make Americans angry
enough to fight.

In another attempt to match the emotional firepower of the opposition, Mr. Baker
kept reminding the nation of the plight of the hostages, a proven audience mover
-- only to have them released within a few days of his testimony. Their reunions
with loved ones plainly make for better television than a Senate hearing; the
question for the Administration is whether their accounts of Iraqi atrocities
will affect the national television audience more deeply than the fact that they
are free again, thereby eliminating one of the main reasons advanced for
resorting to force.

The television campaign is being waged on other fields, too. Gen. Colin L.
Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was given the assignment of
telling the Senate Armed Services Committee and everybody watching those
hearings that the Pentagon plans to wage a ground campaign. That must have sent
a shudder through viewers who remember Vietnam and have been hearing a lot from
sound-bite experts about the toll that Iraq's dug-in troops could take on
advancing soldiers and marines. The alternative advanced by many talk-show
regulars, fighting the war from the air, plays much more easily into audience
preferences.

(One day in November, the photogenic General Powell, who has been caught by the
camera bantering with soldiers in the desert, showed up on all three networks'
morning programs to assure America that Iraq's decision to send 250,000 more
soldiers to the front might weaken Iraq. He deserves another medal for that
job.)

In his latest television appearance, Mr. Baker spoke of attacking the enemy
"suddenly, massively and decisively" but refrained from uttering the word
casualties, leaving that heavily weighted word to his Democratic interrogators,
who did not fail to say what is on everybody's mind. Apparently recognizing that
he was being outflanked on the soft-heartedness front, Mr. Baker revealed that
he often looks out of his office window toward Arlington National Cemetery.

Since the war drums began soon after Election Day, the dispute has centered on
sanctions, which were arranged only a few months ago with great fanfare and to
praise from all quarters and on all channels. So it must have been discouraging
to those who had been enticed to invest their hopes in a bloodless victory to
learn last week from Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney that sanctions have
already proved inadequate. This official dismissal of sanctions must also have
startled viewers, since it came only days after two former Chairmen of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff were seen on the tube asking that the unprecedented embargo be
given a year or more to work. The military men were joined in their opinion by
several former Secretaries of Defense, whose opinions will be carried on many
PBS stations next Thursday, and by former officials in both Democratic and
Republican Administrations who showed up for yesterday's Senate hearings.

Mr. Baker also found himself fighting something of an insurrection when, on the
very day he was shrugging off the usefulness of sanctions before one Senate
committee, William H. Webster, the Director of Central Intelligence, was telling
another committee that if sanctions held, Iraq could not maintain its current
combat readiness for more than nine months. The juxtaposition must have been
jarring to those who rely on the credentialed personages who are always showing
up on the tube, but Mr. Webster's news was easier on the nerves than Mr.
Baker's. No wonder Senator Helms prefers such testimony out of the camera's eye.

Mr. Baker did not exactly take issue with Mr. Webster. His main point was that
President Hussein is too ruthless to be affected by his people's misery, as
evidenced by the Iraqi ruler's "whole history as a dictator." But as George F.
Will reminded the Secretary of State and the audience on Sunday in "This Week
With David Brinkley," President Hussein's predilections were as well known in
August as in December. Indeed, all news programs have drawn attention to the
fact that his record was known to Washington even in the years when it was
backing his war against Iran, which the chief backer now offered as a
demonstration of Iraqi ruthlessness.

However one weighs the televised give-and-take over the Administration efforts
to rally the nation for war, it confirms the difficulty of expounding policy
calculations through a medium that immediately translates them into human costs.
Mr. Baker has spoken of the need for "full support of Congress and the American
people" to lend credibility to the threat of force, but to judge by the nightly
reports from the Middle East, the nation's mind is less on rebuking Mr. Hussein
than on safeguarding the vulnerable young Americans who from the beginning have
been the focus of the television drama.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, who testifed on the
Persian Gulf crisis at a Senate hearing that was televised. (The New York Times)


                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

ESSAY;
The Final Sanction

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 31; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 748 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Suppose the wishful thinking sweeping the world turns out to be wrong, and
Saddam Hussein does not withdraw from all of Kuwait by the U.N. deadline date.

The major argument against launching an attack against the Iraqi regime is not
moral -- even the sanctioneer Sam Nunn has asserted it would be "justified" --
but is presented as practical: the cost in casualties of a land war would be too
high.

But proponents of removing Saddam Hussein's threat reject the need for an
inch-by-inch, trench-by-trench reconquest of Kuwait, featuring attacks of massed
infantry and what is being advertised as history's most fearsome tank battle.

We say that such a conventional land war would be a fight on Iraq's terms. We
see no need for the allied forces to act like the hapless Iranian Army, with
human waves attacking dug-in defenders. Instead we envision a strategy put
forward by Alexander de Seversky 50 years too soon: "Victory Through Air Power."

Unfortunately for us, the argument of the sanctioneers rightly worried about
high casualties was bolstered last week by, of all people, the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen.  Colin Powell.

General Powell, a product of the Army, derogated the air-power strategy as
"nice, tidy, allegedly low-cost, incremental, may-work options that are floated
around with great regularity all over this town."

Apparently he sees air power as a means only to soften enemy defenses before
invasion by infantry and armor, both overland and seaborne. Such a coordinated
assault, spreading participation to each of the armed services, would "suddenly,
massively, decisively," in Secretary Baker's words, be our means of striking.

If this is the actual strategy, and not just a plan made public to scare the
Iraqi dictator, it is probably designed to avoid the gradual escalation that
characterized our failure in Vietnam. That's understandable; so is the Army's
desire to justify its existence by bearing the brunt of the battle; but such a
strategy does not fit the mission.

The mission is not to push the Iraqi Army out of Kuwait at all costs. The
military mission is to destroy the enemy's potential for mass destruction and to
break the Iraqi regime's will to resist at the lowest cost in casualties.

We have been investing in the world's biggest and best Air Force for decades to
be able to do precisely that. Within a month, we should be able to drop a
hundred times the tonnage of explosives used against Germany in World War II,
with infinitely greater accuracy at closely observed targets.

The concentration of the Iraqi Army in Kuwait creates opportunities for
effective attack from the air and for the destruction of water supplies; our
ally would soon be thirst, worsened by the redirection of water away from Iraq
by Turkey.

Air power may bring Saddam Hussein to his knees or it may not; we should treat
bombing as the next sanction, and in Sam Nunn's phrase in a more cautious
context, we will never know if this sanction will work unless we try it.

Time enough, after aerial persuasion has removed Iraq's nuclear, poison-gas and
germ warfare facilities -- and after the Iraqi war machine has at least been
decimated -- for the Commander in Chief to order ground troops to invade.

It may be that Mr. Hussein will make that decision for us, with a bullet to his
own head or an offensive strike. If the latter, better for us that his army
abandons dug-in defensive positions; we have the ground forces in place to win.

Such a two-phase war must be an option, with its possibility of never having to
move to the ground phase; the national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, is
after all an Air Force general. It would not be nice or tidy, but air power may
work; if not, the allies have ground forces to the south and north of Iraq to
follow through.

Would it be worth the sacrifice? "If we don't stop him now," said Richard Nixon
in a speech last week, "we will have to stop him later when the cost in the
lives of young Americans will be infinitely greater."

Even longtime doves have come to respect Mr. Nixon's foreign-policy views, and
he sets great store on the need for credibility: "If we fail to roll back his
aggression -- peacefully if possible, by force if necessary -- no potential
aggressor in the future will be deterred by warnings from the U.S. or by U.N.
resolutions."

We'll know in a month if force is necessary; at that time, President Bush should
give air power its chance to be the final sanction.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 14, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Remains of Two Servicemen From Vietnam Are Identified

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 55 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 13


The remains of two American servicemen who had been listed as missing in action
in Vietnam have been identified, the Pentagon said Wednesday.

The remains, identified as those of Lieut. Col. William R. Andrews of the Air
Force and Lieut. Comdr. Frederick W. Wright 3d of the Navy, were repatriated by
Vietnam in September.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 14, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

STANDOFF IN THE GULF;
Lawmakers Lose a Suit on War Powers

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 495 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 13


A Federal District Court judge ruled today against 54 Democratic members of
Congress who had sought an order forbidding President Bush from going to war
against Iraq without first seeking a Congressional declaration of war, but left
open the possibility he could issue such an order later.

The judge, Harold H. Greene, said the issue was not yet "ripe" for him to decide
because the full Congress had not taken a stand on whether it wanted Mr. Bush to
seek a declaration of war before sending forces into action. At the same time,
Judge Greene emphatically declared that the Constitution gave Congress the sole
power to declare war.

In effect, he ruled that Congress could force Mr. Bush to seek a declaration of
war before beginning hostilities if it chose.

Although Judge Greene rejected the request of the 53 Representatives and one
Senator, his ruling was also a significant rejection of the Bush
Administration's position that it need do nothing more than consult with
Congress before going to war.

Courts' Role Backed

Judge Greene dismissed the Administration's arguments that the issue of war was
something courts were obliged to leave to the other two branches of government.
He also said the history of Article 1 of the Constitution left no doubt that the
framers intended that a President could not go to war without the explicit
approval of Congress.

Judge Greene noted that those who brought the suit represented only about a
tenth of the Congress and said, "It would be both premature and presumptuous for
the Court to render a decision on the issue of whether a declaration of war is
required at this time or in the near future when the Congress itself has
provided no indication whether it deems such a declaration either necessary, one
the one hand, or imprudent, on the other."

He said that since a majority of Congress would be required to declare war, only
a majority of Congress could seek a court order preventing the President from
going to war.

His ruling left open the possibility that if the full Congress approved a
resolution insisting that Mr. Bush seek a declaration of war before beginning
hostilities, or enough Congress members joined the suit to constitute a majority
of Congress, he would reconsider his decision.

Michael Ratner, legal director for the New York-based Center for Constitutional
Rights, which brought the suit on behalf of the members of Congress, praised the
ruling but said the ripeness issue would be appealed to the United States Court
of Appeals for the District of Columbia.

In a related case decided today, Federal District Judge Royce M. Lamberth ruled
in favor of the Government in the case of an Army sergeant, Michael R. Ange, who
contended that he should not be sent to the gulf because President Bush had
neither declared war nor complied with the War Powers Resolution, a post-Vietnam
law requiring the President to seek Congressional approval for actions like the
gulf buildup.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 14, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

'Saigon' Producer Seeks Arbitration

SECTION: Section C; Page 4; Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 266 words


Cameron Mackintosh, the producer of "Miss Saigon," reportedly filed papers with
Actors' Equity late yesterday afternoon formally asking that an arbitrator
decide whether the Filipino actress Lea Salonga will be allowed to come to
Broadway to re-create her leading role of a Vietnamese bar girl in the hit
London musical.

Mr. Mackintosh's decision to go to arbitration reportedly came after Equity's
alien committee rejected Miss Salonga last week and the union's council upheld
that rejection on Tuesday. The council's proposal that a five-member panel be
set up to decide the case was said to have fallen apart in a dispute over the
specific terms under which the panel would work.

The designated arbitrator who handles disputes between a producer and Equity
under the production contract is Daniel Collins, a professor of law at New York
University.

Spokesmen for the union and for the producer declined to comment on the
situation yesterday. The $10 million production has a record advance ticket sale
of more than $30 million.

In asking Equity last week to approve Miss Salonga, Mr. Mackintosh said that he
had conducted extensive nationwide auditions and had seen 1,200 Asian actresses
but that none had her unique ability or professional potential. He later asked
that the union permit her to appear on Broadway by declaring her a star of
international stature.

The alien committee reportedly rejected Miss Salonga on the grounds of both star
status and unique ability. The show is to begin performances in March at the
Broadway Theater. Rehearsals are to start in late January.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Architects Clash Over Korean War Memorial

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1102 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 14


Four architects who won a national competition for their design for a Korean War
Veterans Memorial and a Washington architectural firm that wants to change it
brought their dispute to the Commission of Fine Arts on Thursday to determine
which design will eventually pay homage to Americans who fought in Korea.

"It's a very unusual situation," said Charles H. Atherton, the commission
secretary. "We generally do not look at two designs on one issue, but as a
matter of fairness we felt we should do this."

The original design for the memorial, which won over 500 submissions, was
executed by Don Leon, John Paul Lucas, Veronica Burns Lucas and Eliza
Pennypacker Oberholtzer, all from State College, Pa. It was unveiled in a White
House ceremony in June 1989. Against a cruciform pattern within a semicircle,
the design incorporates a wall and row of trees and 38 statues of soldiers
marching along a path leading from an entry plaza to a flag plaza.

The design by the Washington architectural firm of Cooper-Lecky, which will
execute the memorial, dramatically alters the original scheme, relocating the
wall, adding a comtemplative grove of trees called "the chapel," and changing a
ceremonial plaza to include a large mural depicting the history of the war. The
original design visualized the long column of soldiers in a semi-abstract way.
In the Cooper-Lecky design, the column of soldiers is under attack and one has
been wounded.

Another Review Planned

After the two sides made their presentations on Thursday, the commission
deferred judgment until a second review at its January meeting. But some of the
comments and questions raised by the panel indicated that they did not wholly
embrace the new design concept.

"I think we recognized that in a memorial, the simpler the better," Robert Peck,
a commission member, said after the meeting.

Earlier Mr. Peck had asked Kent Cooper, who made the Cooper-Lecky presentation,
"I am confused by the line of march; what is its tactical function?"

"This is an undefined mission," Mr. Cooper explained. "They are subject to
hostile action. They are alert, caught in a moment of time."

Another commission member, Joan Abrahamson, spoke of the purity of the original
design. "We have two questions here," she said, "the process of the design
competition and the other esthetic decision about what is the best and most
powerful memorial, one that we are going to have to live with."

J. Carter Brown, the commission's chairman, voiced some concern that the
elevation of the flag plaza and the openness of the new design would make too
strong a statement on the Mall. "The whole concept of the Vietnam Memorial was
you couldn't see it," he said. "One reason it is so effective is that it doesn't
wave its hand at you."

The Hurdles Passed

The memorial competition, which had a $20,000 prize, was judged by members of
the Korean War Veterans Memorial Advisory Board, all veterans, and professional
designers and artists. The winning design was approved in an initial round of
reviews by the four Federal commissions that have oversight over construction on
the Mall.

The Fine Arts Commission, said Mr. Atherton, gave it "an affirmative nod" but
raised some questions about traffic patterns, plant material and elements of the
plaza around the flag. Other governmental commissions criticized the design for
not using its axial links to surrounding monuments on the mall and voiced strong
reservations about the creation of what they called a self-contained room. The
memorial will be south of the Reflecting Pool and directly opposite the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial.

At the hearings this week, the State College team presented a modified design
that responded to some of the criticisms and concerns. "Clearly you have two
designs here," said Mr. Lucas who made the slide presentation. "We would ask
that you again approve of this design; you approved it once in concept."

Under the terms of the design competition, there was no obligation to hire the
winning designers to build the memorial. Cooper-Lecky, the firm that was
selected, was project architect for the Vietnam Veteran Memorial.

The winning design, in effect, becomes the property of the client, said Mr.
Atherton. In this case the client was the Korean Veterans Memorial Advisory
Board, the Army Corps of Engineers and the American Battle Monument Commission.
"They have the liberty to change whatever they feel is not suitable, and they
have the legal right to do that," Mr. Atherton said.

Robert Hansen, the executive director of the memorial advisory board, said:
"They got their $20,000. It is now the property of the United States
Government."

Cooperation at First

The winning architectural team worked closely with Cooper-Lecky at first, Mr.
Leon said. "We started out and were beginning to make a go of it," he said, "but
then Cooper-Lecky was ordered to proceed on another course. After June 14 this
year we received in the mail documents that recorded work that we had never
seen, that in fact had already been presented to the client. It is a repugnant
and duplicitous situation."

Gen. Richard G. Stilwell, who commanded American ground forces in Korea and is
the head of the memorial advisory board, has called the new design "dynamic,"
and he supported it at the hearing. The sculptor commissioned by Cooper-Lecky to
execute the heroic line of march, Frank C. Gaylord of Barre, Vt., also spoke. He
had been concerned that the line of soldiers might be boring, he said, so he
introduced "a narrative story of soldiers responding to unexpected unfriendly
fire."

The winning design team vehemently opposes the introduction of elements of war.

"Ours was a dignified walk through the landscape and based on a famous David
Douglas Duncan photograph," Mr. Leon said after the hearing. "They have
romanticized it by depicting a fictitious battle scene. If they build this new
design it will destroy the character of the Mall forever, in my estimation. The
Mall should not be, particularly in this day and age, the setting for an actual
battle scene. We intended for the memorial to honor the service and sacrifice of
1.5 million men and women."

Neil H. Porterfield, a landscape architect and the vice chairman of the
commission, had the last word today, pointing out that the Washington design
competititon with its numerous government commissions and multiple official
advisers "is a horrible process for creating great designs."

"In the review process you end up with a compromise," he said. "I think it is
the problem we are dealing with."

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings: Model of original Korean War Veterans Memorial design by four
Pennsylvania State University architects. The new design by the Washington
architectural firm of Cooper-Lecky, which will build the memorial.
(Cooper-Lecky)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

After the Initial Shock

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 98 words


To the Editor:

After reading Morley Safer's review of my book "The Phoenix Program" (Oct. 21),
certain words came to my mind: words like bitter disappointment, public disgrace
and end of career.

Now that the initial shock has worn off, however, I just want the opportunity to
encourage your readers to disregard Mr. Safer's review and to read my book. In
the process, they will learn significant facts about the C.I.A.'s role in the
Vietnam War that Mr. Safer and his colleagues at the time either missed,
benignly ignored or suppressed.

DOUGLAS VALENTINE
Easthampton, Mass.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TWENTYSOMETHINGS;
Generation Gap

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4; Column 5; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 259 words


To the Editor:
 Bret Easton Ellis's article represents another chapter of life in the shadow of
the baby boomers. As a 23-year-old graduate student, I can attest to the virtual
nonexistence of this alleged generation of cynical, apolitical, thoughtless
youths. It is yet another ideological imposition by the thirtysomething crowd,
who outnumber everybody, seem to have all the money and most of the political
power, and who tend to see everything through the hazy, drug-induced perspective
of the 60's.
 The thirtysomething crowd came of age in the 60's, and seem to be marked by a
consciousness of themselves as a generation. But contrary to Mr. Ellis's
conception, this generation-consciousness does not exist among younger people as
far as I can see. And the fact that we do not act en masse or adhere to a
grocery list of politically correct views continues to be interpreted as a lack
of soul. Moreover, when some of us do act up it is interpreted as an imitation
of the 60's. When thousands of young women and men marched on Washington to
defend women's reproductive rights, the media compared it to a Vietnam protest;
when college students protest the Persian Gulf buildup they are accused of
mimicking the 60's. This nostalgic group of very powerful people seems to be
under the delusion that no new ideas have been conceived since the advent of
bell-bottom jeans. And now they have somehow convinced people in their 20's that
we are a generation too -- a generation that pales in comparison with them.

LAUREN McLAUGHLIN
Brooklyn

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Tin Army And Fond Thoughts Of the Past

BYLINE: By CHRIS HEDGES

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 65; Column 1; Style Desk; Lifestyle Page

LENGTH: 858 words


In a world of Nintendo games and G.I. Joe action figures the little armies of
tin soldiers that lay wrapped under Christmas trees three or four decades ago
seem a quaint anachronism.

The great British concerns that once produced the toys by the millions
discontinued their lines more than 20 years ago, and the figures that survived
the rigors of childhood play have been snapped up by wealthy collectors.

Despite the decline in the industry, a few thousand collectors and a handful of
toy makers who laboriously mold and paint tin soldiers continue a tradition that
often was kindled on a Christmas morning. The collectors and toy makers, most of
whom developed their passion in childhood, are universally nostalgic about a
world that, with the patina of time, appears gallant and romantic.

'We Wish It Was Us'

"We look at these wonderful people in their turn-of-the-century uniforms and we
wish it was us," said Michael G. Abbott, who has been collecting toy soldiers
since his childhood in England. These days his living room in Locust Valley,
L.I., is the scene of a mock battle between Scythian and Persian soldiers who
fought around 400 B.C.

"This is about being Gary Cooper," the 30-year-old stockbroker said, "but all
that is gone now."

"The soldiers help us return to the uncomplicated, imaginary world of our
childhood," said Stephen Balkin, the owner of Burlington Antique Toys, to which
Mr. Abbott had slipped away on his lunch hour from his Wall Street job to
browse. "A lot of this is about nostalgia."

Mr. Balkin's store, one of four shops in the city catering to collectors, is in
a cramped basement room at 1082 Madison Avenue.

Thomas N. Loback, the only manufacturer of metal toy soldiers in New York City
and one of the few in the country, has his business in his loft in the garment
district.

The 40-year-old sculptor, who first began by producing figures from the J. R. R.
Tolkien books, now works 10 or 12 hours a day hunched over small Civil War
figures, often with his cat perched on his shoulders.

First he sculptures a figure and then he has it cast into bronze. Tin copies --
lead alloys are no longer used -- are made from the bronze.

Mr. Loback's assistant, Susan St. John Ryan, an actress, paints the undercoats
on the 54 millimeter-high toys while listening to tapes of Shakespeare plays.
Mr. Loback then applies the detail painting in lots of 24. The process takes
three or four days.

New Soldiers, New Prices

Sets of antique toy soldiers are expensive. A 50-year-old British set of the
Indian Army Mountain Battery, 11 pieces, sold for $12,100 in April at the
Phillips auction gallery. Many collectors are being squeezed out of the market
by the current prices, turning instead to the handful of artists like Mr. Loback
who continue to produce the toys, which sell at $50 to $110 a set depending on
the number and quality of the pieces.

The recent Civil War series on the Public Broadcasting System and the movie
"Glory" have boosted sales of Civil War figures among collectors.  Mr. Loback
has sold over 100 sets of four black soldiers and a white officer from the 54th
Massachusetts, which he modeled from Augustus Saint-Gaudens's monument on Boston
Commons, since the set was introduced last year. Each set costs $59.

He makes 24 different Civil War sets that depict units like the Union's elite
Iron Brigade in their trademark black slouch hats, the 69th New York Irish
Brigade, with the sprigs of evergreen they tucked in their caps when their green
battle flag was too tattered to be carried into combat, and the Confederate 23d
Virginia.

Tin soldiers that fail to conjure up the glory of a distant era have always
fared poorly. Most shops do not stock toy soldiers from the Vietnam War and few
collectors expect a flood of figures depicting the military deployment in the
Persian Gulf.

"For these toys to be successful they have to be seen through the rosy glasses
of time," Mr. Loback said. "The awful questions can no longer be asked or
answered."

Attitudes and Sales

That need for perspective or passage of time has affected the fortunes of toy
soldiers before. After World War I, British companies that had done a brisk
business before and even during the war found the public less receptive to toy
soldiers. Children who had lost fathers and brothers apparently found little
enjoyment in war games and the firms expanded their output to include toy
farmers, complete with village idiot. The makers produced an average of five
million metal toy soldiers a year until 1967, when an increase in the cost of
lead, and a proposed ban on its use in toys, brought a switch to plastic.

In recent years, as the bitterness over the Vietnam era has receded, even G.I.
Joe, who was first made in 1964 and removed from the market in 1978, has made a
comeback with little boys. For metal soldiers, however, the most steadfast
collector is the adult male. And they bristle at suggestions that they are
warmongers.

"I do not promote war," Mr. Balkin said, petting one of three Chihuahuas he
keeps in his tiny shop. "I sell toy soldiers. I sell imagination."

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas N. Loback, above, who sculptures toy soldiers, looks out
between a row of some of his works. His hands, below, painting the uniform of
one soldier. (Don Hogan Charles/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Why Cambodia's U.N. Seat Is 'Unattended'

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 670 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Dec. 15


"Temporarily unattended" is how the leaders of Cambodia's quarreling parties
describe their country's empty United Nations seat as this year's General
Assembly draws to a close.

"The seat is definitely not vacant, you see," insists Prince Sisowath Sirirath,
Cambodia's deputy representative, who is also the personal representative of
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, leader of one of the country's four warring factions.

The reason he gives is that a new body called the Supreme NationalCouncil, which
the United Nations Security Council has created under its Cambodian peace plan,
is supposed to occupy the seat as the embodiment of Cambodian sovereignty.

The council is intended to represent all political factions in Cambodia and give
advice to a new United Nations authority that will administer the country while
organizing free elections to choose a new government.

"The S.N.C. should sit in the seat because it is the soul of Cambodia," the
Prince said. "The trouble is, we can't agree on its membership."

Originally, the council was to have 12 members, with 6 appointed by the
Vietnamese-backed Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen, which controls the
capital of Phnom Penh, and the other 6 equally divided among its enemies: the
Chinese-supported Khmer Rouge and the non-Communist opposition armies loyal to
Prince Sihanouk and to his former Prime Minister, Son Sann. But all these
factions are maneuvering to preserve as much influence as they can for
themselves during the transitional period leading to the elections.

So Prince Sihanouk wants to be made chairman of the council and its 13th member,
as recognition of his claim to be the father of the Cambodian people. Mr. Hun
Sen will not agree unless he becomes vice chairman or there are rotating
chairmen and his Government can choose a 14th member. The others refuse to
discuss any vice chairmanship until Prince Sihanouk is made chairman.

Mr. Hun Sen said today that he would meet with the three opposition factions in
Paris within a week, The Associated Press reported from Bangkok, Thailand,
quoting the official press agency in Phnom Penh.

Meanwhile, the dispute over Cambodia's General Assembly seat has left its United
Nations mission in a state of suspended animation.

Officially it represents a coalition between the Khmer Rouge and the supporters
of Prince Sihanouk and Mr. Son Sann that now calls itself the National
Government of Cambodia.

Most countries still recognize this coalition as Cambodia's legitimate
Government because they say Vietnam had no right to drive the Khmer Rouge from
power by force at the end of 1978 despite Khmer Rouge's harsh reign in which
more than one million Cambodians died. As a result, the official leader of the
Khmer Rouge, Khieu Samphan, who is the coalition Vice President and Foreign
Minister, appointed Cambodia's United Nations representative, a Khmer Rouge
supporter named Thiounn Prasith, while Prince Sihanouk named his deputy.

International support for this coalition was dwindling even before this year's
General Assembly, with the United States and the European Community countries
saying they would no longer support giving Cambodia's seat to a coalition that
included the Khmer Rouge. But the coalition did not even ask for the seat this
year, instead declaring it "temporarily unattended." Since then the Cambodian
mission has become almost invisible, taking no part in any of the General
Assembly's work and making little contact with other Asian delegations,
diplomats say.

Prince Sisowath maintains that it continues to do its normal work. But the
mission skipped its traditional independence day reception in November, and a
week ago the telephone operator said all staff members were out of the country.

The empty seat and the quarrel over the council's composition reflect the
intractable nature of Cambodia's decade-long civil war as the four factions
press on with their armed struggle even after agreeing in principle to the
United Nations peace plan.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

College Reservists Go From Campus to 'Real Life'

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 34; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1061 words

DATELINE: RED BANK, N.J.


Less than a month ago Martin O'Shea was a junior at William Paterson College of
New Jersey, studying psychology. Now, dressed in fatigues and self-consciously
clutching an M-16, he is a Marine Corps corporal, possibly headed for the
Persian Gulf.

"In college you're always studying theory -- you know, the ivory tower thing,"
the 22-year-old corporal said, standing beside a dummy enshrouded in a chemical
protection suit at the Armed Forces Reserves Center here. "This is real life.
This is black and white."

The call-up of military reservists has wrested thousands of students like
Corporal O'Shea from college classrooms around the country, abruptly halting
their studies within weeks of the end of the fall semester and, in some cases,
of graduation.

Most joined the Reserves or the National Guard to help pay for the college
education they have now been asked to postpone. Most of them probably never
expected they would be activated, let alone possibly sent into combat in the
Middle East.

$140 a Month for School

Serving one weekend a month and two weeks a year, they earned $140 a month for
school under the Montgomery G.I. Bill of Rights, a 1984 law that provides
educational benefits for reservists and for those who had been on active duty.

The Defense Department could not say how many of the 117,313 reservists and
National Guard members who have been called up as of Dec. 7 were full-time
college students. But nearly 10 percent of the 1.6 million reservists receive
money for college under the G.I. Bill, said Lieut. Col. David Super, a Pentagon
spokesman.

Like thousands of other reservists forced to leave jobs and families, college
students have had to abandon their way of life. They have had to drop out of
classes on a few days' notice and hastily make arrangements with professors and
deans.

Donald Basil Jr., a 23-year-old Marine Corps reservist, had three weeks of
studies left at Springfield College in Massachusetts. He needed only six credits
to graduate in January.

"I was so close to finishing," he said. "Now I can't. I have to be a marine. I
can't be a college student anymore."

Colleges and universities were largely unprepared for the first call-up of
reservists since the Vietnam War. Most have offered to refund tuition, give
students full credit for the studies they have done, or allow them to make up
work when they return.

Donna-Lyn Knauf, a communications major at Southern Connecticut State University
who is going to Saudi Arabia as a medic with the Army National Guard, is taking
her books.

"If there does happen to be a war, I won't have time for homework," said the
21-year-old sergeant with the 142d Medical Company, now stationed at Fort
Devens, Mass. "But if there isn't, I'll have time after training to work on it."

Most said they support the American stance in the Persian Gulf. And most said
they do not regret joining the reserves, though some have had second thoughts.

"I feel angry," said Specialist Jay Alvarado, a sociology major at the
University of Connecticut until he was called up on Nov. 17. "It puts us back a
whole year. We're just left hanging."

Corporal O'Shea's unit, the Sixth Motor Transport Battalion, was activated in
two groups, the first on Nov. 20, the second two days later. The 210 marines
were told to report to the battalion's headquarters here by Dec. 4. Nearly one
in four was a college student, said the battalion spokesman, Capt. E. Ray
Atwell.

"On television they tell you, 'Get an edge on life,' " said Scott B. Thistle, a
corporal who is a field radio operator for the unit. "Obviously, they're not
pushing the idea that you might go to war. In post-Vietnam America no one is on
that wavelength."

A Wife and a New Lease

Corporal Thistle, who lives in Albertson, L.I., joined the Marine Reserve three
years ago to help pay his way at St. John's University in Queens. He was married
two months ago, and he and his wife, Jill, just signed a lease on their first
apartment and bought new furniture.

With final exams only two weeks away, St. John's gave him full credit for his
classes this semester.

"I don't regret going," the 22-year-old junior said. "But at my age I want to
finish college someday."

Lance Cpl. James H. Knox, the unit's administrative clerk, had just returned
from typing a paper for a class at Seton Hall University when he responded to a
blinking light on his answering machine and learned that he had been called up.

"I was pretty scared," said Corporal Knox, a 21-year-old English major. "I never
figured it would come to this."

At first, the university was as confused about his sudden need to withdraw as he
was, he said. In the end, it offered him and four other reservists a refund of
this semester's tuition, but they will not receive credit for the work. "Spring
would have been my last semester," he said.

While Corporal Knox had nearly completed his studies, Cpl. George J. Little Jr.
had barely begun. Corporal Little, who lives in Carteret, N.J., joined the
Marine Corps right out of high school in 1986. The Corps, he said, "helped me
find out what I wanted to do in life."

Corporal Little, 23, finished his four-year enlistment in February but decided
to remain in the Marine Reserve to earn money for school. He enrolled at
Middlesex County College in Edison, N.J., to study business.

"It looked real promising -- getting out, going to school, starting to lay down
roots again," he said. "I'd just started getting back to a civilian way of
thinking. And now I'm back in it again. It's like a roller coaster."

Preparing for Departure

At the Reserve center, his battalion was preparing for its departure, with some
marines going to Camp LeJeune in North Carolina, others to Camp Pendleton in
California. In the assembly hall the marines lugged hefty duffle bags and
rifles, issued that morning. They talked and played cards. Mostly they waited.

Some said goodbye to their family and friends, awkwardly posing for photographs.
Couples stood to the side, whispering.

Lance Cpl. Thomas Frascella of Neptune City, N.J., a business major at Kutztown
University in Pennsylvania, said the whole thing was "sort of like a car
accident -- you believe it will happen to someone else, but not to you."

Outside a light snow fell.

"Maybe we'll get a white Christmas," he said.


LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The call-up of military reservists has wrested thousands of
students from college classrooms around the country, abruptly halting their
studies. Members of the Marine Corps Reserves' Sixth Motor Transport Battalion
who were college students less than a month ago include, from left, Cpl. Martin
O'Shea, Cpl. Scott B. Thistle, Lance Cpl. Thomas Frascella, Cpl. George J.
Little Jr. and Lance Cpl. James H. Knox. (Eddie Hausner/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 16, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

War by Default

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 503 words


The clock ticks down on President Bush's Jan. 15 deadline for war with Iraq --
too fast. Many Americans, including former Secretaries of Defense and Chairmen
of the Joint Chiefs, remain persuaded that the worldwide embargo of Saddam
Hussein needs more time to work; they see no reason to risk war prematurely.

That presents a gravely important question of content that cries out for public
debate. A tactical misjudgment here could needlessly cost many American and
other lives.

The gulf crisis also presents another question, of equivalent gravity, one of
process. Who decides on the timing of war is just as important as what is
decided. The Administration, however, shows every intention of rushing ahead and
no intention of asking Congress to vote on war. The President will impose his
war deadline by default -- unless Congress moves to debate, and vote on, a
declaration of war.


Members of Congress are understandably reluctant to appear to be weakening the
Administration's hand in any discussions with Iraq. But if discussions fail, the
country will be proceeding toward war simply by George Bush's unilateral
decision.

As the Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, noted a few days ago, the
President "does not need the approval of Congress to threaten war. But he does
need the approval of Congress to make war."

There's more at issue here than legal philosophy, as recent lawsuits make clear.
Congress's constitutional power to declare war is a political power, rightly so.
War, more than any other government activity, involves the entire society. If
America's Vietnam experience taught anything, it taught that political unity is
essential to prosecute a major war, especially given the possibility of
unforeseen setbacks.

Yet the Administration, after scrupulously negotiating United Nations approval
for its policy direction, appears to be avoiding Congress, in effect daring
Congress to block Mr. Bush's course. Congress knows how to say no, officials
argue, and if it fails to do so, why that's tantamount to a declaration of war.

Congressional action so far has been largely limited to public hearings. These
have been useful in demonstrating that many experienced and well-informed
national security experts believe that the present embargo should be given more
time. But the Administration brushes off this sober testimony as it plunges
ahead.

The rush to force is all the more dismaying because debate over a declaration of
war would serve everyone's interests, the Administration's included. The
Congressional leadership has simplified the logistics of consultation by
deciding to keep both houses in session after their Jan. 3 opening ceremonies. A
formal discussion and vote on a declaration of war could constructively resolve
internal differences over tactics. And it would send an unmistakable message of
unified purpose to Saddam Hussein.

The best place to explain the need to open fire is in Congress, and the best way
is to debate a declaration of war.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

San Francisco's Chinatown Seeks to Save Its Soul

BYLINE: By KATHERINE BISHOP, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1421 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Dec. 16


Here on the streets where tens of thousands of Chinese immigrants gained a first
foothold in America, their descendants are faced with a wrenching and divisive
prospect: the demise of Chinatown.

Until now, Chinatown has simultaneously been a poor ghetto of elderly and newly
arrived immigrants, a center of the garment industry, a tourist mecca in a city
whose main industry is tourism and the economic, social and religious heart for
the estimated 200,000 San Franciscans of Chinese descent.

The United States' most densely populated area outside Manhattan, it is honored
throughout the Pacific Rim as a landmark in Asian history, having served as a
haven from racist persecution and a base where Sun Yat-sen plotted the overthrow
of the Manchu dynasty.

Fighting Sameness

But along the main tourist thoroughfare, Grant Avenue, stores selling Chinese
products from fine jade to cheap curios have given way to camera and video
equipment shops. Boarded-up storefronts alternate with stores selling the same
inexpensive T-shirts sold all over town. There are outlets of hamburger and
cookie chain stores and even two shops selling Wild West gear.

Judge Harry W. Low of the California State Court of Appeal and national
President of the Chinese American Citizens Alliance, said, "The question is, 'Is
Chinatown going to remain a unique area with a special history, food and other
attractions said or just another place full of camera and T-shirt shops?' "

Judge Low's question is particularly pertinent. In 1991, 300 buildings housing
700 small businesses and thousands of low-cost apartments face state deadlines
requiring the installation of special earthquake bracing. The work, intended to
anchor floors to walls and prevent roofs from collapsing, will require
dislocations and some temporary closures that could force many people out of
Chinatown permanently. What will replace them is unknown.

The debate is so heated and confused that even community stalwarts are
expressing doubts about whether the nation's first Chinatown can be saved as
both a vital Asian community and a lucrative tourist attraction.

"I break out in a cold sweat every time I think about it," said Rose Pak, a
consultant with the Chinese Chamber of Commerce and a longtime advocate for
Chinatown. "We are at a crossroads. I've never been so concerned and
apprehensive. I'm thinking for the first time, maybe it's time to move on."

Collapse of a Lifeline

Change is coming from many directions, from skyrocketing rents that drive out
small family businesses to an exodus of middle-class Chinese to the suburbs. But
the most obvious blow to the area's economic health was last year's earthquake.
Not only did it damage some buildings beyond repair and necessitate expensive
changes in others, but it also closed a community lifeline: the Embarcadero
Freeway, which brought streams of shoppers from the suburbs every day.

The freeway remains closed, and intense disagreement over its future has driven
a wedge deep into the community.

"We had a big fight," said May Louie, an owner of several import shops and
president of the new Chinatown Merchants Association, which formed in a protest
of the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. The break came when the Chamber stopped
supporting immediate repair of the freeway, considered by many Chinatown
merchants vital to economic survival, and agreed to support the Mayor's
long-term plan to tear it down and create a surface roadway.

"I call them all wimps," Mrs. Louie said.

Others argue that the estimated 20 percent downturn in business after the
earthquake merely revealed a set of deeper, more complex problems that the
community had been avoiding.

Moving On and Out

"It's a superficially simple question to ask whether fixing the freeway is the
solution," said James Ho, a Chinatown restaurateur who is San Francisco's Deputy
Mayor for economic development. "The earthquake simply brought a lot of changes
to the surface."

Mr. Ho cited "unconscionable" rents, garbage, crime and immigration of poor,
rural Chinese lacking business skills as some of Chinatown's problems.

Equally important, he said, has been the flight of the middle class to the
suburbs and to San Francisco's Richmond district, known in recent years as "New
Chinatown," where the children of immigrants have bought homes and opened shops
catering to their needs.

"Chinatown is the mother who has created a lot of kids," Mr. Ho said. "Its
demise is because of how successful it has been as the beachhead for those who
move on."

Cleanliness vs. Sterility

New Chinese restaurants popular with tourists and suburbanites have opened
outside Chinatown, where floor space and parking are abundant. Their owners not
only enjoy lower rents, but also avoid Chinatown's garbage and traffic problems.

"Caucasians have become more sophisticated about Chinese food," said Henry Chan,
president of the Yank Sing company, which operates a popular dim sum restaurant
in the city's financial district. "They demand high quality and cleanliness. We
really need to clean up Chinatown."

Mr. Chan said he had proposed a task force to insure compliance with city
sanitation codes.

But some worry that such efforts may go too far, transforming the community into
a sort of Oriental theme park.

"The danger is that everyone wants to fix it up and it becomes a Disneyland
where people can't afford to live," Mr. Ho said.

Ms. Pak agreed. "We don't want it to become a shopping mall," she said. "This is
a living community with markets selling live fish and poultry and fresh produce
on the sidewalks. Where else can you get that? We want to protect the integrity
of the community and also serve the tourists."

Crime Grows and Changes

Concern over the rising number of robberies, pickpocketings and other petty
thefts has also kept tourists away. Last spring, open warfare between Asian
gangs broke out for the first time in over a decade with street shootings that
left two dead and nine wounded. The authorities believe that the killings, which
remain unsolved, are part of a power struggle to control illegal gambling
parlors and drug trade.

Chinatown elders negotiated a truce, arguing that the gangs were hurting their
own community, Judge Low said. But changes in immigration have brought in young
toughs from the refugee populations of Vietnam. These young men, who have no
ties to Chinatown or its leaders, joust with others in enforcing collections and
other extortion activities.

Judge Low said he recently met with leaders of New York City's Chinese-American
community, who reported that despite gang activities, Manhattan's Chinatown had
not experienced a similar economic decline.

"It was jam packed with activity at 10 P.M. on a weeknight," Judge Low said. "It
was quite a contrast to San Francisco."

Nervous Hong Kong Investors

Paul Yee, the president of the Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association in
New York, said the community was being infused with money from more affluent
Hong Kong immigrants who are concerned about investing in San Francisco's
Chinatown. "They say they are afraid of the earthquakes and are settling here
instead," he said.

In San Francisco's Chinatown, power has rested in the hands of the 140-year-old
Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association, an all-male hierarchy of
Chinatown's dozens of fraternal, district, family, business, and charity
organizations that is informally known as the Six Companies. Its strength comes
from the family associations, which own about 35 percent of the property in
Chinatown.

Women have been excluded from the boards of the family and district associations
and in some cases are confined to women's auxiliaries. No woman has ever held a
position on the board of the Six Companies. "There is a lot of talent out there
that is not being utilized," said Judge Low. If women are not allowed on the
boards, he said, "new organizations will come forward and challenge them."

For now, the question has become whether the community can pull together to save
itself.

"There's going to be more and more restaurants and businesses closed because
they need the outside people," said Dennis Wong, a pharmacist who has owned a
small drug-store in Chinatown for 20 years and who sits on the board of
directors of both the Six Companies and the new Chinatown Merchants Association.
"They can't get by on Chinatown residents alone. There's going to be some
survival of the fittest going on."

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Along Grant Street in San Francisco's Chinatown, stores selling
Chinese products are giving way to camera shops and fast-food restaurants.;
Dennis Wong, who owns a drugstore in Chinatown, said Chinese businesses are
closing because the area needs to diversify to attract non-Chinatown residents.
(Photographs by Terrence McCarthy for The New York Times)

Map: Map of San Francisco showing location of Chinatown.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
Lost in the Crosscurrents of Mainstream America

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1367 words


The time is 1960, the place the Catskills, and Nick Lockridge of all people
finds himself summering in a Jewish hotel where the food is dished out round the
clock according to the American plan. Nick (D. W. Moffett), a handsome young
Time magazine writer whose square jaw and Darien manners match his F. Scott
Fitzgeraldesque name, has never seen such an excessive regimen of meals and
snacks. "What Americans live like this?" he asks in affable disbelief.

But in "The American Plan," Richard Greenberg's first play since "Eastern
Standard," the American plan isn't just a matter of enforced menus for resort
vacationers. The American plan is instead symptomatic of a larger fate that
finally engulfs each of Mr. Greenberg's five very different characters, the
golden Nick not excluded. Set for most of its length during the last summer of
the Eisenhower years, this sorrowful comedy tells of people who are in one way
or another at odds with the ethnic, intellectual or sexual codes by which
Americans of their time are required to live. When the play ends a decade later
-- in an epilogue set in a Central Park West parlor pointedly overlooking a
Vietnam-era demonstration -- the conformist American plan may be under attack,
but not soon enough to rescue Mr. Greenberg's characters from the tragedy of
assimilation.


I have some serious reservations about "The American Plan" -- about both the
play itself and Evan Yionoulis's staging of it at the Manhattan Theater Club --
but none of them prevented me from being devastated by Mr. Greenberg's
denouement or from being awestruck once again by his precocious talent. (He is
still in his early 30's.) As this playwright has demonstrated since his earliest
works at the Ensemble Studio Theater, "The Bloodletters" and "Life Under Water"
(later seen on public television), he remains a tender, ecumenical champion of
individualists who are crushed by society, whether they be Jews or lonely
post-adolescents or homosexuals or artists or even outwardly self-assured WASP's
like Nick. Yet Mr. Greenberg would rather exercise his highly articulate wit and
boundless empathy than moralize, which is one reason why "Eastern Standard," a
screwball comedy in which not unsympathetic yuppies foolishly adopted a bag
lady, went right over the heads of its more pompous critics.


"The American Plan" is more melancholy in tone. And given its author's concern
for fragile souls who are destroyed by the world's mendacity, it is not
surprising that its basic premise owes something to "The Glass Menagerie": Nick
is a gentleman caller who crosses a Catskill lake to rescue Lili (Wendy
Makkena), the lonely, oppressed daughter of the widowed Eva Adler (Joan
Copeland), a wealthy refugee from Hitler's Germany. After that, most
resemblances to Tennessee Williams end. Mr. Greenberg's voice -- he describes
Time magazine as "the weekly cultural epiphany" and a domineering Jewish mother
as a "late Ibsenesque figure with mah-jongg tiles" -- is purely his own. This
play, though, is kept so firmly in period that it at times seems a literary
cousin of such roughly contemporaneous phenomena as Herman Wouk's "Marjorie
Morningstar" and J. D. Salinger's stories of the Glass family.

If Lili is a Laura Wingfield, she is a decidedly Jewish one, a Sarah Lawrence
dropout who is too smart for her own good and so sensitive she seems to court
psychological collapse whenever exposed to any environment more volatile than
"rooms heavy with damask and Sabbath light." Nick, her putative savior, is no
ordinary Joe but "a prince," an aspiring architect who would "like to build a
whole city" once he has left behind his transient post-collegiate career in Luce
journalism. While Lili feels that "everything I've ever done was something that
happened to me," the buoyant Nick looks as if "nothing ever happened" to him. "I
cause happiness -- that's what I do," he says.


The problem for these soon rhapsodic young lovers -- and to some extent the
problem of the play -- is Eva, who is not merely a suffocating mother but a liar
and manipulator who will stop at nothing to keep Lili from leaving home for
Nick. Eva's nasty intrigues add a lot of flabby narrative repetitiveness to "The
American Plan," too much of it laborious subterfuge to camouflage another buried
plot that won't be revealed here. Nor do Mr. Greenberg or Ms. Copeland bring
enough balance to the mother, once her initially amusing Eastern European
worldliness gives way to pure destructiveness. Though the playwright provides an
intellectual rationale for Eva's behavior, she remains that rare Greenberg
character whom the audience does not see compassionately, from the inside.

Even so, Eva's defeatist view of life, a legacy of her narrow escape on the last
boat out of Germany, is provocative. "The world has a wish of its own for you,
and it's never good," she says definitively. Eva sees figurative Nazis
everywhere in her adopted country and blames gentile businessmen for the
destruction of her husband, an inventor. Under her philosophy, even the
perennial Catskills game of Simon Says can be interpreted as a sublimated replay
of Jewish annihilation.


The sadness of "The American Plan" is not only that Eva holds her daughter a
hostage to the neurotic patterns of her grim history lesson, but that her
fatalistic view of an intolerant and unyielding world is also borne out by the
lives of Americans as disparate as Nick and the Adler household's loyal but
sphinxlike black maid, played with buried bitterness by Yvette Hawkins.
"Happiness exists, but it's for other people" -- Eva's credo -- becomes a
universal one for Mr. Greenberg's characters by the play's 1970 coda.  Only the
demonstrators in Central Park offer any small hope for a new order of justice
for those who do not fit in with those "other people," the American majority.

The urgency of what "The American Plan" has to say is not always conveyed by Ms.
Yionoulis's direction. The lethargic pacing and nostalgic tone of Act I --
reinforced by James Youmans's realistic woodsy setting and the dithering
woodwinds of Thomas Cabaniss's incidental music -- are too ironic by half. An
audience should not have to wait until well after intermission for a play to
stop being coy about its intentions. Ms. Yionoulis can be congratulated,
however, on her guidance of the acting partnership of Ms. Makkena and Mr.
Moffett, who make an enchanting pair of unlikely lovers in Act I before lighting
out for other territory in Act II.


Lili and Nick show off Mr. Greenberg's range -- in depicting women and men, Jews
and WASP's -- and the playwright, in turn, gives two young actors a chance to
show off theirs. Lili, the victimized overgrown girl to whom things always
happened, finally must make a choice in "The American Plan," and once she does,
Ms. Makkena metamorphoses harrowingly from a difficult, teary child into a
resigned adult choked by pearls. For his part, Nick, the privileged boy to whom
nothing ever happened, is visited by life at last, and he, too, enters a
defeated adulthood, which Mr. Moffett conveys by seeming just a shade too small
for his broad smile and Brooks Brothers suit.

"It's such a relief to find your place in life, don't you think?" he says to Ms.
Makkena as they reach the resolution of their story. But there is no relief for
the audience, only a kind of horror at seeing exactly what that place is. The
all-American portrait, suitable for framing, in which Mr. Greenberg leaves his
characters trapped at the end of "The American Plan" looks too inhuman to be
mistaken for anything other than a deadly lie.

The American Plan

By Richard Greenberg; directed by Evan Yionoulis; sets by James Youmans;
costumes by Jess Goldstein; lighting by Donald Holder; sound and original music,
Thomas Cabaniss; production stage manager, Richard Hester. Presented by
Manhattan Theater Club, Lynne Meadow, artistic director; Barry Grove, managing
director. At City Center, 131 West 55th Street.

Lili Adler . . . Wendy Makkena
Nick Lockridge . . . D. W. Moffett
Eva Adler . . . Joan Copeland
Olivia Shaw . . . Yvette Hawkins
Gil Harbison . . . Jonathan Walker

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Wendy Makkena as Lili Adler and D. W. Moffett as Nick Lockridge
in a scene from "The American Plan." (Gerry Goodstein/Manhattan Theater Club)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

War in the Gulf: Counsel of Ignorance

BYLINE: By Arthur Schlesinger Jr.; Arthur Schlesinger Jr. is professor in the
humanities at the City University of New York.

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 696 words


Many factors shape foreign policy -- interest, information, judgment, vision,
prejudice, fatigue, fear, panic, stupidity -- but there is one we tend to
forget. That factor is ignorance -- ignorance of the challenge, of the context,
of how ignorant we may be.

Take the Persian Gulf crisis. Do we really know enough about the Mideast to act
with confidence? The U.S. has not had serious historic experience in this
region. A few missionaries went there in the 19th century, a few oilmen in the
20th and that is about it. We have no strong tradition of Arabist studies in our
universities. Most of the time we don't know what we are doing in the Mideast.

Recall our policy toward Saddam Hussein: support when he committed "naked
aggression" against Iran; unconcern when he gassed Iranians, massacred Kurds and
murdered his own opposition; agricultural credits amounting to a billion
dollars; opposition to economic sanctions against Iraq until the very eve of
more "naked aggression," against Kuwait.

One year, Saddam Hussein is our pal; the next, he is Hitler. One year, Hafez
al-Assad of Syria is the king of terrorists; the next, he is our pal: we will
repent that, too. When we got so much wrong about the Mideast yesterday, the day
before yesterday and the day before that, why do we suppose we have suddenly got
it right today? Right enough to send thousands of Americans to their deaths?

Years after the Vietnam War, I asked a high official of the Johnson
Administration why they had ever supposed, as they said at the time, that North
Vietnam was the spearhead of planned Chinese expansion into South Asia.
Historians, I noted, could have told them that the Chinese and Vietnamese had
hated each other for a thousand years.

My friend replied: When it came to Soviet questions, policymakers could turn to
Government experts like Charles Bohlen, George Kennan and Llewellyn Thompson for
informed counsel. In the case of China, John Foster Dulles had purged the State
Department of the old China hands in the 50's. Our Far Eastern policy in the
60's thus plunged blindly ahead without benefit of expertise on China. So we got
things wrong.

Alas, no Middle Eastern Bohlens and Kennans advise the Government at high levels
today. In consequence, we are used, exploited and manipulated by wily locals in
flowing robes who live in air-conditioned hotels and expect us to do their
fighting for them.

If our ignorance of today's Middle East is considerable, our ignorance of the
future there is total. Yet the case for war is increasingly based on the
conviction that we have divine foreknowledge and know the shape of things to
come. Those who claim the gift of prophecy say that unless we destroy Iraq's
nuclear program, 5, 10 or 15 years from now Saddam Hussein, armed with the bomb,
will terrorize the world. We have heard such prophecies before. It is the old --
I thought discredited -- argument for preventive war.

It requires particular presumption in 1990 to claim accurate foreknowledge of
the future. Over the last four years, the world -- from the Soviet Union to
Eastern Europe to South Africa to China to the Middle East -- has undergone
extraordinary changes. What is equally extraordinary is that no one foresaw
them: All the statesmen, sages, experts, all those bearded chaps on "Nightline"
were caught unaware.

Some Americans were once so sure they could foretell the future that they called
for preventive war against the Soviet Union and China. Does anyone regret that
our Government declined to drop the bomb? And if great powers like the Soviet
Union and China did not rate preventive war, why should we contemplate it
against a third-rate power like Iraq?

Let us not sacrifice lives today because of a guess about what Iraq may be up to
10 or 15 years from now. Don't forget the warning of the theologian Reinhold
Niebuhr about "the depth of evil to which individuals and communities may sink .
. . when they try to play the role of God to history." Ignorance of the present,
ignorance of the future -- these are pardonable. No statesman, no nation, can
expect to know everything. But ignorance of how ignorant we are is unpardonable.


LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

CONGRESS AND THE GULF;
Hard Question May Need an Answer Soon: Should It Give Bush a Go-Ahead on Force?

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1211 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 16


After months of ducking a serious debate on American policy in the Persian Gulf,
Congress is preparing to face its moment of truth.

Unless a diplomatic breakthrough persuades President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to
withdraw his troops from Kuwait before Jan. 15, lawmakers expect that they will
have to decide whether to give President Bush the go-ahead to remove them by
force.

Mr. Bush has offered no guarantee that he will seek such approval, saying only
that he is "considering" it. And the Democrats who control Congress have shown
no interest in pressing the point with resolutions specifically ruling out
force. Instead, Democratic leaders have made plans for the new Congress that
convenes on Jan. 3 to remain on call instead of recessing until Jan. 23 as
originally scheduled.

"The Senate should and will debate this issue," the Senate majority leader,
George J. Mitchell, told reporters as he and seven Democratic colleagues left
Washington on Thursday for a weeklong trip to the gulf that they described as an
information-gathering mission. It includes visits with American troops in Saudi
Arabia and meetings with Saudi, Egyptian and Israeli leaders.

But much as Congress wants to play a part in shaping Persian Gulf policy, the
fact is that by tradition and inclination it is a reactive institution,
especially in foreign affairs.

Its role in the current crisis is defined by sometimes contradictory objectives
-- exercising the war-making powers conferred on it by the Constitution, raising
legitimate questions about the conduct of foreign policy, supporting the
President when American lives and vital interests are at stake and getting the
President to make the first move.

The Vietnam Experience

Representative Dante B. Fascell, the Florida Democrat who heads the House
Foreign Affairs Committee, describes the Congressional posture as "staying as
quiet as you can while gnashing your teeth and growling."

The first objective, shared by Republicans and Democrats, hawks and doves, is a
genuine desire to see the constitutional prerogative to declare war protected
and observed. The Vietnam experience weighs heavily on lawmakers, even though
only 23 current House members and 5 current Senators were in office when the
Gulf of Tonkin resolution was adopted in 1964.

Institutionally and emotionally, Congress has never quite forgiven itself for
giving President Johnson what amounted to a blank check to conduct that war.
Lawmakers who were prepared to wink at the Constitution when American forces
were called to action in Libya, Grenada and Panama without prior Congressional
approval see the gulf as a very different matter.

Defense Secretary Dick Cheney's assertion on Dec. 3 that the President has all
the authority he needs right now to order offensive military action is taken
very seriously on Capitol Hill.

"There is no question that the President, as Commander in Chief, can order the
forces to engage in offensive action, and they will properly obey his command,"
the House Speaker, Thomas S. Foley of Washington, acknowledged in an interview
on the CNN program "One on One."

"But to do that from a standing start," Mr. Foley said, "in my judgment, in
constitutional terms, requires an authorization -- not necessarily a formal
declaration of war, but an authorization."

More Than a Legal Nicety

House Democrats were sufficiently exercised by Mr. Cheney's comment to adopt
overwhelmingly a policy statement stipulating that the President should not
order American troops into offensive combat without the explicit approval of
Congress. Although Republicans have been less vocal on the subject, influential
figures like Bob Dole of Kansas, the Senate Republican leader, and Senator
Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, a senior member of the Foreign Relations Committee,
have told the President that it would be folly to proceed with a military
offensive unless Congress is behind him.

The worry over consititutional requirements is more than a legal nicety. House
and Senate leaders and the rank and file recognize that once American troops are
engaged in combat, Congress will have little stomach to exercise its other
constitutional prerogative: cutting off money to fight a war. That means that if
a resolution authorizing force is adopted, any reservations, limitations or
redefinitions of policy goals that lawmakers want to express on Persian Gulf
policy will have to be built into it.

Those mechanics will be tricky if Congress is to meet another of its objectives:
making sure that it is seen as supporting, or at least not obstructing, the
President in the first major foreign policy crisis of the post-cold-war world.
For Democrats this is also a matter of partisan political concern. Party leaders
would like to dispel the image that Democrats are unwilling to use American
military might under any circumstance.

That explains why Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Foley went along with President Bush's
decision to order additional American troops to the gulf last month.

Support for Bush's Goals

Party politics were also a major factor in the move by moderate and conservative
House Democrats to modify the language in the House Democratic policy statment.
At their behest, and with the full backing of the House leadership, the
statement was amended to include a reiteration of support for the President's
goals in the gulf and the initial deployment of troops to defend Saudi Arabia
against an Iraqi attack.

"I've believed all along that there is something here worth standing up for and
even dying for," said the House majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt of
Missouri. Like other top Democrats in the House and Senate, Mr. Gephardt has
argued that economic sanctions against Iraq should be given more time to work
before miltiary action is taken. But that view, he said, has never been advanced
to preclude the use of force, but rather to insure that it is a last resort.

In the last week, the Democratic Party's sensitivity to its image on questions
of war and peace was underscored by the appearance of several prominent liberals
in a new bipartisan coalition advocating the use of force to dismantle President
Hussein's chemical and biological arsenal and potential nuclear weapons.

Congressional leaders are struggling with yet another difficult objective:
making sure that once Congress speaks, it does so with something approaching
coherence and unity.

Special Session Ruled Out

This month, Mr. Foley, Mr. Mitchell and the House Republican leadership judged
that convening a special session of the lame-duck Congress to debate gulf policy
would be the worst way to accomplish that.

Although Mr. Bush was persuaded, there were dissenting voices from both
political parties. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, said
the Bush Administration should have faced the question of authorization for use
of force back in September, but he also blamed Congress for not pressing the
point. "I think it was our responsibility," he said. "If they didn't, we should
have."

Nonetheless, Congressional leaders fear that Congress does not deal well with
hypothetical questions. Their fourth objective is to have the President ask
Congress for something specific.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 19, 1990, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, a front- page article on Monday about Congress and
Persian Gulf policy misidentified the organization that distributes the
television program "One on One." It is PBS, not CNN.


TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Officer at Pan Am Links Its Growth to Europe's

BYLINE: By Daniel F. Cuff

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 332 words


In his new job as chief operating officer of Pan American World Airways, Peter
T. McHugh is in charge of passenger and cargo marketing, sales reservations,
planning and scheduling, field services, dining services, flight operations,
aircraft maintenance and airport operations -- just about everything.

Mr. McHugh, who is 43 years old, has been executive vice president for marketing
and sales at the financially pinched airline. His appointment to the new post
was announced last week. He assumed the duties of Robert L. Gould, senior vice
president for operations, who left to become president of Eastern Airlines.

Mr. McHugh will keep his job with the parent company, the Pan Am Corporation, as
executive vice president in the office of the chairman. Others in the office are
Thomas G. Plaskett, president, chairman and chief executive, and Richard H.
Francis, chief financial officer.

Pan Am, which is based in New York, is hoping that the sale of its London routes
to United Airlines will stabilize its finances. "We're tying our future to a
unified Germany and a unified Europe," Mr. McHugh said. "That's where the growth
is and that's where our future is."

Mr. McHugh said that of 11 planes that fly the London routes, only 2 are being
sold in the deal, with the other 9 going into service in other places. "The
whole notion that we are cutting the heart out of Pan Am is just not correct,"
he added.

Mr. McHugh was part of the team that Mr. Plaskett brought in in 1988 to help him
run the airline. Previously, Mr. McHugh spent 20 years at Trans World Airlines,
where he was senior vice president for marketing and sales when he left for Pan
Am. He started at T.W.A. as a part-time reservations agent.

Mr. McHugh graduated from LaSalle College in 1972 and received an M.B.A the next
year from Drexel University. He saw combat in Vietnam as an Army infantry first
lieutenant.

A native of Philadelphia, Mr. McHugh and his wife, Elizabeth, live in Garden
City, L.I.

NAME: Peter T. McHugh

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

STANDOFF IN THE GULF;
U.S. 'Nightmare Scenario': Being Finessed by Iraq

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 905 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 18


President Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d have spent the last 48
hours struggling to ward off what they fear could prove an ominous new
development in the Persian Gulf: an effort by Saddam Hussein to make the crisis
seem so trifling that his opponents would lose the will to keep the heat on.

They believe, as Mr. Baker told America's North Atlantic Treaty Organization
allies on Monday, that the Iraqi President will probably make some dramatic
announcement next month, just before a United Nations resolution authorizing the
use of force to evict Iraq from Kuwait goes into effect. By sharply reducing the
dimensions of the crisis, he would hope to undermine domestic and foreign
backing for a war.

"We can't let him maneuver us into a position where the stakes seem too petty to
fight over, which is what he seems determined to do," a senior intelligence
official said. He said a pledge by Mr. Hussein to pull out of all but a fraction
of Kuwaiti territory, or to pull out much later than the deadline specified by
the Security Council, or a combination of the two, would "complicate our
position enormously."

Another official spoke of "the nightmare scenario facing us."

Reward for Aggression Feared

The difficulty with a "partial solution," in the view of the Administration, is
that it would seem to reward Mr. Hussein for lawless actions, leaving him in
possession of territory to which he has no right and enabling him to flout
international will, as well as making the United States look like a paper tiger
that roars and roars but never bites.

To others, such abstractions may seem less than persuasive.

Even on the present terms, sustaining support for a war among the American
people will be hard enough. Mr. Bush said as much today, telling reporters: "I
think that if the United States has to do its part to implement the United
Nations resolutions, I believe the country would support that. But I don't think
that support would last if it were a long, drawn-out conflagration. I think
support would erode, as it did during the Vietnam conflict."

But it would be much harder if Saddam Hussein succeeds in marginalizing the
crisis, casting it as a small-scale border dispute between Arabs or a dispute
over timing, rather than a test case of American willingness to stand up for
principles and to punish a bully who cruelly seized a friendly country.

An Alliance Coming Apart?

Such a ploy by the Iraqi leader, as Mr. Baker described it, might also soften
the glue keeping the anti-Iraq alliance together, perhaps even causing the
Saudis to have second thoughts about fighting other Arabs.

Insisting that he still held out hope for a diplomatic solution to the crisis,
Mr. Bush said that "it cannot be an answer where Saddam Hussein is rewarded with
one single concession, because that would fly right in the face of the
rejuvenated United Nations peacekeeping effort, and it is simply unacceptable,
not just to us, but to the rest of our coalition partners."

"I think the coalition is holding," Mr. Bush said. But some of his partners,
European as well as Arab, remain reluctant about fighting, even if the United
States takes most of the casualties, and concessions by Mr. Hussein would look
appealing to them.

Through pre-emptive oratorical strikes like Monday's and today's, Mr. Bush hopes
he can convince Mr. Hussein that a partial withdrawal would not work and
therefore is not worth trying. At the same time he is trying to inoculate the
alliance and the American public against Iraqi blandishments.

But from Mr. Hussein's point of view, there is little to lose by trying; if a
partial withdrawal did not work, he could always concede more, hoping that his
opponents' will would crack at some point. He would be no worse off for the
effort, and he might generate enough optimism about peace to make it impractical
for Mr. Bush to use force, at least right away.

Will of Congress

One decision that Mr. Bush will have to make if he decides to use force --
despite Iraqi gambits -- is whether to seek Congressional backing. He said today
that he would "look at" that problem later, if he had to, although he hoped that
step would not be necessary to take. For the moment, he said, he had no
definitive way to answer the question, though he had been having "the darnedest
consultations with the Congress you've ever seen."

If he asks Congress to give him the same sort of authorization he got from the
Security Council, he might run into difficulty. The House and the Senate could
stall, stringing the process out for weeks. It could pass an authorization full
of qualifications. It probably could not afford to turn him down flatly, but he
would be almost equally embarrassed by a very narrow victory.

If, on the other hand, he decided to go ahead without asking for authorization,
the President would risk splitting the country further -- "not an appealing
prospect, either," as one of his principal advisers said.

Four weeks from today, the Security Council deadline arrives. As the days go by,
the prospects increase that Mr. Bush will find himself confronted not by a
clear-cut, black-and-white, good-and-evil issue that would be comprehensible to
all, but by a decision that will come to him in shades of gray -- a tough call,
not very easy to explain, like the ones that tormented Lyndon B. Johnson and
Richard M. Nixon during the Vietnam War.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

STANDOFF IN THE GULF;
Bush Sees a Firm Coalition Even if Iraq Attacks Israel

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 889 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 18


The Bush Administration said today that it had reached an arrangement with its
allies in the Persian Gulf to keep the coalition against Iraq from falling apart
if Baghdad attacks Israel and draws that country into fighting in the Middle
East.

The specter of an attack on Israel has been especially troubling to American
policy makers as they prepare for the possibility of war with Iraq. Washington's
concern has been that the historic enmity between Israel and its Arab neighbors
would resurface and break apart the international coalition if Israeli were
involved.

Today, the Administration appeared to go out of its way to leave the impression
that this was no longer a problem. But officials refused to provide any details
and it was not clear if there had been some specific agreement among the allies
on this score or whether the Administration was simply anxious to set aside the
issue before the Jan. 15 deadline set by the United Nations for Iraq to leave
Kuwait.

Pursuing Their Campaign

As has been the case in recent days, White House officials used each public
appearance today as an opportunity to pursue their campaign to bolster public
support for the gulf operation.

In a speech today, Vice President Dan Quayle sought to counter what he said were
Americans who "questioned the morality of coming to the defense of what they
call a 'feudal,' 'reactionary' and 'repressive' regime" in Kuwait. Mr. Quayle
said those accusations were false and seemed to differentiate between groups of
people who are worth protecting and groups who "are expendable."

"This is precisely the warped and evil morality used by Stalin and his henchmen
to justify their infamous campaign of terror during the 1930's," Mr. Quayle
said. "The people of the Soviet Union have turned their backs on the morally
demented legacy of Stalinism and so shall we."

When asked at a news conference with a group of newspaper editors about the
possibility of an attack by Iraq on Israel, President Bush said he was
"convinced the coalition would not fall apart."

'I'm Absolutely Convinced'

"I can't give you the specifics on that," he said, "but I'm absolutely convinced
of it and you can assume the way I've answered the question that we've inquired
about that."

Mr. Bush went on to praise the Israelis, as he has done before, for keeping
"what I would call a low-profile position on all of this."

He added: "It is not easy. They have their security they feel could well be at
stake from some radical act by Saddam Hussein. But I have no argument with Mr.
Shamir over the way that the Israelis have conducted themselves, nor do I think
the coalition partners, on that particular point."

Earlier, Brent Scowcroft, the President's national security adviser, was asked
by the same audience about the possibility o an attack on Israel. While noting
that was a hypothetical question, Mr. Scowcroft acknowledged that Washington had
discussed the issue with Israel.

U.S. Has Assured Israel

He said the United States, Israel and its allies were "satisfied" with their
understandings about "a variety of scenarios" in the gulf.

Another senior official, briefing reporters on condition of anonymity, said the
United States had "talked about a variety of contingencies" with other nations
supporting the military operation. "They're comfortable and we're comfortable
with the outcome of these discussions," the official said.

The official refused to answer when asked if Israel had agreed to allow the
United States to respond militarily on its behalf in the event of an attack by
Iraq.

A third official, who also spoke on condition of anonymity, said the United
States has assured Israel that it would be secure if there were a war because
one of Washington's first military priorities would be to destroy Baghdad's
ability to launch an air or missile attack, which would have the effect of
protecting Israel as well as Americans.

Two Troubling Themes

But it was not known if there was any arrangement that went beyond such
assurances.

At the news conference today, Mr. Bush repeatedly returned to two themes
evidently troubling him as the January deadline looms -- the longevity of public
support for a war and the fear of some Americans that the United States is being
drawn into what could become a long, inconclusive conflict like the war in
Vietnam.

Seeming at times to be almost thinking aloud, Mr. Bush told the newspaper
editors that he is concerned that support for a war would erode if it did not
end quickly.

"If the United States had to do its part to implement the United Nations
resolution, I believe the country would support that," he said. "But I don't
think that support would last if it were a long, drawn-out conflagration. I
think support would erode as it did in the Vietnam conquest -- I mean,
conflict."

Mr. Bush said he could not predict how long a war in the gulf might last.

But he repeated his vow not to let the Persian Gulf become "another Vietnam." He
said that "one of the reasons that I moved this additional force, or had it
moved, was because every individual life is precious and if there had to be some
confrontation militarily, I would want to be able to assure the parents and the
families there is enough force there to minimize the risk to every single
American kid."

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush during a news conference yesterday in Washington.
(Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Hospital, Family Doctor and Benefactor

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1160 words


The procedure was a spinal tap, and Eldris Green stared intently as the doctors
behind the glass window at Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center plunged a needle into
the spine of a tiny baby. Other students wriggled uncomfortably, but Eldris did
not flinch. She was born at the hospital, lives a few blocks away and will have
a summer job there this year. She may well work there full time when she grows
up.

Eldris, 15 years old, was one of 50 ninth graders from the nearby Taft High
School who visit the hospital once a week to learn -- early -- about health care
careers. In today's bureaucratic jargon, that kind of recruiting of inner-city
youth is called "mentoring," but it harks back to old-fashioned patronage.

$200 Million Renovation

If that insular, seven-square-mile section of the South Bronx can be viewed as a
small town, then it is a company town, and Bronx-Lebanon is the company. Its two
towering complexes, one on the Grand Concourse, the other a mile away on Fulton
Avenue, straddle the nation's poorest Congressional district -- an area of the
South Bronx where the median income is well below the poverty line and there are
more abandoned buildings than trees, more storefront churches than stores or
churches. The hospital is the largest private employer in the South Bronx.
Almost by default, it also provides its community with drug-addiction treatment,
half-way houses, social welfare services, housing, job training, counseling and
health education.

At dusk, the streets empty and the hospital waiting rooms fill with people who
have no family doctor or insurance or, more simply, no other place to go. It's
the kind of community where only crack houses and the hospital's emergency room
operate 24 hours a day.

More than 70 percent of the hospital's 3,200 employees live in the immediate
area, just about everyone except the doctors. "We're not just a hospital," said
Miguel A. Fuentes, the president of the hospital. "We are an economic anchor in
the South Bronx."

Bronx-Lebanon is a private nonprofit hospital that accepts patients regardless
of their ability to pay and that almost went bankrupt in the early 1980's
treating its increasingly indigent clientele. Rescued by an influx of special
funds earmarked for "financially distressed hospitals," Bronx-Lebanon is now
solvent and undergoing a state-financed $200 millionrenovation and expansion
that will increase its bed capacity from 574 to 677 -- government money given
with the understanding that the hospital provides more to the community than
just medical services.

Health care, Borough President Fernando Ferrer said, is "the Bronx's single
largest industry," and Bronx-Lebanon, in particular, illustrates the grim
paradox that rules many inner cities: illness is the community's greatest
blight, and it is also its chief economic linchpin.

"Here, health care will always need employees," said Margaret Hutton, 38, who
has worked as an emergency room nurse for the last 10 years and watched the
patient population grow -- and grow ever younger and sicker. Her husband also
works there, as a lab technician. "The hospital," she said, "is the only place
where jobs are secure." She said she hoped and expected her that her 12-year-old
daughter would work in pediatrics there some day.

'Accepted the Responsibility'

"The only good thing that has come out of our AIDS epidemic is that it has
channeled money into this community," said Dr. Jerome Ernst, an AIDS researcher
and clinician who says 20 percent of the hospital's patients under 40 are HIV
infected. "The hospital has given us the money; it's not afraid of being branded
as an AIDS hospital. They have accepted the responsibility -- that's why I am
still here."

Bronx-Lebanon employs 200 attending physicians and 120 full-time social workers
-- more than 40 of those work exclusively with HIV-infected patients who even
after they leave need help filling Medicaid claims, finding child care, housing,
clothing or even a meal. Last month the hospital distributed 100,000 pounds of
food.

The hospital, which is a partner with three local community groups and
coalitions in an effort to build new housing in the area, is simultaneously
spilling out onto the surrounding streets and drawing outsiders within its
walls: the office of Community Board 4 is in one of the Grand Concourse
buildings, and in January Community Board 3 plans to move into an office in the
Fulton division. Bronx-Lebanon, which employs 114 guards, recently set up its
own 24-hour security station a block away from the hospital -- in a sense,
helping to police its own neighborhood.

Urban Enterprise Zone

Particularly in the Fulton division, the part of the hospital that fills two
blocks on Fulton Avenue, an area far from the epicenter of Bronx
"revitalization," the main signs of vitality are hospital construction sites:
there, across the street from the pre-World War I building is a new pink and
white granite almost-completed 240-bed nursing home. Half of the new building
will be reserved for AIDS patients, and it will be the city's first
free-standing AIDS nursing home. In the neighborhood, it is viewed as a kind of
urban enterprise zone.

The ill worry more about services than jobs."They fixed it up real nice," said
Carmen Gearhart, 25, of the renovated waiting area of the emergency room, "but
the service is still so slow."

No Other Doctor

Mrs. Gearhart, who had carried her feverish 9-month-old boy into the Grand
Concourse emergency room at 9 A.M., was still there, waiting for blood test
results, at 6 P.M. Overcrowding, a shortage of beds and long waits are endemic
at Bronx-Lebanon. "Our patients don't have a family doctor, whatever problem
they have," explained Dr. Luis Maceira, an emergency room physician. "They have
to come to the hospital instead."

Unlike most of the other doctors, Dr. Maceira, 44, does not commute to
Bronx-Lebanon from the suburbs. He was raised in the South Bronx and left high
school in the 10th grade to become an Air Force mechanic in Vietnam. When he
returned, many of his neighborhood friends worked in the hospital, and he first
considered becoming a nurse or an X-ray technician. But he discovered those
fields had three-year waiting lists. Almost by default, he became a doctor,
starting medical school at the age of 31. He decided to stay in the South Bronx,
he says, to "help the community" and also because "all my friends are from the
area."

Bronx-Lebanon is not very well known outside the Bronx. As Judy Turnock, a
community organizer put it, "This is a community hospital -- the Shah of Iran
doesn't come here for heart surgery." But for those who live in the area, it is
one constant in a neighborhood that keeps changing and rarely for the better.
"Our care can't be that bad," Mrs. Hutton said with a laugh. "We employees all
say we would never go there as patients, but as soon as we get sick, we go to
Bronx-Lebanon."

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dr. Luis Maceira treating a patient, Eddy Olivares, in the
emergency room at the Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center. Dr. Maceira, who was raised
in the South Bronx, decided to stay there to "help the community."; The
hospital's complex on the Grand Concourse in the South Bronx. More than 70
percent of the hospital's 3,200 employees live in the immediate area.
(Photographs by Sara Krulwich/The New York Times) (pg. B1)

Map of the Bronx highlighting site of Bronx-Lebanon Hospital (pg. B4)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
Who's In Charge?

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 760 words


Who, if anyone, is minding the store at the White House? What kind of
Administration is it that could allow the minority-scholarship flap, without
even a high-level review, to flare into fiasco?

Such ineptitude has not been seen at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue since Donald
Regan, then chief of staff to the Great Communicator, described Ronald Reagan's
staff as being "like a shovel brigade that follows a parade down Main Street
cleaning up." True enough, but infelicitous; and for that and other offenses
against the First Family, Mr. Regan soon thereafter got the gate.


This time the victim may prove to be President Bush himself. It's his
Administration, after all; and the political climate he fostered led a
second-level bureaucrat in the Department of Education to proclaim a major
policy decision that embarrassed Mr. Bush and may have destroyed any lingering
hope for a bigger Republican share of the black vote.

In extricating itself, or something, from this dilemma, the Administration not
only floundered between conflicting courses, giving new evidence of its
inability to guide itself, let alone the country; it further alienated the
Republican right wing, which already was holding its nose. That could be
disastrous for a Republican President seeking re-election.

This unwanted and unnecessary rumble came along just when other developments had
made Mr. Bush look like the Incredible Shrinking Man: the budget flip-floppery
that tumbled him out of the approval-rating stratosphere; his inability to make
clear the vital national interest that requires 400,000 U.S. troops on the Saudi
border; such unseemly intramural bouts as Richard Darman vs. Newt Gingrich and
John Sununu vs. Ed Rollins, all topped by William Bennett's on-again, off-again,
gone-again Finnegan performance in re the chairmanship of the G.O.P.

Now, in recognition of the larger political realities, the President again has
had to give the back of his hand to conservative theology. He repudiated the
belief, which his Administration had seemed to foster, that no deviation can be
allowed from the strictest color-blindness, even in a good cause or to correct
obvious evils.

It need not have happened. No one was agitating for an end to scholarships for
minorities; the charge that "affirmative action" sometimes disadvantages some
whites -- which might occasionally be true of college admissions policies --
almost never applies to minority scholarships. Nor should any competent
Administration permit a policy of such profound social and political
implications to be decided anywhere but at the top.

But if the Administration is looking weak, and if the Republican right threatens
an insurgency against Mr. Bush in 1992, where is the Democrat to take advantage
of the situation? Testimony from Iowa and New Hampshire, where would-be nominees
usually are a dime a dozen, suggests that this time around no one aspires to
fill the shoes of Walter Mondale and Michael Dukakis.

Gov. Mario Cuomo of New York, who leads the speculation, did make a
campaign-sounding speech to a campaign-like forum, the National Press Club in
Washington. He accused Mr. Bush of being more worried about Kuwait than the U.S.
economy, which could be a potential campaign theme; but Mr. Cuomo is not
confessing to Presidential ambitions and has nasty budget problems of his own.

In view of the President's mounting troubles, no doubt Iowa and New Hampshire
soon will receive visits from some of the usual Democratic suspects -- Senators
Lloyd Bentsen of Texas and Al Gore of Tennessee, for example, and certainly
Jesse Jackson. Mr. Cuomo and Senator Sam Nunn are much "mentioned," as is a
newcomer from a state not known for Presidential timber -- Senator Bob Kerrey of
Nebraska, an honored Vietnam veteran.

The first signs can be seen, however, of the internal warfare that characterizes
the Democrats. An unnamed spokesman for the Democratic Leadership Conference --
the organization led by Senator Charles Robb of Virginia, Senator Nunn of
Georgia, and other "moderates" -- said the conference hoped to be able to
counter the "money and publicity" the Northeastern liberal Mr. Cuomo would
receive if he became a candidate.

With the economy in decline, the Administration in disarray, the right-wing
conservatives in high dudgeon and the Middle East situation in doubt, Republican
prospects for 1992 might seem dubious at best. But with the Democrats in their
usual muddle, the oldest rule of politics may nevertheless apply: You can't beat
a horse with no horse.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT EDUCATION

BYLINE: By Fred M. Hechinger

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; National Desk; Education Page

LENGTH: 789 words


This is my last column in The Times. It has had a long run, as they say on
Broadway, and so the time has come to let others take the stage.

My first column, on Sunday, Aug. 9, 1959, was headlined: "A Look at the
Educational Landscape as U.S. Schools Move into a New Decade." It read in part:

"The public pronouncements about the schools ring with grandiose phrases, such
as 'Education for the Space Age'. . . But the children in school are still
earthbound . . . Mathematics and science have been neglected . . . (Is) the
junior high school doing its job?" It concluded with a call for a "broader
outlook" -- national goals.

My report of 31 years ago might suggest that little has changed. Americans have
landed on the moon, but schools are still mired in earthbound problems, such as
mastery of math and science. Junior high schools still await reform.

Some things have grown worse -- poverty, disintegrating families, drugs,
violence.

I can hear critics complain, "You reporters write only about what's wrong."

I disagree. Of course, I have commented on what's wrong and who is responsible
for it -- politicians (as when President Nixon vetoed the Child Development Act
in 1971) and education bureaucrats who cared more about their power and perks
than about children. They seemed to me just a notch above child abusers.

The difference between the education in affluent suburbs and in decaying cities
remains as intolerable as it was in 1961 when James B. Conant in his book,
"Slums and Suburbs," called it "social dynamite."

Bad news must be reported. But the three decades since my first column have also
seen good news, and I enjoyed writing about it.

Better ways have been found to teach reading and writing. Math and science are
finally getting attention.


The importance of child care and early childhood education has at last been
acknowledged, even though the United States is not even close to matching other
industrial countries. Head Start was invented in 1964 -- a small first step to
give poor children a chance to catch up. By 1994, it is supposed to be available
to all youngsters who need it -- fully 30 years after its inception. Good news
still travels slowly.

One crucial discovery has been made in the 1980's: better schools are possible
only if able teachers play a major role in their reform.

John Dewey's idea that schools should nurture "the whole child" -- mind, body
and soul -- has recently become respectable again, three decades after it was
denounced as subversive.

I never fell for the propaganda that all teachers are dedicated. No profession
can make that claim. But given the hard work and meager rewards, I met more
dedicated teachers than we have a right to expect.


I found much pleasure in writing about great teachers, including some who taught
me. I measured the ideal by the recollection of the gentle man who taught me in
first and second grade. When he illustrated a childish poem of mine and set it
to music, he opened worlds that are often closed off by test-driven pedantry.

One of our sons, in fourth grade, said his teacher was different because "she
knows how we children think." I learned that children are more reliable than
competency tests in spotting good teachers.

For great teachers, the classroom is a stage. At City College, the late David
Klein would transform his unremarkable self into a towering Caesar or a pathetic
Lear, and the late William Bradley Otis, a mid-Westerner of dyed-in-the-wool
conservatism, could nevertheless move a class of young radicals to tears with a
rendition of Amy Lowell's anti-war poem, "Patterns."

Good and bad news came mixed in the 1960's student revolution. Some excesses
were inexcusable; but despite some old-timers' outrage, the colleges survived,
some stronger than before. And the young rebels did help to end the war in
Vietnam.

The best news always came from classrooms where children learned and enjoyed it:
6-year-olds huddled in "editorial conference" before writing their stories; a
high school student, who had never read a book for pleasure, discovering
"Catcher in the Rye" and asking if there were more books for him to take home.

But after leaving such good news classrooms, I would think about hundreds of
thousands of youngsters who are never allowed to taste such pleasures. Should I
have ignored the bad news -- about a system that deprives the many of joys
reserved for the few?

I tried to celebrate the islands of excellence; but I could not overlook the sea
of neglect and apathy that threatened to wash over them.

Good and bad news always compete for attention. That's the story as I saw it.
Regrets? Only that on my desk is an untidy pile of notes for columns not
written.

NAME: Fred M. Hechinger

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodian Rivals to Meet in Paris on Friday

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 668 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Dec. 19


Leaders of the four warring Cambodian factions are to meet here on Friday, as
Western and Asian diplomats express hope that the Cambodians will be nudged
closer to accepting a cease-fire and United Nations supervision of their country
pending elections.

These diplomats said that getting Cambodia's Prime Minister, Hun Sen, to accept
United Nations supervision was the chief stumbling block, but that Vietnam, Mr.
Hun Sen's principal sponsor, could put pressure on him to be more flexible at
the meeting becauseHanoi hopes to improve relations with the West.

Nonetheless, Western diplomats said they doubted that there would be a
breakthrough to end two decades of war in Cambodia. "Everyone is pessimistic,
but there is reason to be hopeful," a Western diplomat said. "If they knew there
was no chance of progress, some of these parties would have refused to come."

At the session, which is expected to run one or two days, Mr. Hun Sen is to meet
with Price Norodom Sihanouk and the heads of two other guerrilla factions that
are seeking to overthrow him. The other factions are a democratic opposition
group, headed by former Prime Minister Son Sann, and the Khmer Rouge, whose
reign in the late 1970's led to the deaths of more than one million Cambodians.

The talks are being run by Foreign Minister Roland Dumas of France and Foreign
Minister Ali Alatas of Indonesia, who were co-chairman of an August 1989 meeting
of a 19-nation peace conference in Paris that unsuccessfuly sought to bring
about a cease-fire in Cambodia.

In late November, the five permanent members of the United Nations Security
Council -- Britain, China, France, the Soviet Union and theUnited States --
agreed on a plan in which hundreds and perhaps thousands of United Nations
officials would be stationed in Cambodia to supervise a cease-fire and
elections.

To take effect, that plan needs the approval of the four factions. Asian
diplomats say the three guerrilla factions are ready to accept United Nations
supervision. But Mr. Hun Sen has refused to accept United Nations supervision,
unhappy that it would mean that United Nations officials might run several key
ministries, including the Interior and Foreign Ministries.

In addition, the Hun Sen Government fears that the United Nations call to disarm
the warring factions could unintentionally help the Khmer Rouge. Under any
program to disarm the factions, it would probably be easier to take away arms
from soldiers in theGovernment's army, who are easily recognizable, than from
the Khmer Rouge's guerrillas, who are hard to recognize and are spread through
the countryside. Of the three guerrilla factions, the Khmer Rouge is by far the
most successful on the battlefield.

Last week, Hor Nam Hong, Mr. Hun Sen's Foreigh Minister, said the Government
opposed the United Nations plan "because of the Khmer Rouge," adding, "Who can
trust them?"

Seeking to reassure Mr. Hun Sen, Western diplomats say the United Nations would
not necessarily remove many Government officials from the ministries. They add
that the five Security Council members are not calling for total disarmament
because they recognize that the Khmer Rouge might circumvent such a program.

Asian diplomats say Vietnam hastold Mr. Hun Sen to accept United Nations
supervision because Hanoi is eager to improve relations with the West and
receive economic aid from the West. Vietnam's economic crisis is expected to
worsen after Jan. 1 because the Soviet Union, struggling to get its own economic
house in order, has said it would severely cut aid to Vietnam and other
third-world nations.

"The U.S. has made it clear that it will not normalize realtions with Vietnam or
end the economic embargo until there is a settlement on Cambodia," a Western
official said.

The five permanent Security Council members have called for setting up a Supreme
National Council, made up of members of the four factions, that would embody
Cambodian sovereignty during the period before the elections.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

STANDOFF IN THE GULF;
FORCES NOT READY FOR JANUARY WAR, U.S. GENERAL SAYS

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1079 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, Dec. 19


American forces in the Persian Gulf will not be ready to attack Iraq by Jan. 15,
the deadline the United Nations has set for Baghdad to withdraw its forces from
Kuwait, a senior United States commander said today.

The candid assessment by the officer, Lieut. Gen. Calvin A. H. Waller, the
deputy commander of American forces in the gulf, had the effect of undermining
the Bush Administration's policy of applying pressure on Iraq in advance of Jan.
15. The Administration has wanted to leave the impression that if Iraq does not
withdraw from Kuwait by then, it faced the risk of imminent military conflict.

General Waller said that because of constraints on matching up troops with their
equipment and sending them to their field positions, there was a "distinct
possibility that every unit will not be fully combat-ready until some time after
Feb. 1," or perhaps as late as mid-February.

Second-Ranking in Gulf Force

General Waller, who is second in command to Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf,
commander of the American forces in the gulf, made his comments in a 30-minute
interview with reporters traveling here with Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and
the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Colin L. Powell.

General Waller likened his situation to that of a football coach preparing for
the game of his life.

"I want everything I can possibly get and have it my side of the field when I
get ready to go into the Super Bowl," he said. Asked what he would tell the team
owner if ordered to play before he had all the players he needed, General Waller
responded:

"If the owner asks me if I'm ready to go, I'd tell him 'No, I'm not ready to do
the job,' " General Waller said.

Date for Baker-Hussein Talks

The general's comments seem to undercut diplomatic efforts by the Bush
Administration to find a suitable date for Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d
to meet with President Saddam Hussein in Baghdad.

The Iraqi leader has offered Jan. 12 as the earliest date he has available for
such a meeting. The Administration has proposed any time up to Jan. 3, arguing
that the later date would not give Iraq enough time to pull its troops out of
Kuwait before Jan. 15. The United Nations Security Council resolution authorizes
the use of force to evict Iraqi forces from Kuwait if Iraq has not pulled out by
then.

Although President Bush has never said the United States would attack Iraq
immediately after the deadline, General Waller's remarks could seriously
undermine the Administration's policy of applying steady psychological and
military pressure to drive Iraq out of Kuwait.

The general's comments go beyond remarks Mr. Cheney made on Tuesday at the
beginning of a five-day trip here, when he said that not all American forces
would be "combat ready" by Jan. 15.

Speaking to reporters aboard his plane, Mr. Cheney said, "It takes time to get
organized, marry them up with their equipment and get them acclimated."

'Work to Be Done'

"Obviously there is additional work to be done before you would identify them as
combat-ready," he said.

General Waller, 53 years old, a three-star general who took his post here a
month ago, sought to distinguish Jan. 15 as the beginning of a warning period
that could result in war rather than a war-triggering date in itself.

Significance of Date

"What is so magic" about Jan. 15? General Waller asked. "Why does it have to be
that on Jan. 15 we must be ready to go and initiate hostilities?"

General Waller said it was his "understanding" that President Bush had been
advised of the logistical constraints on attacking after Jan. 15.

General Waller was unusually candid in the interview, and stunned aides to
General Powell and General Schwarzkopf, who sat in on the briefing, said later
that the officer's forthrightness had overstepped prudent boundaries.

A spokesman for Mr. Cheney, Pete Williams, said that the Defense Secretary had
been in meetings all day with Saudi officials and had not had a chance to see
General Waller's remarks.

In testimony last week before the House Armed Services Committee, General Powell
said that American reinforcements were arriving in the gulf at a rate of about
2,000 a day and would increase to about 4,000 a day in the coming weeks.

General Powell described United States forces in place in the gulf as
"fundamentally defensive in nature" but he said the force "has always had an
inherent offensive capability."

On the readiness issue, General Waller said in the interview: "I can't imagine
what the President would say that he would want to do right on the 15th."

'Full Complement of Forces'

"I'd say to the President, to the Secretary of Defense, as well as to the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, that until our full complement of forces
are on the ground we should not initiate hostile activities," said General
Waller.

General Waller was appointed commander of the Army's I Corps in August 1989, and
before that commanded the Eighth Infantry Division, deployed in West Germany.
His 31-year Army career includes a one-year tour in Vietnam.

General Waller said that all American warplanes and the six aircraft carriers
deployed to the gulf should arrive by Jan. 15, but that some ground forces from
the 100,000 Army troops being sent from Europe and 17,000 from the First
Mechanized Infantry Division at Fort Riley, Kansas, would not arrive until late
January.

General Waller said American forces would number about 430,000 when the latest
wave of reinforcements arrive. More than 220,000 allied troops would join them
against more than 500,000 Iraqis now in Kuwait and southern Iraq.

Most Precise Estimate

The accounting of American troops is the most precise to date by a military
official. Pentagon aides have said privately for several weeks that the total
force would exceed 400,000.

General Waller also expressed concern that the six-month tour of duty for
reservists summoned to perform support jobs in the gulf would begin to expire in
February.

Without an extension of the call-up authority or replacements for those leaving,
General Waller said the military would face a shortage of transportation
specialists, particularly those who regulate vehicle convoys.

General Powell said before the House panel last week that the Pentagon was
considering asking Congress to extend to one year the current six-month call-up
authority for most reserve and National Guard units.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lieut. Gen. Calvin A. H. Waller (Associated Press) (pg. A1);
Gen. Colin L. Powell, left, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, at meeting
yesterday in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, with Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, commander of
American forces in the Persian Gulf.General Schwarzkopf's deputy, Lieut. Gen.
Calvin A. H. Waller, said American forces would not be combat-ready by Jan. 15,
when the United Nations has authorized the use of force against Iraq.
(Associated Press) (pg. A20)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Paul Tortelier, a French Cellist And Political Idealist, Dies at 76

BYLINE: By BERNARD HOLLAND

SECTION: Section D; Page 21; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 484 words


Paul Tortelier, a French cellist known for his elegant, passionate playing and
for his political idealism, died of a heart attack on Tuesday at Villarceaux,
France, near Paris, the news agency Reuters reported. He was 76 years old and
lived in Nice.

Mr. Tortelier spent most of his long career in Europe, where he was a professor
at the Paris Conservatory, a busy soloist and an author. His master classes for
the British Broadcasting Corporation attracted wide attention in 1964. Among his
more notable pupils was the cellist Jacqueline du Pre. Mr. Tortelier, on the
other hand, was busy in the United States both at the beginning and at the end
of his musical life. In 1937, Serge Koussevitzky engaged him as a cellist for
the Boston Symphony. From Boston he began an American solo career, including a
1938 Town Hall recital with the pianist Leonard Shure.

A year later, Mr. Tortelier returned to France and remained. After a successful
American tour in 1954, his career here dwindled, and by the time Lorin Maazel
invited him again in the 1960's, the Vietnam War was in full swing. Mr.
Tortelier, whose sensitivity to world politics was developed by his father in
childhood, disagreed with America's stance on the war and refused the
invitation.

Winning a Prize at 16

Early in the 1980's Mr. Tortelier returned to concerts in the United States, and
after a 35-year absence he played in New York again a year ago. His last New
York appearance was in February when he was a soloist with Bruno Weill and the
New York Chamber Symphony. Writing in The New York Times, James R. Oestreich
noted that Mr. Tortelier "showed no concern for fashionable notions of proper
period practice" but that "his playing was on the whole so eloquent that it
swept those considerations aside."

Paul Tortelier was born in Paris in 1914 and won a first prize at the Paris
Conservatory at the age of 16. His debut came a year later at the Concerts
Lamoureux. His international career had perhaps its biggest catalyst in 1947,
when Sir Thomas Beecham invited him to play "Don Quixote" for a Richard Strauss
festival in London. He was the author of "How I Play, How I Teach," published in
1975.

Mr. Tortelier's father was a cabinetmaker and a Marxist and engaged him in
political debate at a young age. The cellist acted out his beliefs, retreating
temporarily from musical life in 1955 to spend a year on an kibbutz in Israel
even though he was not himself Jewish. Political idealism also affected his own
compositions, which in their populist style bore such titles as "The Great Flag"
(written for the United Nations) and "May Music Save Peace" performed at last
February's concert.

Mr. Tortelier married one of his pupils, Maud Martin, in 1946. They had three
children, all professional musicians.

He is survived by his wife, two daughters, Maria de la Pau and Pomona, and a
son, Yan Pascal.


NAME: Paul Tortelier

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Paul Tortelier (1989)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 21, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At the Movies

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 12; Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 814 words


Rock-and-Roll Pals

With plans for a timeout over Christmas, Simon Wincer, the Australian-born
director of the Emmy Award-winning mini-series "Lonesome Dove" and such movies
as "Phar Lap" and "Quigley Down Under," has been busy filming "Harley Davidson
and the Marlboro Man."

Mickey Rourke plays a philosophical drifter, Harley Davidson, and Don Johnson
plays his buddy, the Marlboro Man. And in the story, written by Don Michael Paul
and set in Burbank, Calif., in 1996, they team up to save a friend's
rock-and-roll saloon.

"It's very contemporary," Mr. Wincer said of the film, which is being made for
Pathe Entertainment in Tucson and Los Angeles, "and the last two films I've
done, 'Lonesome Dove' and 'Quigley Down Under,' being big period westerns, it
was nice to get involved with something that has real horses like motorbikes."

Mr. Wincer said he also liked Harley Davidson and the Marlboro Man. "They are a
couple of characters who are clinging to old-fashioned values in this very
changing world of ours," he said. "The little man has just as much right to
survive as the multi-nationals, so to speak."

Besides directing a film set in 1996, Mr. Wincer is looking to the future in
other ways. A few years from now, he said, he hopes to make a film based on the
Lee Falk comic strip "The Phantom." But late next year, he expects to begin
filming "Boswell for the Defense," set in Hogarthian London and based on a
Patrick Edgeworth play. Mr. Wincer said Leo McKern, who starred in the London
production, would play the role of James Boswell.

"It's a true story about Boswell," Mr. Wincer said of Samuel Johnson's
biographer, "who, as a lawyer, represented a girl called Mary Broad, who went to
Australia with the first fleet as a convict."

"And because conditions were so bad there," he continued, "she escaped in a
rowboat and rowed to Timor. She was caught there and sent back to London for
trial, and he got her off.

"It's a wonderful, very moving story about a man who is in the autumn years of
his life who goes to bat for somebody who's younger but very appealing."

<> <>

From Death to Gold

When it comes to successful -- make that highly successful -- screenwriters
turning to directing, Bruce Joel Rubin is not to be overlooked.

That's also Bruce Joel Rubin the alchemist, the one who managed the feat of
turning death into gold not once but twice in 1990. First he did it with
"Ghost," the romantic tale of a man who returns from the dead to protect the
woman he loves from his killer. It became the year's big box-office hit. And
then he did it again with "Jacob's Ladder," the eerie tale of a Vietnam
soldier's life and death that ascended to the very top of the weekly moneymakers
before settling back.

"What I'm trying to do is a film called 'My Life,' " Mr. Rubin said. "And it is
a film about life and death in an American family. But I refer to it more than
anything as a celebratory movie. I'm still in the early stages of writing it."

No, Mr. Rubin said: "It is not an autobiographical film. It's a personal film,
but not autobiographical. But every film I write is personal. They come from
deep inside. I'm writing about things that mean a great deal to me.

"People look at 'Ghost' and think of it as a fantasy film. I very firmly believe
that life is not bracketed by the experience of being born and dying, but that
we pre-exist our lives and continue to exist beyond them in infinite time and
space.

"I do tell people when they criticize me as being death-obsessed that I'm
life-obsessed, but I do not believe life means anything unless you have accepted
the reality of its completion."

Mr. Rubin, who was born in Detroit in 1943 and grew up there, moved to New York
City when he was 18 years old and studied film making at New York University,
where his classmates included Brian De Palma and Martin Scorsese.

"From the age of 5, I wanted to be a film maker," Mr. Rubin said. "I loved
movies. They were my primary passion. Everyone was looking at girls. I was
looking at movies. I loved the size and scope of movies. I felt you were really
in the realm of the gods."

Mr. Rubin said he found the prospect of directing "My Life," which he will also
produce for Paramount , "very scary."

"For me now," he added, "writing is also very scary because now people expect
something."

But he noted that as an associate producer of "Ghost" and "Jacob's Ladder," he
was able to stand next to the directors, Jerry Zucker and Adrian Lyne,
particularly Mr. Zucker, who directed "Ghost." "I was able to observe the
process firsthand, so it was no longer quite so scary."

Hollywood, he asserted, has no apprenticeship system: "Here's $20 million. Don't
blow it."

But he noted, "I always had a suspicion in my younger days that directing was my
calling and that writing was just a means to that end."

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Simon Wincer (Barry Peake/MGM)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 21, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Fashion;
Images of Man, Labeled Armani

BYLINE: By WOODY HOCHSWENDER

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1295 words


WHEN one thinks of Giorgio Armani, many images come to mind: the actor Richard
Gere rifling through an enormous closet of Armani suits and shirts in "American
Gigolo," or the earnest double-breasted G-men in "The Untouchables."

One could also mention the "power suits" of the 1980's: aggressive,
big-shouldered models often worn by otherwise sensitive, culturally with-it New
Men. Conversely, in 1990, there is the new soft silhouette of the Armani "slouch
suits," mostly without shoulder padding, presumably to be worn by more confident
corporate types, guys who have made it.

Last, there is the silver-haired image of Mr. Armani himself, in the short film
"Made in Milan," directed by Martin Scorsese: draping fabric on a model, or,
sleeves rolled up, his burly hands ripping the insides out of a jacket. Such
scenes are on an excitement level somewhere between sewing and watching people
sewing. It's a bit like hiring George Cukor to film your wedding.

Nevertheless, Mr. Armani is on a pedestal. He has come to stand for modernity
and fluidity in dress. In stores, he commands ever greater selling space, not to
mention precious real estate in fashionable women's closets. He is frequently
called the most influential designer in the world; so much so, it's getting to
be part of his image. But images, like clothes, can be manufactured. And this is
perhaps the unintended message of both the Scorsese documentary and the current
photographic exhibition "Giorgio Armani: Images of Man," at the Fashion
Institute of Technology in Manhattan.

The institute show spans 15 years of the designer's career in men's wear, from
the unconstructed jackets of 1975 to the pile-driver shoulders of the 80's to
the new soft sack suits of 1990 -- a complete circle. The one-room exhibition of
204 advertising photographs, taken by Aldo Fallai and Norman Watson, was
underwritten by the Giorgio Armani Fashion Corporation.

The photography is not so much of the clothes as of the aura the clothes create:
men with wet hair in rumpled sport shirts, or naked to the waist in just jeans,
looking broody, languid and ready to spit. One walks a spaniel in the rain in a
flowing herringbone suit, another walks a child by the sea in a marvelous Armani
trench coat. One model sits naked in bed, wearing nothing recognizably Armani,
unless he happened to design the sheets.

Clearly, the exhibition is only partly about clothes. And so is Armani.  The
name is magic. To the extent that clothing performs surplus functions --
conferring status, seductiveness, authority -- the Armani name has great
contemporary resonance. If clothing has magical functions, akin to the mystic
powers of tribal vestments and jewelry, the Armani label is talismanic. What are
you wearing? An Armani. Not a double-breasted suit with a strange weave of tan
and gray, but an Armani. Like Polo, the name stands for quality and integrity of
design. But also something else.


It is not any one style, for it is difficult to think of any one look that Mr.
Armani has invented. Big-shouldered, unlined jackets? Rather, his innovations
involve careful, commercially calculated modulations of existing styles. As
documented in the exhibition, these include subtle variations in traditional
tailoring details, new fabric blends or the use of colors in a novel way
(referring to a typical Armani shade for men, the show's catalogue calls it "not
brown, but a mossy mushroom"). Through the years, these are kaleidoscopic
changes, and add up to a difference in attitude. As the copywriters might say: a
softer, more relaxed way of dressing.

This attitude, or Armani influence, is bound up with important currents in
society. In the last half-century, as population shifted from the city to the
suburbs, men found themselves with more leisure time and considerably wider
contexts for dressing. Sport clothing of all kinds was required -- from the golf
course to the tennis court to the mall -- and men have had to learn to cope with
different degrees of casual.

In the mid-70's, Mr. Armani found ways to make tailored dressing more casual.
His early unconstructed looks represented a liberating step away from the
restrictive sharp-shouldered, high-armhole tailoring that characterized Pierre
Cardin's Continental suits, the reigning fashion of the time. The Armani suit
integrated sportswear themes into traditional tailoring. In the men's-wear
fraternity, this liberalization of men's tailoring is considered comparable in
stature to Coco Chanel's dressing the women of Deauville in jersey.


As the Armani look developed, it also came to bridge the gap between the
anti-Establishment 60's and the money-gathering 80's. It made the wearer seem
simultaneously more at ease and more powerful. In the post-Vietnam era, an
Armani suit, with its enhanced silhouette -- wide shoulders, shaped waist,
elongated lapels -- was right for a new generation of men slipping back into the
office routine after a decade of countercultural copping out.

It had an ameliorative effect on the average physique. The dropped lapels served
to elongate the torso, making a shortish man seem taller. Somewhat
paradoxically, the longer gorge and lower button stance also pulled a very tall
man's center downward, which may explain why so many basketball stars and
coaches wear Armani. One just looks lankier.

To put on an Armani was to be immediately transformed. It was hip enough to
identify the wearer as not being completely square, but it was well tailored
enough to pass in the workaday world, especially in California. More important,
it had style enough to guarantee entrance to the world of style -- even to men
with no real style of their own.

Never mind that an Armani suit announced itself. Or that the cultural
antecedents were suspect. The wide-shouldered double-breasted Armani suits
recalled an earlier era, but in many cases it was the ill taste of one's
grandparents that was being mimicked. Not Henry Cabot Lodge but Al Capone.


But the Armani influence has been undeniable and enduring. In any large men's
clothing department, imitators abound, most notably Hugo Boss, which retains the
aggressive linebacker look even as Armani has moved on.

In the last few seasons, the Armani silhouette has changed again. It now
superficially resembles the Madison Avenue, Ivy League look of the 1950's. With
much of the shoulder padding, haircloth and canvas removed, the jackets are
sometimes like cardigans, with a worn, slightly rumpled look. It must make Ralph
Lauren and Brooks Brothers see red to hear Mr. Armani credited with this
revival, but his new version has its refinements: distinctive colors, ultra-soft
fabrics, suppressed waists. They are sack suits with swagger.

These innovations parallel the growing pressure on manufacturers of both men's
and women's clothes to keep prices down. In most cases, a less-constructed
garment is simply easier and less expensive to manufacture. (Meanwhile, men all
over America wonder why it is virtually impossible to find a decent $500 suit.)

But beyond that, the new styles indicate Mr. Armani's determination to change,
to look at men's wear as more than just men's wear -- as pure fashion, a word
that men traditionally have not been comfortable with. Walking through the
Fashion Institute's exhibition one realizes that more than any conscious
manipulation of silhouette, Mr. Armani has revolutionized the way men think
about clothing.

"Giorgio Armani: Images of Man" remains on view through Jan. 12 at the Fashion
Institute of Technology, Shirley Goodman Resource Center, 27th Street and
Seventh Avenue in Manhattan. Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, noon to 8 P.M.;
Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. Free admission. Information: 760-7760.


LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: From the exhibition "Giorgio Armani: Images of Man." (Aldo
Falaii/Giorgio Armani) (pg. C1); Giorgio Armani, above, is also on view in the
Martin Scorsese film "Made in Milan;" The Fashion Institute of Technology show
spans 15 years of Mr. Armani's career in men's wear. (Photographs by Aldo
Fallai/Giorgio Armani) (pg. 36)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 21, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Stage, and Off

BYLINE: By Alex Witchel

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1068 words



5 More Chances at 'Monster'

Don't despair. If you tried everything but failed to get tickets to Spalding
Gray's monologue "Monster in a Box" at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, you have a
second chance. Although the engagement ends on Jan. 20, Mr. Gray has agreed to
add performances at the Vivian Beaumont on Monday evenings, the night off for
"Six Degrees of Separation": Jan. 21 and Feb. 4, 11, 18 and 25. Which raises the
question of Tony eligibility: if Mr. Gray plays five performances in what is
deemed a Broadway house, can nominations be far behind?

"It didn't really occur to us," says Gregory Mosher, artistic director of
Lincoln Center Theater. "We just wanted 5,000 more people to see his show."
Harvey Sabinson, president of the League of American Theaters and Producers,
would say only: "It's up to the Tony administration committee. It's an unusual
case."

Mr. Gray does not find the idea uninteresting. "It would certainly stretch the
definition of those awards," he says. "I'm all for it."

2 in the Future of Circle Rep

Things are hopping at the Circle Repertory Company. Last week, the theater had a
very successful reading of "The Redwood Curtain," a new play by Lanford Wilson,
which it is to co-produce next season with another nonprofit theater out of town
before its run at Circle Rep. Marshall Mason is to direct the three-character
drama about an Asian-American girl looking for her father, a Vietnam veteran, in
California. Tanya Berezin, artistic director of Circle Rep, says the Mark Taper
Forum in Los Angeles and two theater companies in Seattle are being considered
as co-producers.

And the first preview of Arthur Kopit's "Road to Nirvana," starring Peter
Riegert and Saundra Santiago, directed by Jim Simpson, is scheduled for Feb. 13.


Stars Passing in the Night

There has certainly been enough advertising for "Aspects of Love" lately,
celebrating the onstage union of John Cullum and Sarah Brightman. As the
television commercial says: "You loved him in 'Shenandoah.' You loved her in
'Phantom of the Opera.' Together they make the most beautiful music on
Broadway." But just how long that music will last seems questionable.

Mr. Cullum is leaving the cast on Jan. 5 to return to the television series
"Northern Exposure." He joined the show on Oct. 26, and his agent, Eric Shepard,
says he signed a six-month contract, with an option to leave if the series
resumed. He says his client plans to return to "Aspects" in April. But Miss
Brightman's contract runs only through March 31, and because of Actors' Equity
rules governing aliens, the longest she could extend her contract would be
through April. So the two may overlap again for a whole four weeks. Miss
Brightman also has an out in her contract that allows her to film "The Phantom
of the Opera," although that project has been indefinitely postponed. Mr.
Cullum's replacement has yet to be chosen.

After the Funk

You could say that all of the people connected with John Patrick Shanley's "Big
Funk" at the Public Theater are now in one themselves. The avant-garde comedy by
the Oscar-winning screenwriter of "Moonstruck" closed on Sunday after only one
week of performances. Joseph Papp says the main reason is that the show was
added after the season was planned, so it was not included in the Public's
subscription series. Despite extensive efforts to sell it, including special
mailings and phone calls to subscribers, the show had no advance sale, Mr. Papp
says, and after its mixed reviews, the largest number of tickets sold on any day
last week was 81. The Anspacher Theater at the Public, where it played, seats
275.

"I technically shouldn't have done the play, but I loved it and I wanted a
relationship with John," Mr. Papp says. "If we'd even had half a house, I would
have run it." Mr. Papp expressed great admiration for Mr. Shanley and recalled
that earlier this year, when he refused a grant from the National Endowment for
the Arts, Mr. Shanley had written him a supportive note and sent the theater a
$5,000 contribution. "It was the first time a writer ever gave me a check for
anything," he says.

Mr. Shanley was reached in Los Angeles, where he is casting a new film that he
has written and will direct for 20th Century Fox. "Joe had expressed concern
about being off the subscription early on," he says, "but when we opened there
was no battle plan. And I said, 'If the guy is not committed to a fight, that's
the end.' Joe Papp is one of the best producers we have, but maybe he wasn't on
top of his game about bringing in the audience. There were no ads after the
reviews. The only place you're really protected is in a theater with 100 seats
with a small, steady subscription audience."

Still, Mr. Shanley says he doesn't "feel terribly disenchanted." "This was the
only slot I had to do a play for the next two years," he says. He adds that his
new film, "Night Train to Valhalla," is about a blue-collar playwright who has
one theatrical disaster after another. "It opens on the night his play closes,"
Mr. Shanley says. "It's too appropriate."

Pacino, Herod and 'Salome'

Al Pacino's fans should get ready to call in their favors at Circle in the
Square. Ted Mann, the artistic director, says Mr. Pacino will play the role of
Herod in four performances of a staged reading of Oscar Wilde's "Salome." Arvin
Brown is to direct it "sometime before mid-January," when Mr. Pacino is
scheduled to shoot "Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune" with Michelle
Pfeiffer. Molly Ringwald will play the title role. Attendance is by invitation
only, Mr. Mann says, though the goal is to mount a full production for public
performances.

Next, Bingo?

Even if the nuns you knew as a child still give you nightmares, the ones at
"Nunsense" never will. And since it is the time of year for good works, they are
very busy -- at intermission -- selling $1 raffle tickets to benefit Broadway
Cares, an AIDS support and resource organization. They have sold more than 1,000
tickets so far for a stocking stuffed with gifts as varied as a weekend at the
new Embassy Suites hotel on Seventh Avenue at 47th Street and the "Nunsense"
compact disk. The drawing will take place at Sunday's matinee, but if you can't
make it and want to buy tickets, go to the Douglas Fairbanks Theater on West 42d
Street at showtime and catch the nuns at intermission.


LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Movie 'Kiss'

 The leads have been cast for the film of Craig Lucas's "Prelude to a Kiss."
Alec Baldwin, above, is to re-create the role of Peter, and Meg Ryan and Alec
Guinness are to co-star. April 8 is the scheduled start date with Norman Rene
directing Mr. Lucas's script for 20th Century Fox. Tonight "Prelude to a Kiss,"
plays its 271st performance on Broadway at the Helen Hayes Theater.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 21, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Books: What's Best and Where;
Year's Worth Of Fiction That Ought To Be Read

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2124 words


WITH 1990 winding toward a close, it's a good time to look back on the year in
fiction, at some of the issues and ideas that have preoccupied imaginative
writers, as well as at their individual achievements. It's also a good time to
reassess some of this year's most notable works of fiction: not only is
Christmas coming up, but also given the short shelf life of hard-cover books
these days, some of them might soon be difficult to find.

In a year in which writers -- from Salman Rushdie to Vaclav Havel to Mario
Vargas Llosa (all of whom, incidentally, published new books this year) -- were
frequently in the news, it's not surprising that many of the most provocative
new novels dealt with large political and social issues, and the consequences of
those issues on individual lives.

Many of those books came from writers from abroad, including these:

*"Haroun and the Sea of Stories," by Salman Rushdie (Granta Books/ Viking,
$18.95). Originally written as a fairy tale for his 12-year-old son, Salman
Rushdie's rollicking Gulliveresque parable pits a tongue-tied storyteller and
his son against an evil sorcerer who has imposed a "Cult of Dumbness or
Muteness" on an entire land, a situation not unfamiliar to the embattled author
of "The Satanic Verses." In the course of their travels, Mr. Rushdie's heroes
meet up with genies, ghosts and talking animals, and do battle with an array of
enemies that would daunt James Bond. Magical realism in Mr. Rushdie's own
version of the Land of Oz.

*"London Fields," by Martin Amis ( Harmony Books , $19.95). A best seller in
Britain, this huge, language-drunk book conjures up a futuristic London with
Pynchonesque verve. As Martin Amis's seductive heroine draws two unsuspecting
men into her spider's net of murder, the reader is given a harrowing tour of a
world run amok, a world in which people are dying of bizarre diseases and the
specter of nuclear annihilation hangs over everyday life. By turns funny,
disgusting and self-consciously literary, the novel testifies to its author's
far-reaching ambitions, and his formidable verbal powers.

*"The Beautiful Mrs. Seidenman," by Andrzej Szczypiorski; translated by Klara
Glowczewska ( Grove Weidenfeld , $16.95). This series of interlinked tales takes
place during several of weeks in Nazi-occupied Warsaw. By showing the
consequences of the war on the lives on some ordinary citizens, Andrzej
Szczypiorski creates a kaleidoscopic portrait of daily life in the city, while
at the same time setting forth a philosophical meditation on God and history and
the fate of Poland. A lyrical yet deeply unsettling novel about courage,
cowardice, luck and fate.

*"My Son's Story," by Nadine Gordimer ( Farrar, Straus & Giroux , $19.95). Like
so many of Nadine Gordimer's earlier heroes, the characters in her latest novel
find that apartheid overshadows every area of their lives, forcing them to come
to terms with the question of moral commitment. This time, she tells the story
of Sonny, a small-town schoolteacher of mixed race who discovers that his
growing immersion in politics has estranged him from his wife and children. By
carefully delineating Sonny's relationships with his family, his mistress and
his ideological colleagues, Ms. Gordimer manages to create a beautifully drawn
portrait of a conflicted man, and at same time examine the frightening rewards
and costs of revolutionary politics.

Confronting the Issues

Politics and social issues also made a strong showing in American fiction this
year. John Edgar Wideman's powerful novel "Philadelphia Fire" used the 1985
police bombing of a row house occupied by members of the MOVE cult as a means of
examining the theme of urban disintegration. Paul Monette's "Afterlife" gave the
reader a moving portrait of three men trying to forge new lives after their
lovers' deaths from AIDS. Leslie Epstein's "Pinto and Sons" drew inspiration
from a real-life confrontation between white settlers and an Indian tribe in the
19th century. T. Coraghessan Boyle's "East Is East" examined the clash between
American and Japanese cultures through a prism of black humor. Barbara
Kingsolver's "Animal Dreams" charted a woman's coming of age against a backdrop
of ecological disaster. And Thomas Pynchon's "Vineland" used a continuing battle
between the freaks and the Feds to create a satiric portrait of America under
Ronald Reagan, circa 1984.

In some cases, the heavy reliance on social issues made for portentous "problem"
novels in which characters were subordinated to didactic plot points. Other
books opened out wondrously to illuminate the vast landscape of history, and the
confluence of public events with private lives. Among the best:

*"The Things They Carried," by Tim O'Brien ( Houghton Mifflin /Seymour Lawrence,
$19.95). A kind of bookend to the author's hallucinatory novel "Going After
Cacciato" (1978), this volume of overlapping stories mixes fiction and
autobiographical facts to create a sharply observed picture of foot soldiers in
Vietnam. Tim O'Brien conveys the day-to-day horror (and emotional aftermath) of
the war, and at the same time he's able to make the reader understand the
consolations and frustrations of writing about combat. At once a classic war
story and an elegiac meditation on the art of writing fiction.

*"Because It Is Bitter, and Because It Is My Heart," by Joyce Carol Oates
(William Abrahams/E. P. Dutton, $19.95). On one level, this novel is another one
of Joyce Carol Oates's chronicles of a young girl's coming of age: a story of
family, volition and fate. On another level, it's an expansive examination of
racial and social tensions in small-town America during the 1950's and 60's.
Violent, and at times implausible, the book is carried along by Ms. Oates's
authoritative narrative, her serene confidence as a storyteller.

Real People

An unusual number of novelists this year turned to another historical source for
inspiration: biography. Egon Schiele, Fritz Lang, Walter Winchell, Hermann
Goring, Simon Bolivar, Lord Byron, Coco Chanel, Elvis Presley, Leo Tolstoy and
Georgia O'Keeffe were just some of the people on whom recent novels were based.
These are among the best:

*"Buffalo Girls," by Larry McMurtry (Simon & Schuster, $19.95). Mixing up the
lives of such legendary characters as Calamity Jane, Bill Cody and Sitting Bull
with his own Dickensian creations, Larry McMurtry takes the reader on a
melancholy tour of the Old West, then follows his heroes on tour with their Wild
West Show. The result is another of his fine, funny and touching books about the
vanishing frontier.

*"Chekhov's Sister," by W. D. Wetherell (Little, Brown, $17.95). Chekhov's
devoted sister, Maria, who died in 1957 at the age of 94, is the heroine of this
beautifully fashioned novel, set in Yalta during World War II. Drawing upon a
handful of biographical facts and his own intimate knowledge of the playwright's
work, W. D. Wetherell has fashioned a sad, lovely -- well, Chekhovian -- tale
about love and loss and the passage of time.

Time as Character

These same themes, of course, have also been the focus of much recent domestic
fiction. Four books in particular this year -- all of them models of modern
realism -- work variations on these themes, leaving the reader with a new
understanding of the connections between time present and time past, and the
sort of intimate knowledge of another person's life afforded only by fiction:

*"Rabbit at Rest," by John Updike (Alfred A. Knopf, $21.95). Harry (Rabbit)
Angstrom, whom readers first met 30 years ago in "Rabbit Run," is in his late
50's now and trying to cope with a bad heart and a heightened sense of
mortality. His wife, Janice, has decided she wants a career, and their son,
Nelson, has become addicted to cocaine. The most somber of the Rabbit novels,
this volume charts the changes that have overtaken Harry and this country in the
last four decades with magisterial sympathy and grace.

*"Family Pictures," by Sue Miller (Harper & Row, $19.95). An autistic child and
his effect on his parents and his siblings: it's the sort of subject usually
saved for television movies, but in the capable hands of Sue Miller it yields
some finely wrought insights into "the great loving carelessness at the heart of
every family's life." Musical in structure, the novel moves back and forth in
time, back and forth between different viewpoints, slowly but persuasively
demonstrating the hazards and consolations of familial love.

*"Friend of My Youth," by Alice Munro (Alfred A. Knopf, $18.95). If readers have
not already been won over, this volume should convince them that Alice Munro is
one of the short-story form's most virtuosic practitioners. Concerned with what
she once called "the progress of love," these stories chart the changes that
relationships between parents and their children, friends and lovers undergo
through the years. The author's voice is compassionate but unsentimental; the
writing, dazzling in its emotional precision.

*"The Music Room," by Dennis McFarland (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95). When he
learns that his brother has fallen from the 23d floor of a mid-Manhattan hotel,
a young man named Martin Lambert sets out to uncover the reasons for the suicide
and finds himself propelled back into his past. The portraits of his wealthy
alcoholic parents, the flashbacks re-creating Martin's childhood, the
delineation of Martin's relationship with his brother: all are fluently and
sensitively rendered. A highly affecting first novel.

New From the New

In fact, there was much good fiction by young writers this year, though it was
less highly visible than a couple of years ago when the trade paperback
publishing of new authors was at its height. Lorrie Moore, David Leavitt,
Jamaica Kincaid, Stuart Dybek, Jeanette Winterson and Patrick McGrath all added
to their small but impressive bodies of work with new books this year. Richard
Ford -- who is hardly a new writer himself, but rather a formidable influence on
a younger generation of authors -- burnished his reputation as one of this
country's finest storytellers with a vivid new novel, "Wildlife." Rose Boyt
earned attention on both sides of the Atlantic for her first novel, "Sexual
Intercourse," a grisly Freudian tale reminiscent of paintings by her father,
Lucian Freud. And Brooks Hansen and Nick Davis made a lively debut with "Boone,"
a fictional portrait of a performance artist told through imaginary interviews
with family and friends. These were among the best books by new writers:

*"Sweet Talk," by Stephanie Vaughn (Random House, $16.95). The best of these
interconnected stories chronicle the childhood and youth of a woman named Gemma,
introducing us to her Army officer father, her frustrated mother (who dreams of
becoming a door-to-door American Fragrance Lady) and her brother, who leaves for
Vietnam. Gifted with a sharp eye for detail and an unerring ear for dialogue,
Stephanie Vaughn conjures up small-town America with uncommon talent and poise.

*"In a Father's Place," by Christopher Tilghman (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$18.95). Though many of these stories revolve around a single dramatic incident
(a woman's flight from her husband, a father's attempt to talk to his son during
a strained family reunion, a sailor's effort to choose between his marriage and
his love of the open sea), they unfurl, magically, to disclose their characters'
entire histories. Whether he's writing about people who live in the wilds of
Montana or the clay banks of Maryland's Eastern Shore, Christopher Tilghman
demonstrates a vivid understanding of their connections to their pasts, as well
as an uncanny sense of place.

All by Itself

Finally, a book that doesn't fall into any of the easy categories favored by
writers of round-up articles like this one. All this novel has in common with
the books mentioned above is some wonderful writing and a distinctive authorial
voice:

*"Possession," by A. S. Byatt (Random House, $22.95). This deliciously
intelligent novel is a detective story of a very unusual sort. When Roland
Mitchell, a scholar concerned with the life of a Robert Browning-like poet,
discovers one of his subject's love letters, he starts unraveling literary
history. In the course of his researches, he also manages to fall in love with a
feminist academic, involved in parallel research. Their story, counterpointed by
the love story of their subjects, makes for a novel that combines elements of
the satiric wit of David Lodge with the literary gamesmanship of John Fowles and
the scholarly artistry of Umberto Eco.


LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings (pgs. C1 & C40)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

STANDOFF IN THE GULF;
Setting Deadlines Is Risky, Particularly Those You Can't Meet

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 956 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 21


Deadlines can be treacherous things for the people who set them as well as the
people who are called upon to meet them.

The truth of that maxim was demonstrated again this week when Lieut. Gen. Calvin
A. H. Waller, the deputy commander of United States forces in Saudi Arabia, said
that all the elements of his team would not be in place by Jan. 15, the deadline
set by the United Nations for President Saddam Hussein to pull out of Kuwait or
face expulsion by force.

"I'm not ready to do the job" by then, General Waller told reporters.

State Department officials wrung their hands and said the comment would make it
harder than ever to convince Mr. Hussein, the Iraqi leader, that the United
States meant business, that he had less than four weeks to comply with United
Nations Security Council resolutions.

New Warning From Cheney

Today, in an effort to turn up the pressure once again, Defense Secretary Dick
Cheney was talking tough in the Middle East. Speaking of Mr. Hussein, he told
troops at a forward air base, "It increasingly looks like he is not getting the
message and we will have to use force to get him out."

In Washington, Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser to President Bush,
took a similar tack, saying that Jan. 15 was "an authorization date" that tells
President Hussein "he'd better get moving now."

"It doesn't say he is going to be attacked this date or that date or whatever,"
Mr. Scowcroft said in an interview with news agencies. "One of the important
points we're trying to get across to him is that we haven't blinked so far,
we're not blinking now, and we will not blink."

General Waller, new to his job, may have been a little blunter than his
superiors would have liked. But Mr. Cheney himself had said much the same thing,
in the guarded sort of language that official Washington prefers. On his flight
this week to Riyadh, he commented that while most of the additional forces
ordered to the crisis zone by President Bush would be in place by Jan. 15,
"obviously there's additional work to be done before you would identify them as
combat-ready."

They would "need time to acclimate and to marry up with their equipment," the
Defense Secretary commented.

Generals Prefer the Advantage

"With the limited knowledge I have of what the realities are," said Lieut. Gen.
William Odom, a former head of the National Security Agency, "it has long been
clear to me that a March date was about all we could meet. To hear Waller say
that comes as no surprise."

To some degree, General Waller -- and senior colleagues who have privately made
similar comments -- reflect the caution of commanders down through the ages who
have wanted to make doubly and triply sure that they had enough strength before
attacking. Lincoln was plagued by generals who counseled delay, notably Gen.
George B. McClellan.

In this case, the tendency is perhaps intensified by the trauma of Vietnam,
where officers felt that they were never given quite enough to do the job.

A third element, given the importance of tanks in desert warfare, is a delay in
the arrival of the Army's heavily armored Seventh Corps from West Germany.

But the fact is that Jan. 15 has never been a true deadline in the sense that
offensive action would begin immediately unless Mr. Hussein had pulled out by
then. It is more a threshold that must be crossed before offensive action
becomes possible -- "in two hours, two days, two weeks or even two months," as
an allied diplomat put it.

Another Round of Consultations

Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d still has another round of consultations to
complete with Washington's principal partners before any attack can be mounted,
State Department officials said. That will begin early next year and should be
finished before Jan. 15, but some additional conversations will surely take
place after the "deadline" has passed.

Then the Bush Administration will do its best to allow American forces to strike
in an unexpected way at an unexpected moment. It is not inconceivable, for
example, that it might wait a week or 10 days to try to lull the Iraqis into
thinking that the attack has been indefinitely postponed. It might not. But it
will certainly try to achieve tactical surprise, as military commanders say.

One thing is almost certain: any attack would begin with an attempt to establish
air superiority by destroying, to the degree possible, Iraqi airfields, missile
emplacements and aircraft. Pentagon officials today called attention to the fact
that Navy and Air Force planes will be ready for combat well before some
elements of the ground forces, which might not be required until somewhat later.


Waller May Find Agreement

President Bush is not likely to go against the advice of his top generals if
they echo General Waller's message three weeks from now. Almost inevitably,
influential Congressional critics of his policy will seize upon warnings that
United States forces are not ready as further evidence that Mr. Bush is rushing
things and would be better, much better, advised to wait before attacking.

On the other hand, the President will have only limited capacity for maneuver.
Having pledged to do something after Jan. 15, having deployed hundreds of
thousands of troops, having built and nurtured a worldwide coalition, he will
court criticism for wimpishness if he does nothing.

"I'd be very surprised if he let it run on for more than a couple, three weeks,
four at most, after Jan. 15," said a Reagan Administration official who dealt
with foreign crises. "He'll be under pressure both ways, but the logic of the
deployments, the logic of all the work at the United Nations, is to act promptly
and decisively."

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

France Presses Cambodians to Accept Pact

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 215 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Dec. 21


The French Foreign Minister sought today to press Cambodia's four feuding
factions to back the United Nations peace plan for their country as they opened
talks here.

"The world has changed," said Foreign Minister Roland Dumas, one of the chairmen
of the talks. "Other priorities are calling for our attention. The international
community cannot turn its attention indefinitely to the fate of Cambodia if the
Cambodians don't have the political will to reach an agreement."

Cambodia's Prime Minister, Hun Sen, collapsed from fatigue as the factions
started assessing the plan at the meeting. French officials said he would
probably be well enough to attend the meeting when it resumes on Saturday.

The four factions agreed in principle last September to United Nations
supervision of the country. The United Nations peace plan calls for a
cease-fire, free elections and United Nations oversight pending the vote.

Western diplomats say that Prime Minister Hun Sen, whose Government is backed by
Vietnam, has been the chief opponent of the plan.

They said the plan was backed by the Communist Khmer Rouge and by the National
Front for the Liberation of the Cambodian People, headed by former Prime
Minister Son Sann. The third guerrilla faction is headed by Prince Norodom
Sihanouk.

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

STANDOFF IN THE GULF;
Out of Saudi View, U.S. Force Allows Religious Their Rites

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1686 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia, Dec. 21


American soldiers and sailors will celebrate an old-fashioned Christmas in the
Saudi desert next week, complete with festively decorated trees, troupes of
Christmas carolers and, for those who can get a break from late-night duty, the
traditional midnight Mass.

But if the Pentagon has its way on Dec. 25, the Saudi public and the rulers of
this Muslim nation will barely notice the celebrations.

Outside of war plans, perhaps no subject is treated by the Defense Department
officials here with such sensitivity and secrecy as that of religion. Military
officials say the nearly 300,000 American troops in Saudi Arabia as part of the
international force arrayed against Iraq are being permitted to worship as they
choose, but quietly and with discretion.

Symbols Hidden Under Uniforms

The idea, they say, is to avoid any offense to the religious leaders of Saudi
Arabia, a nation that recognizes only one faith: Islam.

"As the guardians of Islam's holy places, the Saudis restrict the overt practice
of proselytizing of any religion other than Islam," the Pentagon said in a
statement outlining its policy on religious worship. "Our personnel, whether
Jewish, Christian or any other faith, are free to practice their religion as
long as they do so in a discreet manner."

That means that while there is a full range of religious services on American
military installations in Saudi Arabia, soldiers who wear a cross or a Star of
David around their necks must keep the symbol hidden beneath their uniforms.
There are reports of some Army commanders who limit the display of religious
symbols even at private gatherings.

American soldiers are being warned not to discuss their religious beliefs with
Saudis and not to take Bibles outside their compound. They are told that in
public settings, their religious services should be described as "fellowship
meetings," and their chaplains identified only as "morale officers."

On Christmas Day, soldiers will have church services and a full Christmas feast
with turkey and the trimmings. But all of it will take place on military
installations, away from the Saudi public.

Some Concern Among Troops

Restrictions are also being applied to journalists, who are barred from
observing any religious services on American military installations and are
routinely refused interviews with chaplains. Western reporters who wish to
worship are advised to seek out an invitation to one of the many services
organized privately by expatriate workers in Al Khobar, the Persian Gulf port
five miles southeast of here.

The rules have disturbed some American soldiers and sailors, who say they resent
that any prohibitions have been put on their religious freedom, especially in a
country that they are now being asked to defend with their lives.

"Saudi Arabia invited us to come here, and I believe we should be able to
practice our religion openly, however we choose," said Specialist Smiley Wilson,
a 20-year-old soldier from Philadelphia who is part of a chemical-warfare
decontamination squad in the Army's 82d Airborne Division. "Why can't I wear a
cross around my neck and show it if I want to?"

Pvt. Mylinda Harr of the Army, 26, of Roanoke, Va., usually wears a cross around
her neck. "But I don't now," she said. The restrictions on public religious
displays "have really upset a couple of people I know," she said. "They feel
they should be allowed to worship however they want."

'This Is a Muslim Country'

Military officials say the Pentagon agreed to the restrictions at the request of
the Saudi Government. Saudi officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, say
their Government is willing to allow Christian and Jewish soldiers to worship on
Saudi soil but that public religious displays would upset the nation's
fundamentalist religious leaders.

"This is a Muslim country, and the fundamentalists have much power," a Saudi
said. "We have always had many people of many faiths working in Saudi Arabia.
They can all worship God as they choose. All we ask is that it be done quietly."

Asked about the restrictions on journalists, Defense Department officials said
there was also a fear that Iraq might use news coverage of non-Islamic worship
services in Saudi Arabia, particularly television broadcasts, as a propaganda
tool.

"Can't you see Saddam getting videotape of a Hanukkah service or of soldiers
singing 'Silent Night' and running it on TV over and over again, and arguing
that the Islamic holy places are being defiled?" a Defense Department official
said, referring to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq. "It would be garbage, of
course. But it would also be dangerous for everyone."

Sticking to 'Jingle Bells'

Journalists had been allowed to visit military installations in Saudi Arabia
where Christmas preparations were under way. But soldiers meeting with the
journalists have been urged by their commanders not to discuss the holiday's
religious significance and, if Christmas carols are sung for reporters, to stick
to nonreligious tunes like "Jingle Bells."

The question of religious worship would appear to be particularly uncomfortable
for Jewish soldiers, some of whom said they were torn about defending a country
that has repeatedly vowed to destroy Israel and whose leaders often speak of
"conspiracies" by Zionists. There are estimated to be 700 Jewish soldiers and
airmen among the American troops in Saudi Arabia.

"Sure, I can think of places I'd rather be right now," said a Jewish infantryman
from the eastern United States. "But this is my assignment, and my duty." He
spoke on condition of anonymity, saying, "I may just finish up in an Iraqi
P.O.W. camp some day, and I'd just as soon not have them single out a Jew for
special treatment."

Whatever their discomfort, Jewish soldiers say they are being allowed to worship
in Saudi Arabia largely as they please.

500 Menorahs Shipped

Hanukkah ended Wednesday. During the eight-day holiday, Jewish soldiers gathered
each night in small celebrations on military installations across Saudi Arabia
for services that included the traditional lighting of a menorah.

"The services were wonderful and probably more meaningful than at many
synagogues and temples in America," said Rabbi David Lapp, director of the JWB
Jewish Chaplains Council in New York.

In an interview in New York, Rabbi Lapp, who helped organize the shipment of
more than 500 menorahs to Saudi Arabia for Hanukkah, said the low-key services
were organized "in spite of all the fears we had," an allusion to the apparently
unfounded rumors that, among other things, Jewish religious articles would be
banned from the country.

He said the Chaplains Council so far had no trouble transporting Jewish ritual
items and books into Saudi Arabia, as long as they were not manufactured in
Israel.

Limits of Logistics

Rabbi Lapp said three Jewish chaplains were in Saudi Arabia, two more were on
the way, and two were on nearby American ships. At a high point in the Vietnam
buildup, in 1970-71, he said, there were only four Jewish chaplains in Vietnam.

Rabbi Lapp said he had come to believe that for American soldiers seeking to
worship in Saudi Arabia, "there is no more anti-Semitism than
anti-Christianity."

He said he had recently received a letter from a Jewish lay leader in Saudi
Arabia who meets with 5 to 10 other worshipers each Friday night who have taken
a Hebrew name that translates as "the Jewish Congregation of the Arab Desert."

The limitations put on private religious services in Saudi Arabia, whether
Jewish or Christian, are often those of logistics.

'I Haven't Seen a Cross'

In the remote desert camps where tens of thousands of American troops are now
stationed, worship services tend to be limited -- members of separate Protestant
denominations pray together, for example -- and are sometimes held under
camouflaged tarpaulins or in mess tents. In larger military installations near
Saudi cities, the worship services are more varied and can be held in private
auditoriums.

Although Pentagon officials would release few details about the services,
soldiers said it appeared that individual company commanders were given
discretion in organizing religious activites, and in determining what will and
what will not offend Saudis who live and work nearby.

Although there is no military-wide rule banning the display of crucifixes at
private religious services, some soldiers say crosses are never displayed at the
services, apparently because commanders fear that a Saudi wandering into the
installation might be offended by the sight.

"There are prayers and there's a choir, but I haven't seen a cross anywhere,"
said Pvt. Juan Larregui, a 20-year-old mechanic from Carolinas, P.R., who
attends church services every Sunday morning at 9 in a converted mess tent.

'Need That Spiritual Growth'

Another member of his company, Sgt. Freddie Hill, 25, said the lack of
crucifixes caused him little concern.

"I think the religious services here are super," he said. "We need that
spiritual growth, that spiritual comfort, and I don't need a cross in the room
to allow me to worship God."

The restrictions on religious displays appear to diminish, even disappear, the
farther soldiers are from Saudi population centers, especially in the remote
desert camps.

"We can basically do what we want to do for our religious ceremonies," said Sgt.
Craig Simmons, a 27-year-old tank gunner from Charleston, S.C., who has been in
Saudi Arabia for four months and is stationed close to the Kuwaiti border.
"That's one of the good things about being in the desert."

There are well-attended Bible-study classes on Tuesday nights, he said, and on
Sunday dozens of soldiers gather under a large camouflague tent in the desert
for the separate Catholic and Protestant services. At the Protestant services,
the sergeant said, a foot-high black crucifix is openly displayed atop a small
cloth-covered table.

"We don't have to hide the cross," he said, "because there, there aren't any
Saudis -- there isn't anyone else -- to notice."

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 23, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Travel Advisory

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1539 words



Alpine Resorts Revel in Snow, For a Change

The snowstorms that brought havoc to Europe's highways this month have had at
least one happy side effect: after four consecutive warm winters, the storms
have dumped heaps of snow on ski slopes in the Alps. Early in December, almost
simultaneously with reports of 100-car pile-ups on superhighways because of ice
and fog, heavy snow blanketed the mountains of Germany, Austria and Italy. Then
France and Switzerland also reported enough snow to open the season early and to
insure a good Christmas for skiers. After a series of indifferent winters,
Alpine resorts are looking forward to a busy one.

The Suddeutscher Zeitung, published in Munich, reported in mid-December that
almost all the Alpine ski areas had snow depths of 25 inches or more on slopes a
mile high and between 15 and 25 inches on runs down into the valleys. Ski towns
and hotels said that reservations were pouring in and many places were quickly
sold out for Christmas. But a survey of some resorts turned up available rooms
through the month of January and good chances of finding space in February and
March.

Responding to inquiries, a skiing instructor in Lech, Austria, said, "12 to 38
inches and snowing heavily." In Corvara in Badia, Italy: "We have enough to last
until Easter" (12 to 48 inches), and in Zermatt, Switzerland: "30 inches on top
and more snow predicted today."

In the French Alps -- where many ski resorts were obliged to offer tennis,
bicycling, hiking and other summer activities to winter vacationers last season
-- snow started coming down in November and held to the slopes. Then came heavy
snowfalls the second week of December that forced the temporary closure of some
passes leading to resort areas and of the Mont Blanc Tunnel to Italy.
High-altitude resorts like Val d'Isere and Tignes opened their slopes in
November, earlier than scheduled, and places lower down, like Les Contamines,
opened on weekends. Chamonix, at medium elevation, reported 45 inches of snow on
its slopes. Most French resorts open officially this weekend.

Rome Gallery In First Show

An art gallery that opened this month in Rome's Palazzo Ruspoli, once a bank, is
presenting an exhibition entitled "Expressionism: Masterpieces from the
Thyssen-Bornemisza Collection from van Gogh to Klee." The exhibition, organized
by the Memmo Foundation, part owner of the palace, contains 47 paintings
representative of early 20th-century movements preceding Expressionism and
associated with van Gogh, Chagall, Kirchner, Kandinsky and Schiele. It is the
first of three exhibitions planned within a year at the Palazzo Ruspoli Art
Gallery, which includes a conference room, cafeteria and gift shop.

The palace, about 100 yards from the Spanish Steps, is an attraction in itself.
Built in the 16th century for the Florentine merchant and patron of the arts
Orazio Rucellai, it houses frescoes by Jacopo Zucchi, a pupil of the Renaissance
master Vasari.

The address is 418 Via del Corso (telephone, 6832177 or 6832179). The exhibition
continues through the end of February; hours are 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. every day
(until 11 P.M. on Saturdays). Admission is about $9.

Brussels Copes With Growth

As the European Community moves toward integration as a single domestic market
in 1992, work has begun on expansion projects designed to more than double the
capacity of the Brussels National Airport

Hotel Discounts In Three Cities

New York hotels and bargains may sound contradictory, but a discount service
called Express Hotel Reservations says that on average it obtains rooms at 20 to
25 percent off regular rates at certain hotels in Manhattan as well as in Los
Angeles and San Francisco. It says its leverage comes from volume and that its
clients include many business travelers whose companies don't get corporate
rates. Travelers are not charged for the service, and they do not have to join a
club.

Express Hotel Reservations says it books about 50,000 rooms a year. Among the
hotels are, in Manhattan, the Doral Court (39th Street and Lexington Avenue),
the Warwick (54th Street and Avenue of the Americas) and New York Penta (32d
Street and Seventh Avenue). In Los Angeles, they include the Midtown Hilton, the
Ma Maison Sofitel and the Mondrian; in San Francisco, the Diva, Kensington Park
and Parc Fifty-Five. The agency can be reached at (800) 356-1123 Monday to
Friday from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. Eastern standard time.


Travelers bound for Disney World and other attractions in Florida at busy
periods -- and that can be any time other than May and September to November --
can ask the Central Reservation Service to find them rooms. The service, a
member of Orlando-Orange County Convention and Visitors Bureau, operates around
the clock and does not charge a fee. "Orlando fills up every holiday," said
Carlos Giraldo, the manager. "Demand outpaces supply, and travelers go through
an ordeal trying to find a room. We can help." The phone number is (800)
950-0232.

Economy Class Gets New Name

Starting Jan. 15, British Airways won't have an economy class anymore. Instead,
the section will have a new name -- two in fact. Economy will be called world
traveler on long-haul routes, including trans-Atlantic, and Euro traveler on
short-haul routes in Europe.

The change, the airline said, is the result of three years of market research
resulting in improved catering, more comfortable seats, free newspapers and
improved in-flight movies for the 13 million passengers who travel economy with
British Airways every year.

In the cabin, world travelers will be greeted by a new blue and white
decoration, designed to give a feeling of greater space, but the width and pitch
of the seats will remain the same. Euro travelers will have improved service
with free beverages.

Tours: Horses, Wildlife, Food

A crossing of the Andes on horseback is offered by Southern Cross Expeditions.
The trip is scheduled to begin from Mendoza, Argentina, on Feb. 9. Participants
will ride across the Andes into Chile and back, making a 13-day loop amid
glaciers, forests and Aconcagua, the highest peak of the Western Hemisphere. The
price of $2,440 a person covers horses, tents, meals, guides and a two-night
hotel stay in Buenos Aires but no air fares. (Southern Cross Expeditions, Post
Office Box 1228, Bowling Green Station, New York, N.Y. 10274-1228; [800]
359-0193.)


Changes in wildlife and plant and marine life that may have occurred in the
Galapagos Islands as a result of the "greenhouse" global warning and the
unusually strong El Nino current of 1983 will be studied on a 19-day trip next
summer. In 1983, the El Nino current deluged the Galapagos with 103 inches of
rain instead of the usual 3 inches. The tour will be led by Richard Hilton, an
instructor in natural sciences at Sierra College, Rocklin, Calif. Participants
will travel aboard a motor yacht with private cabins. The trip, scheduled for
June 22 to July 10, costs $2,990, including accommodations and all meals on the
yacht, lectures and a three-night hotel stay in Quito. Air fares to Ecuador and
the islands are extra. (Nature Expeditions International, Post Office Box 11496,
Eugene, Ore. 97440; [800] 869-0639 or [503] 484-6529.)


The cookbook author Eileen Yin-Fei Lo will escort a tour to Hong Kong for the
colony's Food Festival. The eight-day tour starting March 11 costs $2,750 a
person, including round-trip air fare from the West Coast ($200 more from the
East Coast), rooms at the Mandarin Oriental Hotel and most meals. Another tour
leaving the same day offers one cooking class and provides rooms at the Kowloon
Shangri-La Hotel. It is $2,495. (Orient Flexi-Pax Tours, 630 Third Avenue, New
York, N.Y. 10017; [212] 692-9550 or [800] 545-5540 outside New York State.)

VIEWING AREA IN HAWAII

The observation point at the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific, Hawaii's
most popular tourist attraction, has reopened following a two-year renovation.
The area, which offers a panoramic view of Honolulu, was redesigned to reduce
traffic congestion and to provide a more tranquil setting.

Nearly 36,000 members of the military who died in World War II and the wars in
Korea and Vietnam are buried in the cemetery.

The $2 million renovation, organized by the Veterans Administration, which
maintains the cemetery, includes new parking areas for buses and cars, restrooms
and enlarged viewing areas.

Memorial plaques donated by veterans groups will be placed along what was called
Observation Drive but has been renamed Memorial Walk, now closed to traffic. The
changes mean that passengers on buses have to walk up Memorial Walk from a new
parking area, adding about 15 minutes to their visit.

In the year before the renovation began, more than 5.6 million people visited
the cemetery. But even after the renovation, the area is still congested with
traffic, especially tour buses. About 85 to 100 buses arrive each day along with
stretch limousines and cars.

Officials of the cemetery and representatives of tour companies are engaged in
discussions on easing congestion.

The cemetery is in the crater -- known as the Punchbowl -- of an extinct
volcano.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: New viewing platform at the Cemetery of the Pacific, Honolulu.
(William Waterfall/Picture Hawaii for The New York Times)

Table: "Traffic Dangers in Europe" lists figures on deaths per 10,000 vehicles a
year for selected countries. (Sources: British Consumers' Association, London;
United States Figure from the National Safety Council)

Map of Rome showing location of Palazzo Ruspoli.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 23, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Children and Vietnam

SECTION: Section 7; Page 4; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 175 words



To the Editor:

Walter Dean Myers's review of children's books on the Vietnam War (Nov. 11) does
a disservice to the crucial questions under consideration.

Mr. Myers complains that two of the books -- one of which, "Vietnam: Why We
Fought" by Dorothy Hoobler and Thomas Hoobler, I had the pleasure to read
recently -- are not "fair-minded." He asks, "Are we really to believe that the
millions of Americans and South Vietnamese who fought in Vietnam, and the
millions who supported them for so many years, were as completely lacking in
good intentions as these books indicate?" In invoking these "good intentions,"
Mr. Myers tries to counter what he calls "the message" of both books, that the
war was "evil." He charges simple-mindedness, but the simplistic, falsely
opposed categories -- "good intentions" versus "evil" -- are Mr. Myers's own.

The issue is timely. How will we assess our role in the Middle East? By the
"good intentions" of the hundreds of thousands of young women and men recently
sent there?

JOANNE PASSARO
New York

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 23, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Children and Vietnam

SECTION: Section 7; Page 4; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 94 words



To the Editor:

As a schoolteacher, I would like to take issue with Walter Dean Myers's review.
Sidney Lens, the author of "Vietnam: A War on Two Fronts," and the antiwar
movement need no apology. We were right. The supporters of the war were wrong.
Mr. Myers criticizes the Hooblers' inclusion of pictures of wounded Vietnamese
children in their book. Perhaps it would have been more "fair-minded" had they
also included pictures of wounded American children. But the Vietnamese did not
wound any of our children.

ROSALYN HABERKERN
Oakland, Calif.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 23, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Frances FitzGerald, Magazine Writer, Married to James P. Sterba, Reporter

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 38; Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 223 words


Frances FitzGerald, the author and New Yorker writer, and James Paul Sterba, a
reporter for The Wall Street Journal, were married yesterday in St. James
Parish, Barbados. The Rev. Andrew Hatch, an Anglican priest, performed the
ceremony at St. James Church.

The bride, who is keeping her name, is the daughter of Mrs. Ronald Tree of New
York and the late Desmond FitzGerald. She graduated from Radcliffe College. Her
1972 book about Vietnam, "Fire in the Lake," won the Pulitzer Prize for general
nonfiction. She is also the author of "America Revised," published in 1979, and
"Cities on a Hill," published in 1986. Her father was a Deputy Director of
Central Intelligence. Her mother, Marietta Tree, is a former United States
representative at the United Nations Trusteeship Council.

The bride's grandfather Malcolm Endicott Peabody was the Episcopal Bishop of
Central New York. Her grandmother Mary Parkman Peabody was prominent in the
civil-rights movement of the early 1960's.

The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs. Frederick J. Sterba of Owosso, Mich. He
graduated from Michigan State University. At The Journal he writes primarily
about Asian affairs.  His father, who is retired, was a machinist for the Ford
Motor Company in Owosso. The bridegroom's mother, Gertrude L. Sterba, is a
retired automobile factory worker.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 23, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sanctions Just May Avert War With Iraq

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 407 words


To the Editor:

Economic sanctions and the supporting blockade in effect against Iraq are dull
stuff, and they suffer for it. Sanctions fail to engage the emotions. There is
nothing that Americans can see and no distinct daily events to give us a sense
of progress or failing. Dan Rather visits the troops in the desert and on the
deck of naval ships, but how is he to visit sanctions? There is nothing to show
on the television screen: no glamour or heroics. Just dull talk about Iran's
declining gross national product and the drying up of its trade with the rest of
the world.

Small wonder that many people grow impatient with sanctions and doubt their
effectiveness, and that President Bush is "tired of the status quo" (front page,
Nov. 24). Impatience lies beneath the debate about the risks and costs of
sanctions, whether or not they will achieve our objectives, and how long they
should be relied on to pressure Iraq into leaving Kuwait. I suggest America's
experience with recent wars offers a useful and contrasting context for thinking
about these questions.

When the Korean and Vietnam wars began, there was no certainty about the
outcome. We knew the human and economic costs would be high, but not whether
military action would achieve any or all of America's political objectives.
Nevertheless, the political leadership throughout the country, and much of the
public, supported these military efforts with a commitment that was strong and
persistent for a long time. I can still hear past Presidents resolving to stay
the course, bear any burden and hunker down -- for the long haul if necessary.
Korea took three years and Vietnam twice that. Stay the course we did, even past
the point when stalemate and compromise had become obvious and inevitable.

Sanctions just may prevent a war with Iraq. The uncertainties and risks that go
along with sanctions are certainly no greater than those that go along with war.
Yet Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney tells the Senate that he cannot "guarantee
that sanctions will work" and that "we cannot wait indefinitely" for them to
work. Far better if this country's political leadership supported sanctions for
the long haul if necessary, and with the same resolve and persistence that they
would ask of all of us if the country were now at war.

"Real men" may prefer strong action, but wise men know the value of patience.

BRINTON WHITALL
Princeton, N.J., Dec. 9, 1990

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Business and the Law;
S.E.C. Near Plan On Mutual Funds

BYLINE: By Stephen Labaton

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 723 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


For the first time in more than a decade, the Securities and Exchange Commission
is preparing an overhaul of the regulations and laws governing the mutual fund
business.

The move, a priority of the S.E.C.'s chairman, Richard C. Breeden, has set the
industry against bankers, pension funds and insurance companies. They fear that
a regulatory overhaul in which their financial products are governed like mutual
funds could ultimately increase their expenses.

About a dozen S.E.C. staff members have spent a few months studying the rules

and the comments collected from a wide range of industries and specialists. The
staff is expected to make recommendations early in the new year.

"The goal is to allow for the development of new products without unnecessary
impediments," said Marianne Smythe, the new director of the Investment
Management division of the S.E.C. "But we also don't want to do anything that
would diminish the protection that investors enjoy under the existing law."

For 50 years, mutual funds have been regulated -- and their customers have been
protected -- by the Investment Company Act. The detailed and highly complex
statute was written under the guidance of William O. Douglas, who left the
chairmanship of the S.E.C. in 1939, a year before the statute's passage, to
become a Supreme Court Justice.

The law was a response to the scandals during the 1920's and 30's on Wall
Street, and it covered the industry in its infancy when it had about $400
million in assets. Since then the mutual funds and other securities regulated by
the act have swelled to $1 trillion in 58 million accounts. The commission is
reviewing all aspects of the law, from its limitations on fees and marketing to
its applicability to foreign companies.

The act and later amendments require such funds to be structured as companies
instead of trusts and mandate that 40 percent of the directors of each company
be from outside the concern. It also limits fees charged to customers, prohibits
self-dealing by company officers, and gives the S.E.C. a wide amount of control
over many aspects of the business, including advertising.

For many lawyers, the Investment Company Act is a thing not to be understood but
to be avoided, for the law's restrictions sharply limit both the structure of a
company and its latitude in engaging in a wide variety of business practices. It
is also the most complex of the Federal securities laws.

"It is viewed as a pit, a trap, a Vietnam," said Matthew P. Fink, general
counsel of the Investment Company Institute, the industry's main trade
association. "It's like Moslem law. You want to stay away from it."

But rather than advocate the repeal of the Investment Company Act, the
association is strongly advocating that it be more widely applied. The law's
application has thus become the main battleground of the review.

The mutual fund industry has taken the position that some types of pension
funds, as well as mortgage-backed securities and credit card receivables that
are sold as securities, all fit in this category. In the spirit of fair
competition, they contend, these securities and funds ought to be restricted
under the same rules.

"Competitively, we're the only ape in captivity," Mr. Fink said.

On the other hand, bankers and pension fund managers maintain that they are
already adequately regulated and that there is little need to change a
regulatory structure that has worked well. Pension funds, for instance, are
supervised by the Labor Department, and banks are subject to as many as four
different regulatory agencies.

The American Council of Life Insurance told the S.E.C. that the Investment
Company Act had actually hurt the prospects for expansion and had diminished
competition in the industry regarding variable life insurance and some annuity
contracts.

The S.E.C. is also considering what should be done about investment companies
overseas that have, with rare exception, been unable to sell their securities in
the United States. Only a handful of Canadian and South African companies have
been granted permission to sell funds in the United States. Several European
groups have asked that barriers preventing trading be reduced.

The agency's recommendations are expected to be followed by both legislative and
regulatory action early next year.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

California Gun Control Law Runs Into Rebellion

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1526 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 23


Nine days before the deadline, thousands of Californians are defying a
ground-breaking state requirement that they register their military-style
semiautomatic guns.

Many gun owners are calling their defiance an act of political protest in the
tradition of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Mahatma Gandhi. "If civil
disobedience was good enough for Dr. King, it's good enough for me," said Mike
Wright, a member of Gun Owners React Committee, a private lobbying group.

Like other members of the group, he said he was refusing to register his weapon,
a Colt AR-15, the assault weapon that was known as the M-16 during the Vietnam
War.

As a one-year registration period draws toward an end on Dec. 31, only about
7,000 weapons of an estimated 300,000 in private hands in the state have been
registered. This non-compliance has virtually nullified the first step of a
March 1989 law that set the pattern for similar attempts to limit ownership of
assault rifles in other states and in Washington.

In New Jersey, which passed a law last May that required such weapons to be
rendered inoperable, surrendered or in some cases registered with the State
Government within one year, a spokesman for the Attorney General's office said
compliance has so far been "not exactly overwhelming."

'A Gun Owners' Revolt'

Passage of the California law was a major defeat for the National Rifle
Association. Now the association is saying it is up to individual gun owners to
decide whether to comply.

"I guess you could call it civil disobedience in the finest traditional sense,"
said Fred Romero, the association's field representative for Southern
California. "We had a taxpayers' revolt. Maybe this, in a way of speaking, is a
gun owners' revolt."

He said, as many gun owners do, that a weapon is a protection against repressive
government. "The Second Amendment is not there to protect the interests of
hunters, sports shooters and casual plinkers, although those are convenient
spinoffs," he said. "The Second Amendment is there as a balance of power. It is
literally a loaded gun in the hands of the people held to the heads of
government."

'Cavalier With the Law'

Assemblyman Mike Roos, a Los Angeles Democrat who helped write the law, said
such references to civil disobedience "darken the memory, the honor and the good
deeds that were done by real civil libertarians."

And he said refusal to obey a law with which they disagree robbed gun owners of
their frequent argument that they are law-abiding citizens. "It only points up
to me that if these people are so cavalier with the law, we should be even more
vigilant about who owns weapons in this society," he said.

Beginning Jan. 1, it will be illegal in California to make, sell, import or give
away any of 56 military-style assault weapons listed in the law, including
semiautomatic rifles, pistols and shotguns. This has angered and alarmed the Gun
Owners of California, the state's largest gun rights organization. "Make no
mistake about it: it is a ban on these weapons," said John Stoos, executive
director of the group.

Up to 12 Years in Prison

Those who owned these weapons before the law took effect but failed to register
them by the end of the year face penalties ranging from fines to prison terms of
up to 12 years if they are caught.

Robert Drake, a bureau chief in the Division of Law Enforcement at the State
Department of Justice, said he did not foresee any aggressive attempt to arrest
people who violate the law. But he said arrests would be made if weapons were
discovered in the course of other law-enforcement activities.

Ignorance of the law and bureaucratic difficulties appear to have contributed to
the low level of registrations. But a significant factor is the refusal of many
gun owners to give in to what they say is a first step in an erosion of
constitutional rights.

"They are nibbling away at our freedoms," said Bret Holter, a marketing manager
who is a member of the gun owners group. "They nibble here, they nibble there. I
am concerned that one day they will say: 'Now we've taken away your guns, we'll
take away your newspapers. Now you can't protest any more.' "

Choosing When to Fight

Calling gun ownership "the litmus test of freedom," the group's chairman, T. J.
Johnston, said, "I'm encouraging all gun owners to stand up for their rights now
before they have to fight for their rights later."

Mr. Johnston, a stage supervisor for the ABC soap opera "General Hospital," said
he was refusing to register his semiautomatic copy of a Colt AR-15 and his
"street sweeper" rotary magazine shotgun.

"It's better to be fighting for our right to keep and bear arms than fighting
for our lives," said Mr. Johnston. "By having 200 million armed Americans, the
Government of the United States would never have the thought of becoming
tyrannical."

The National Rifle Association estimates that there are 20 million to 30 million
semiautomatic rifles in the hands of private citizens around the country, of
which a small percentage fall into the category of assault rifles.

Reaching for Definitions

All semiautomatics fire bullets as rapidly as the trigger can be pulled. Assault
weapons, as covered by the California law, generally have a military look, with
shorter barrels and detachable magazines holding 20 or more rounds.

In trying to define "assault weapons," lawmakers at the Federal and state levels
have generally focused on features like magazine capacity, barrel length and
whether the weapon has purely military features like a bayonet attachment or
flash suppressor.

Passage of the California law was propelled by outrage after the 1988 killing of
five schoolchildren in Stockton by a drifter armed with a Chinese-made AK-47
semiautomatic rifle. Backers of the law argue that registration of the guns will
at least allow the state to know where they are and who owns them.

The California law was followed immediately by a Federal ban on the import of
five makes of assault rifles, includinghehe Israeli-made Uzi, said to popular
among drug dealers.

Following California's Lead

Some 30 state legislatures followed California's lead in introducing measures to
restrict ownership of assault weapons. Last May, New Jersey became the second
state to pass such a law, banning the sale and restricting ownership of a wide
range of semiautomatic guns.

The New Jersey law allows members of some shooting clubs to keep their weapons
if they register them, but some gun owners in the state also said at the time of
passage that they would refuse to comply. A half-year before the New Jersey
deadline, said Christopher Florentz, a spokesman for the state Attorney
General's office, "The number of people surrendering their weapons applicable
under the law is not exactly overwhelming. This would lead us to believe that
there are people, certainly, who are not complying with the new law."

Trying a different approach, the District of Columbia City Council gave
preliminary approval Wednesday to a measure that would make manufacturers of
assault-style guns liable for injuries and deaths caused by the weapons.

Shyness and Pride Blend

Gathered one recent evening at the Straightshooter Firing Range in the city of
Orange, about an hour's drive south of Los Angeles, members of the gun owners
group shyly slipped their weapons from their carrying cases for a visitor to
admire.

Discussing their plans to defy the law, they displayed a passion both for the
guns, which they lovingly termed ugly, and for what they see as their right to
own them.

"The Revolution wasn't fought over taxes; it was fought over the British trying
to take away people's arms," said Varten Brendsel, a spacecraft mechanic who
owns an AR-15.

"People say Tiananmen Square couldn't happen here," said Tom Stayonoff, a
teacher at a community college who also owns an AR-15. "It can't right now
because we're armed and we have a way to retaliate."

Gandhi's Remarks Recalled

"Gandhi said the blackest day in India was when the people were disarmed by the
British," said Mary Ann Escandon, who works in marketing and whose husband,
Carlos, owns several assault weapons.

Though he agreed with these views, Mr. Escandon, who works for an oil company,
said he did not find civil disobedience easy.

"We are people who really try to follow the law; we pay our taxes," he said.
"And now due to this law in California, honest people, good people that really
tried to be honest members of society, are going to become criminals if they
don't register their guns."

Like Vietnam War protesters who fled to Canada to avoid the draft, he said he
would dodge the question by sending his assault weapons out of state.

But Mr. Wright, who is a propulsion engineer at an aerospace company, said that
along with others in the group he was prepared to face the moral choice in the
tradition of American civil libertarians.

"At one point, it was illegal for black people to sit at lunch counters," he
said. "These laws were disobeyed, and the people who disobeyed were forever made
heroes."

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "If civil disobedience was good enough for Dr. King, it's good
enough for me," said Mike Wright, right, a Californian defying a law for the
registration of semiautomatic weapons. He is shown at a safety session. (Bart
Bartholomew for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of the Times;
From a Dark World, Stories of the Damaged

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words


Houses Without Doors
By Peter Straub
358 Pages. Dutton. $19.95.

You expect the horrifying in the fiction of Peter Straub, whose most recent two
novels were "Koko" and "Mystery," and you get it in his new work of fiction,
"Houses Without Doors," a collection of six stories and seven connecting
sketches.

In one story, a 10-year-old boy hypnotizes his hated younger brother and then
orders him to swallow his tongue. In another, a boy who spends his days in a
movie theater is befriended by a man who looks like Alan Ladd, one of the boy's
heroes, and is sexually molested by the man. In still another story, a literary
scholar is invited to do research in the library of an English estate and
discovers in the basement the bones of many dead children.


But judging from earlier novels by Mr. Straub like "Ghost Story," "Floating
Dragon" and "The Talisman" (the last of which he collaborated on with Stephen
King), you also expect from his fiction a certain mechanical quality in the
plotting that leads to repetitiveness and overdone set pieces. The surprise of
"Houses Without Doors" is the suppleness of its best prose, the delicacy of its
plotting and its psychological acuity. These stories shift in their coloring
with the sinister effect of sunshine on oily water.

All the major characters are profoundly damaged in some unspecific way.
Recurrently, young boys are frightened of irrational behavior by their mothers
or held in contempt by their fathers for failing to live up to some vague
masculine ideal. Yet if their afflictions are cliched, they go about trying to
heal themselves in highly original ways.

In "The Buffalo Hunter," for instance, Robert Bunting, home on a visit with his
Midwestern family, comes across his baby bottle while rummaging in the attic. He
takes it back to Manhattan and falls in love with it: "It seemed surprisingly
beautiful for so functional an object. The bottle was a perfect cylinder of
clear glass, which sparkled as it dried. Oddly, its smooth, caressing weight
felt as comfortable in his adult hand as it must have in his childish one." Soon
he starts filling it with vodka or cognac and taking it to bed with him for
marathon sessions of reading. Soon he begins collecting more baby bottles and
gluing them to the wall of his apartment until he creates a wraparound
environment of nipples.


In "Mrs. God," William Standish has suffered some mysterious loss "after a
fantastic act of betrayal that resulted in bloodshed, real bloodshed, though the
blood in question was neither Standish's nor the serpent-friend's, also after
the loss of a certain THING, a THING never to be regarded as human but lost
indeed, most powerfully and irrevocably lost, wrapped in the bloodied sheets and
discarded, burnt or flushed away into psychic oblivion." Standish's response,
like that of other characters in the collection, is to submerge himself in
literature to a point of madness.

Is it depressing to read about people who are so damaged? It is hardly a world
of light that Mr. Straub leads us into. As he himself has observed in a
pre-publication interview, his characters "are doomed because they can never get
out of themselves.

"They are obsessed, but not in a fruitful, productive way." They live in houses
without doors, as the title, from a poem by Emily Dickinson, promises.

Still, their lives are not quite so bleak as the foregoing makes them sound.
It's true that there's a knee-jerk quality to the ending of "Blue Rose," where a
sadistic child grows up to be court-martialed for killing women and children in
Vietnam, though in other respects the story is shocking. "Mrs. God," while
satisfyingly scary, is a little too reminiscent of "The Rats in the Walls" by H.
P. Lovecraft, not to mention "The Shining" by Stephen King, to achieve full life
of its own. "A Short Guide to the City," a cross between a tourist pamphlet and
a news report of some violent killer on the loose, and "Something About a Death,
Something About a Fire," about an uncanny taxicab, are a shade too vague and
portentous to absorb the reader completely.


But almost all the protagonists in "Houses Without Doors" try to heal themselves
through art. As the character who was sexually molested as a boy reports at the
end of "The Juniper Tree": "I am simultaneously a man in his early 40's, that
treacherous time, and a boy of 7 before whose bravery I shall forever fall
short. I live underground in a wooden room and patiently, in joyful
concentration, decorate the walls. Before me, half unseen, hangs a large and
appallingly complicated vision I must explore and memorize, must witness again
and again in order to locate its hidden center. Around me, everything is in its
proper place, my typewriter sits on its sturdy table."

And in the centerpiece of the collection, "The Buffalo Hunter," it is
frightening when the words of the books Robert Bunting reads float off the page
and envelope him. But to the degree that the plots in which Bunting gets lost
begin to deviate from their original versions, we know that Bunting is
performing his own acts of creation, no matter how self-destructive they may
eventually prove to be.


In short, there remains a twisted form of hope amid all the evil in "Houses
Without Doors." As the sexually molested narrator of "The Juniper Tree" reports
of his seducer: " 'Stan,' 'Stanley the Steamer,' has told me things that cannot
be true, that must be inventions and fables, part of the world of children
wandering lost in the forest, of talking cats and silver boots filled with
blood. In this world, dismembered children buried beneath juniper trees can rise
and speak, made whole once again. Fables boil with underground explosions and
hidden fires, and for this reason, memory rejects them, thrusts them out of its
sight, and they must be repeated over and over."

Over and over in "Houses Without Doors," Mr. Straub teases his readers into
hope, only to crush them with his fascinating vision of reality.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Peter Straub (Jay Anderson/Dutton)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

International Report;
Pentagon Paying High Prices For Shipping Supplies to Gulf

BYLINE: By KEITH BRADSHER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1435 words


To support the rapid American military buildup in the Persian Gulf, the Defense
Department has been paying high prices to charter vessels and book space aboard
regularly scheduled freighters -- sometimes twice the standard commercial rate.

Some shipping experts suggest that the Government has greatly overpaid for
charters, particularly in the first two months of the gulf crisis. Robert W.
Kesteloot, a shipping consultant in Reston, Va., who retired in 1986 after six
years as the Navy's director of strategic sealift, termed the rates that
shipowners are charging the Government for chartering some of the larger vessels
"mind boggling." He added, "They'd never get that in peacetime."

Ship brokers, freight agents and shipping executives agree that higher prices
have meant more profits for shipowners. But they defend the surge in rates as
inevitable because the military deployment has sharply increased the worldwide
demand for shipping and because the Pentagon makes some special demands that
commercial shippers do not.

Greater Scrutiny Likely

The Government's costly transportation contracts are likely to receive greater
scrutiny in the coming months if the United States' military commitment in Saudi
Arabia continues. The Government is currently operating 173 vessels for the
sealift to Saudi Arabia, a larger fleet than was ever used at one time during
the Vietnam War, in which the American buildup of ground troops was spread over
three years.

The most expensive shipping agreements were struck in the weeks immediately
after Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2. The military was forced to pay a premium to
persuade shipping companies to take some of their vessels out of commercial
service and to cut back commercial space aboard freighters.

For example, the Military Sealift Command, which manages ocean transportation
for the Navy, has been paying nearly $8,000 for each standard 40-by-8-by-8
1/2-foot steel container that it uses to send supplies to the Persian Gulf from
the East Coast of the United States. This price is double what some commercial
shippers now pay.

In response to a question, the sealift command said in a statement issued on
Dec. 15 that in October it had begun negotiating a new contract but was
interrupted by President Bush's announcement on Nov. 8 that up to 200,000 more
troops would be sent to Saudi Arabia. "It is the Government's intention to
reprice the contract as soon as we are able to accurately define our
requirements," the agency statement said.

The sealift command is also paying $7,000 to $8,500 a day to charter the
medium-size multi-deck freighters needed to carry small trucks, jeeps and other
supplies. The same class of freighters fetched $6,000 to $6,500 a day last
summer, ship brokers said. Commercial interests are also paying the higher rates
now, unless they booked vessels long in advance.

And the military has been paying up to $35,000 a day for long-term charters of
so-called ro-ro's, which are built like automobile ferries to allow vehicles to
roll on and off, and which are the only vessels that can efficiently transport
large numbers of heavy tanks.

 'Paying in Excess of Top Dollar'

"They were paying in excess of top dollar," said James L. Winchester, a shipping
analyst at Mabon, Nugent & Company, a New York brokerage. "It was ludicrous."

Yet, ship brokers describe the surge in ship charter prices as a simple matter
of supply and demand. The demand for charters rose sharply, and so did the
price, they explain. "It's like other markets -- like stocks and bonds," said
John Weale, the vice president of Fednav Ltd., a Montreal shipping company that
has supplied a ro-ro to the sealift.

The military, to be sure, would have paid less if it had arranged for charters
over a six-month period. But it needed to move troops and equipment quickly to
the gulf in August. The Government thus had to pay a higher price, just as an
airline passenger who needs to book a ticket the day before a flight departs
pays more than the bargain hunter who buys a ticket months in advance.

 Original Estimate Doubles

Vice Adm. Francis R. Donovan, the commander of the Military Sealift Command,
responded with a statement to questions about the agency's chartering expenses.
His statement said the rates paid "were not particularly high in light of the
short-term requirement, diversion of ships from commercial employment and
uncertain condition in the Middle East."

Most of the military equipment and supplies sent to Saudi Arabia has gone by
sea, although tanks, guns and many troops have been sent by air. The Defense
Department said in September that the sealift would cost it $336 million for
August and September and another $1.56 billion from October 1990 through
September 1991.

Pentagon officials estimate that the $1.56 billion figure could double as a
result of President Bush's order on Nov. 8 to send another 200,000 troops to
Saudi Arabia.

The Defense Department estimated in September that the airlift to Saudi Arabia
would cost $2.24 billion in the 1991 fiscal year, but much of this cost has been
for the military's own large fleet of transport planes.

 Disadvantage in Public Bidding

The military's urgent need for many vessels prevented it from playing shipowners
against one another, which is standard Government practice with private
companies.

Government rules requiring that large contracts be awarded through public
bidding have put the sealift command at a disadvantage, said Dimitris
Kastriotis, the chartering manager at Alltrans International Group Inc., a ship
brokerage in Wayne, N.J.

If an oil company, for example, wanted to charter five tankers, it might quietly
and separately approach 10 shipowners and ask each for a single vessel. The oil
company would take the five cheapest deals available and announce them all the
same morning.

"Had you known they wanted five, not one, you would have charged them 20 or 30
percent extra," another broker explained.

Shipping companies have also benefited during previous crises. For example,
charter rates briefly doubled when the Arab-Israeli war in June 1967 closed the
Suez Canal.

 110 Ships Currently Chartered

The sealift command has chartered 165 vessels in the last four months, some for
single voyages, and currently has 110 ships on charter. The Government is
responsible for fully compensating shipowners if their vessels are damaged by
military action, but ship brokers say this possibility has not been a
significant factor in the current charter rates.

In addition to the cost of chartering ships, the military is also paying $7,375
to $7,950 to ship each standard steel container of supplies from East Coast
ports to Dammam, the Persian Gulf port in Saudi Arabia. Michael Arnet, the vice
president of Hemisphere Forwarding Inc. in Inwood, L.I., said that he had been
booking passage to Dammam for containers of electrical parts at a rate of $4,000
a container.

The price per container was about $3,800 before the Iraqi invasion, when oil
prices -- and thus ship fuel prices -- were lower, Mr. Arnet said.

 Current Prices

Sea-Land Service Inc., a subsidiary of the Richmond-based CSX Corporation, is
handling the bulk of the traffic from the East Coast and is charging $7,950 a
container. Farrell Lines Inc. of New York is charging $7,847, and the Lykes
Brothers Steamship Company, based in New Orleans, is charging $7,375; both are
carrying containers on regularly scheduled services. American President
Companies, based in Oakland, Calif., is carrying containers that leave West
Coast ports.

Jack D. Helton, Sea-Land Service's vice president of government marketing, said
the $7,950 price was justified because the company has chartered four extra
vessels and leased 5,000 extra containers in order to run an express service to
Saudi Arabia. The company took a risk in setting up the service in August, he
said, because there was no way to know then if diplomacy might resolve the
dispute within weeks.

"Frankly, we calculated at the beginning that if the sustainment phase remains
in place for six months, we'll make money," Mr. Helton said.

A major reason the Government is paying so much is that it is not specifying
what is in the containers. The special undesignated category of cargo container
is the most expensive to transport.

Margaret B. Holtz, a spokeswoman for the sealift command, said it would be very
expensive for the Government to specify the contents of containers because,
unlike manufacturers and farmers, the Government ships a huge variety of
products.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: An American military vehicle being loaded in Elizabeth, N.J., at
Sea-Land Service Inc., which is handling the bulk of the traffic from the East
Coast tothe Persian Gulf. The Defense Department is paying up to double standard
commercial rates to transport vehicles and supplies to the Middle East. (Keith
Meyers/The New York Times)(pg. 34)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

What Persian Gulf Buildup Costs U.S.;
Blind Eye to Iraq

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 278 words


To the Editor:

If Alexander M. Haig Jr. wants to play with history to justify Administration
policy in "Gulf Analogy: Munich or Vietnam?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 10), he should get his
analogies straight.

If there is an analogy to Munich in the Persian Gulf, for example, it applies
only to the long record of United States appeasement of Saddam Hussein,
beginning with our convenient silence in 1980 when he attacked Iran. And
extending to our failure to condemn his use of poison gas against Iranians and
his own Kurdish population. And to our neglect for months -- which he
understandably took for tacit approval -- of his clear signals that he intended,
one way or another, to settle his Kuwait problem to his advantage. We have
always treated Saddam Hussein as a useful tool in the gulf. Not even his attack
on the Navy frigate Stark in May 1987 (killing 37 American sailors) could move
us to do more than slap his wrist.

As for Mr. Haig's Vietnam analogy, it is ridiculous to assert that a declaration
of war would have made no difference. Declared wars give governments enormous
power to censor news, suppress dissidence, manipulate public opinion, mobilize
national resources and transform debatable causes into patriotic crusades.

Mr. Haig refers to United States policy in Vietnam as self-defeating, and there
may be something of an analogy with the gulf. If so, it relates less to clear
goals and winning or losing than to having an inadequate appreciation of the
probable human and historical consequences of our actions.

JOHN G. SPROAT
Columbia, S.C., Dec. 10, 1990

The writer is a professor of history at the University of South Carolina.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Plans Cut in Imports

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 55; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 144 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Dec. 24


Vietnam is so short of hard foreign currency that it will have to suspend
imports of all non-essential goods next year, Prime Minister Do Muoi has told
the National Assembly.

The Vietnam News Agency quoted the Prime Minister last week as telling the
Assembly that Vietnam would have to begin paying market prices for essential
equipment, fuel, fertilizer, iron, steel and other items previously obtained on
preferential terms from the former Soviet bloc.

Changes to a market economy begun in the late 1980's have not gone far enough,
the Prime Minister said. "Subsidization, instead of narrowing down, is growing,"
he added.

He said Vietnam imported three million tons of oil and oil products each year,
2.5 million tons of fertilizer, 400,000 tons of iron and steel, 60,000 tons of
cotton, and chemicals and equipment to maintain normal production.


LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

STANDOFF IN THE GULF;
Decking the Desert With Good Cheer

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 810 words

DATELINE: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Dec. 24


In all of the United States Marine Corps this Christmas Eve, Sgt. Rodney Pigford
may have had the most demanding job: to somehow spread holiday cheer among
hundreds of young marines spending their Christmas in the Arabian desert,
thousands of miles from home.

"That's my assignment" said Sergeant Pigford, 25 years old, the morale welfare
noncommissioned officer at a sprawling Marine supply camp here known as
Northstar. His plans for Christmas Eve include a screening of the film "Teen-Age
Mutant Ninja Turtles" and Christmas caroling in the recreation tent.

"I think it's working," he said of his efforts to raise Christmas spirits. "A
lot of guys are wishing me a merry Christmas."

For the nearly 300,000 American soldiers stationed in the Persian Gulf region,
Christmas is here, and with it comes a heightened sense of the joy and the
sadness that always seem to accompany the holiday at a time of danger.

At Northstar, hundreds of marines continued today to gear up for the possibility
of war against Iraq.

Backup for Front Lines

The depot's role is to store fuel, food, drinking water, mechanical parts and
other supplies for more than 15,000 front-line Marine troops in the surrounding
Saudi desert. There is also a small medical unit with two operating rooms, a
kitchen and a vehicle-repair shop. Because of military reporting rules, the
depot's exact location in eastern Saudi Arabia cannot be identified.

As the soldiers under his command went about their duties this morning under the
brilliant Arabian sun, the unit's executive officer, Maj. Bill Lucenta, said
that Christmas was never far from anyone's thoughts.

"I'd be lying if I said no," he replied when asked if troop morale was affected
by the holidays. "But I used to be stationed in Okinawa, and I've seen it worse.
Out here, there's a sense of purpose. We feel important out here."

Major Lucenta, 36, from Wellesley, Mass., is spending the holiday away from his
wife, Judy, and their infant son, William Alexander, who was born in November,
after the major was sent to Saudi Arabia from Hawaii. William was born two
months prematurely, and Major Lucenta, who has still not seen his son, said
doctors initially feared that William would not survive.

On Christmas day, there will be two religious services, one Catholic and one
Protestant, in a television room that doubles as a chapel. The holiday schedule
also includes a Christmas Eve Bible study class this evening, focusing on the
story of the Nativity.

Worship Must Be Discreet

Out of fear that news coverage might offend Muslim religious leaders in Saudi
Arabia, the Pentagon has barred journalists from observing religious ceremonies
at American military installations on Saudi soil. Journalists visiting Northstar
today were told that even if they stumbled upon a religious ceremony of some
sort, it could not be described or photographed.

The depot's secular Christmas activities will include softball games in a sandy
clearing near the barracks that has inspired a popular pun. "There's real
sandlot ball over here," said Major Lucenta, making a futile effort to brush the
ever-present sand from his camouflage hat.

The barracks have been decorated with tinsel, small plastic Christmas trees and
Christmas cards strung together on holiday ribbon. On Christmas night, there
will be a traditional holiday meal, with turkey and the trimmings.

The compound's chef, Master Gunnery Sgt. Wendell Brown of Memphis, is
responsible for the Christmas feast here at the camp and for thousands of meals
that will be served to marines closer to the front line.

"I know it's worth it," he says of the Gargantuan job of preparing the supper.
For these marines, he says, "the girlfriends are at home, the bars are at home,
the families are at home, so we build up the meal to be really something."

Film With an Unlikely Theme

On Christmas night, there will also be a double bill of movies, which are shown
at the camp with a reel projector and a screen made from a white tent liner
stretched across a piece of plywood.

Sergeant Pigford said the holiday films will include "Born on the Fourth of
July," the true story of a marine who fought in the Vietnam War, then returned
to the United States disabled and protested against the war.

Asked whether the film might be considered an odd choice under the
circumstances, Sergeant Pigford replied, "I haven't watched it, sir."

On a large wooden pole stuck in the sand near the medical unit, soldiers have
posted signs pointing to New York, Los Angeles, San Diego, Baghdad and one that
reads simply "Home." For the holiday, a red-and-green foil rope was snaked
around the pole.

A nearby tent covered in camouflage netting is known as "The Camel's Rear" and
serves as an enlisted men's club. Its motto is: "Every day is Ladies' Day."

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lance Cpl. Robert Posades cleaning his weapon in Saudi Arabia.
The deadline for the United Nations resolution authorizing the use of force to
evict Iraqi troops from Kuwait is three weeks away. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

STANDOFF IN THE GULF;
Reserve Unit Becomes First Rotated Home for Christmas

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 586 words

DATELINE: BIRMINGHAM, Ala., Dec. 23


The National Guardsmen of the 117th Tactical Reconnaisance Wing were among the
first reserve units called up with the American military deployment to the
Persian Gulf. This week, just in time for Christmas, they became the first such
tactical unit to be replaced as an increasing number of reserve units are
mobilized in the crisis.

Unlike transport and refueling units routinely deployed for 30-day periods and
then replaced, the 117th tactical unit began duty in the gulf on Aug. 24 with an
open-ended assignment. Many envisioned a quick war to oust Iraq from Kuwait, and
thoughts of Christmas in the desert never really entered their minds.

But with the crisis now a long-term confrontation, guardsmen of the 117th have
been coming home in recent days in small groups on transport planes or flying
their sleek, matte-gray F-4 fighter jets for the 16-hour return flight.

The last group of 20 ground and support personnel arrived here late this
evening, ending for now the nearly four-month call-up of the unit, which
includes lawyers, engineers, commerical airline pilots, and corporate managers.

Words of Frustration

The 117th is the only such National Guard unit to have returned from the Persian
Gulf, said Lieut. Col. Jim Ragan, a spokesman for the National Guard's central
bureau at the Pentagon. He said he knew of no other units scheduled to return
soon.

On returning, members of the unit spoke for the most part about the frustrating
sense of having been "all dressed up with nowhere to go" as they flew daily
missions and training exercises even as the threat of imminent war in the region
slackened and diplomacy came into play.

For some Vietnam-era veterans, it was a reintroduction to the intensity of
focusing on nothing else but the preparations for war and the uncertainty of
things.

"We didn't know for sure whether we would be coming home until about two weeks
ago," said Lieut. Col. Ben F. Robinson Jr., a weapons systems officer with the
unit's 106th Squadron, which does "long-range oblique photography" as part of
the intelligence-gathering effort of the American forces.

"My whole family, mother, father, wife, children, brothers and sisters were here
to welcome me back," he said. "It was great."

Problems of Part-Time Soldiers

For Colonel Robinson, who is a transportation manager with the Royal Cup Coffee
Company, the deployment and return was a sobering reminder of the risks and
hardships of being a citizen soldier.

The 117th Wing lost the two-member crew of one of its planes when it crashed
during a training exercise. It was Colonel Robinson's job to return to the
United States briefly to present flags to the families of B. K. Henderson, a
chemical engineer from Molton, Ala., and Steve Schramm, an engineer with the
Southern Company here.

"It was the toughest thing I have ever had to do," he said.

Col. James F. Brown, the commander of the 117th, who arrived back in the United
States two days ago, said all 115 men from the unit who went to the Persian Gulf
had volunteered and about 20 percent of them had been part-time soldiers, as
opposed to full-time military employees attached to the unit, like Colonel
Brown.

With a new rotation schedule in effect that puts each of the units in the gulf
for three to six months at a time, the Birmingham-based unit's next rotation
into the region would be in the spring of 1992.

"But I hope we're not needed," said Colonel Robinson. "It's a foolish man who
wants to go to war."

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Mobil Studies Vietnam Deal

BYLINE: By Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 14; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 199 words


The Mobil Corporation said yesterday that it was discussing the possibility of a
three- way oil exploration and production venture with the Soviet Union in
Vietnam.

The project would be Mobil's first exploration and production venture with
Moscow, the company said.

But because of a 15-year trade embargo that the United States has against
Vietnam, the discussions remain at a very preliminary stage, Mobil said.

The venture depends on whether the embargo remains in effect, a Mobil spokesman,
Ray Vaughan, said.

"We're not going to do anything against the spirit or letter of the law," he
said. "If the embargo is in effect, we won't be in the picture, I guess."

Mr. Vaughan said Vietnamese officials had first proposed the possibility of a
joint project.

One area that Mobil was interested in is now being produced by a Vietnamese-
Soviet joint venture, Vietsovpetro.

Mobil struck oil in the area, an offshore region off southern Vietnam in 1975,
before the Communist victory.

The oilfield was taken over by the Vietnamese Government and the output is being
produced by Vietsovpetro, Mobil said.

Mobil would not disclose the amount of land or oil that might be involved.

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Notebook;
From Bonn to Berlin

BYLINE: By Leon V. Sigal

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 504 words


With unification, the heart of Germany has moved east. And the seat of
government will soon follow. Will Germany's attention move east as well?

To symbolize Germany's restored unity and sovereignty, the newly elected
all-German Parliament held its opening session last week in the old Reichstag,
barely a block from where the Berlin wall once divided the city. Members put off
a vote on whether to return the Government to Berlin. But that move is just a
matter of time.

Bonn has always been reassuringly boring and bourgeois. Lights go out at 8,
except for a handful of night spots near the university. Berlin is raffish, even
radical, by comparison.

Before the war, Berlin was Germany, for Germans and foreigners alike. After the
war, attracted by housing and other subsidies, and seeking refuge from the draft
and the rest of West Germany, young people and intellectuals flocked to Berlin.
So, later, did Yugoslav, Turkish and Polish guest workers. Soon Russians may be
coming.

Despite the postwar division, Berlin remained Germany's cultural capital.
Hamburg may have had the Beatles and the rest of the British pop invasion, but
Berlin has jazz and its own home-grown counterculture. Frankfurt, with its large
U.S. bases, may have the largest McDonald's, but the uneasy coexistence of the
counterculture and the four occupying powers made Berlin the site of passionate
demonstrations against Vietnam and the Euromissiles.

Americans, accustomed to having distinct cultural, commercial, industrial and
political capitals, may not appreciate the push and pull that Paris exerts on
the French or London does on the British. Berlin has much the same effect on
Germans. The Bundesbank may remain in the financial capital, Frankfurt, and a
few bureaucrats may stay behind in Bonn, but for most officials and politicians,
it's back to Berlin.

And once there, Germans may direct more of their attention to the East. Bonn is
120 miles from Brussels, the hub of the European Community; Berlin, by contrast,
is barely 50 miles from the Polish border. Eastern Europe's instability, poverty
and emigration all impinge on Germany. Eastern Europe, says a friend in Berlin,
is Germany's Central America. He wonders whether Germany will become Eastern
Europe's overbearing uncle.

Germany's thoughtful President, Richard von Weizsacker, asks the right questions
of those who worry about a shift in power to Berlin, a city many wrongly
associate only with Prussian militarism, decadent Weimar democracy and Nazi
tyranny. "If the viability of our federalism were to depend on not moving the
seat of government to Berlin, how weak would that federalism be? Or if our
faithfulness to our European Community membership were to depend on remaining
close enough geographically to Brussels?"

And he reminds listeners: "We are no longer living in the world of Bismarck.
Prussia no longer exists. We are living in the age of emerging European unity."
What a capital idea for a new chapter in the history of Berlin.

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Leading Indicators In 5th Drop

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 906 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 28


The Government's main set of indicators used to predict the economy fell for the
fifth straight month in November, a 1.2 percent drop that suggested no early end
to a deepening contraction that now lacks only formal designation as the
nation's ninth postwar recession.

"The November indicators leave no doubt that a serious and lengthy recession is
under way," said William K. MacReynolds, director of forecasting for the United
States Chamber of Commerce. "The only remaining questions are just how far the
economy will plummet and how long it will stay there."

A recession would mark the end of the longest peacetime expansion in the
nation's history and one that if it had continued until October 1991 would have
matched the record 1961-69 expansion that embraced much of the Vietnam War.

Most Severe Since 1981

The latest fall in the index of leading indicators, constructed by the Commerce
Department from data collected by various Government and private-sector bodies,
made the five-month drop the lengthiest period of uninterrupted decline since
1984 and the most severe since late 1981, when the most recent recession still
had 10 months to run. In that year, five of the six months from June through
November had sizable declines, with those in September and October both
exceeding any in the current series.

Eight of the 11 components of the index fell during the month, while the other
three components, paced by higher stock prices, made positive contributions.

Two companion gauges, the coincident index designed to reflect current movements
in the economy, and the lagging index that tends to confirm it after an
interval, also fell in November. The coincident index declined 1.1 percent, its
fifth straight fall, and the lagging index dropped by eight-tenths of 1 percent
after a three-tenths of 1 percent decline in October.

 Preceded by Three Declines

Traditionally, a string of three straight declines in the leading index is
regarded as pointing toward a recession and, indeed, recessions in recent
decades have generally been preceded by three monthly declines.

But the three-decline rule has on several occasions also signaled recessions
that never occurred. For example, the four-month stretch from October 1987, the
month stock prices crashed, through January 1988 was not followed by a business
downturn. Likewise, no recession followed the six straight declines reported
between May and October of 1984.

The current decline, however, is twice as severe as the drop during the first
five months of the 1984 streak -- 4.4 percent compared with 2.2 percent. And the
decline registered over the first four months is slightly more severe than that
in the 1987 period.

Economists warn not only about false, or misleading, signals but also about
assuming a close correlation between the magnitude of declines in the index and
the amount by which the economy may subsequently decline. The index is designed
specifically to anticipate turning points in the economy -- that is, direction
rather than momentum.

Two privately constructed forecasting indexes also moved down for November,
their compilers reported today. Safian Investment Research of White Plains said
its Composite Forecasting Index fell 1 percent, its sixth straight decline. A
subindex that excludes stock market and monetary data fell 1.7 percent, its 20th
decline in the last 22 months.

The Jesup, Josephthal & Company Macro-Economic Index, which first flashed a
recession signal in August 1989 for early 1990, fell to minus 118 from 112 in
October, a moderation in its rate of fall.

 Milder Recession Seen

"My interpretation of the more modest -118 reading currently is that the
recession of 1990-91 is likely to be milder and over by the end of the first or
second quarter of next year," said Jesup's chief economist, David B. Bostian Jr.
The consensus among private analysts now is for a recession to last through
mid-1991. But Mr. Bostian also believes the downturn actually began in late 1989
or early this year instead of in the third or fourth quarters of this year, as
most economists believe.

The components with a negative effect on the Government's index, ranked by their
impact, were a decline in manufacturers' new orders for consumer goods and
materials, lower prices for materials particularly sensitive to the business
cycle, a decline in factory order backlogs, falling contracts and orders for new
plant and equipment, a rise in average weekly claims for state unemployment
insurance, a reduction in the length of the average workweek and declines in the
money supply and in building permits.

 Deliveries and Expectations

Components with a positive impact on the index, besides higher stock prices,
were slower deliveries by corporate suppliers and a slight increase in the
University of Michigan's barometer of consumer expectations.

October's decline, initially put at 1.2 percent, was revised to 1.3 percent, the
Commerce Department also reported. The declines in the previous three months
were eight-tenths of 1 percent in September, 1.2 percent in August and one-tenth
in July.

The ratio of the coincident index to the lagging index, which is considered an
alternative predictor of the economy's direction, fell slightly in November, the
third straight decline.

The leading index now stands at 139.7, which is 3.4 percent below the November
1989 reading of 144.6.

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Leading Indicators," listing index of 11 indicators designed to
"lead" or predict overall economic activity, June 1989-Nov. 1990 (Source:
Commerce Dept.)

Table: "Leading Indicators; Component Analysis," showing components of the index
of leading economic indicators and their net weighted contribution to the
index's change from Oct. to Nov. (Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis) (pg. 30)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Oil Up 56 Cents, to $27.57, in Thin Trading

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 394 words


Rumors of shots fired in the Middle East drove up oil prices yesterday in thin
trading.

On the New York Mercantile Exchange, crude for February delivery rose 56 cents,
to $27.57 a barrel. For the week, crude gained $1.65.

The Merc was closed on Monday and Tuesday for Christmas. An abbreviated session
is set for this Monday, and the market will be closed on New Year's Day.

Traders said volume was light as many market participants refrained from trading
at the end of the month and year, and because of an absence of significant news
on the Persian Gulf crisis.

Andrew Lebow, a senior broker with E.D.&F. Man International Futures Inc., said
traders bought futures after a trading floor rumor that shots had been fired in
the standoff between Iraq and the United States.

Mr. Lebow said he believed the rumor resulted from confusion over reports that
Iraq test-fired a surface-to-surface missile for the second time this week.
United States officials in Saudi Arabia said the missle had been fired away from
multinatioal forces and landed within Iraq.

 'It's Jittery'

The approach of the Jan. 15 deadline set by the United Nations for Iraq to
withdraw from Kuwait has agitated the market. Oil prices are expected to surge
if war breaks out because of reduced supplies from the Middle East.

"It's jittery" as Jan. 15 nears, Mr. Lebow said. "The closer we get the more
nervous people are going to get."

A 17-ship armada embarked from three United States ports yesterday, bringing
America's naval deployment to a level unprecedented since the Vietnam War. Also,
Saudi Arabia reportedly increased orders for jet fuel, interpreted by the oil
market as a sign of war preparations.

The first snowfall of the season in the Northeast failed to support the market
for home heating oil, which has slumped because of recent warm weather.

Heating oil for January delivery fell 1.10 cents, to 79.78 cents a gallon, on
the Merc after falling 0.38 cent on Thursday. Traders said forecasts of warm
weather in the Northeast over the weekend pushed prices down. Later months were
mostly higher.

Unleaded regular gasoline for January delivery rose 0.92 cent, to 69.56 cents a
gallon, after a 0.50-cent rise Thursday. Later months were also higher.

Natural gas for February delivery was down 1.0 cent at $1.950 for 1,000 cubic
feet. Later months were mixed.

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-Follower of Ho Chi Minh Scolds Vietnam in Broadcasts

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1106 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Dec. 28


A longtime Vietnamese Communist who personally accepted the surrender of Saigon
in 1975 has shown up in the West and, surprisingly, has begun broadcasting
statements over the BBC calling on his compatriots to abandon the rigid
Marxist-Leninist economic system, political repression and enmity with the
United States and other adversaries.

The Vietnamese, Col. Bui Tin, a deputy editor of the party daily Nhan Dan, said
in a telephone interview from Paris today that he had decided to take advantage
of a stay in France to beam his appeals back to his country over the BBC because
he would not have been allowed to publish or broadcast them at home.

Besides, he said, more Vietnamese -- three million of them -- listen to the
BBC's Vietnamese-language service every day than to Radio Hanoi.

Returning Could Be Dangerous

"I want to go back," said Colonel Tin, who arrived in France in September. But
he acknowledged that returning to Vietnam could be dangerous for him, and he
would not say exactly when he would try. "Prison is possible, and my wife and
children have already been interrogated by the police."

Colonel Tin, a disciple of Ho Chi Minh, was at Dien Bien Phu when the French
were defeated there in 1954, and accepted the surrender of Gen. Duong Van Minh
when the Communists rolled into Saigon in April 1975.

He has a long and honored record as a Communist. He joined the Vietminh in 1945
as a teen-ager and became a member of Ho Chi Minh's private guard unit. In 1963,
as Hanoi's leaders were debating whether to send major North Vietnamese troop
units to join the Vietcong fighting against the Saigon Government, Colonel Tin
was assigned to lead a secret scouting mission to South Vietnam.

Accepted South's Surrender

He later left active duty and became deputy editor of the North Vietnamese army
newspaper, Quan Doi Nhan Dan. As a correspondent for that paper in the last days
of the Vietnam War, he was riding with the advance tank unit that broke into the
Presidential Palace in Saigon. The tank commander deferred to him as the ranking
officer present and gave him the honor of accepting General Minh's surrender.

Colonel Tin came to France at the invitation of L'Humanite, the French Communist
newspaper. He said he planned to return home "in a few months."

By his account, he has been troubled by events in his unhappy country for some
time, but could not say so. "I had a serious heart attack last year," he said,
"which is why I felt I absolutely had to try to do something now to save the
people."

Broadcast in Installments

On Nov. 28, he made public what he calls "a petition from a single, ordinary
citizen" to the leaders and people of his country. The BBC's Vietnamese-language
service has been broadcasting his explanation and commentary on his views in
installments. The last installment of the five- to six-hour interview will be
broadcast sometime in January, said Richard Black of BBC radio here.

Vietnam, with North Korea, is one of the few Communist countries that still
resists radical Soviet-style change, at least in economic and social policy.
Last spring, its Communist Party purged Tran Xuan Bach, a senior member of the
Politburo, for warning of the danger of rigidity.

The authorities in Hanoi have also menaced Colonel Tin. The Voice of Vietnam
broadcast a statement by the editorial staff of Nhan Dan on Dec. 15, saying that
Colonel Tin's BBC interviews contained "many points that distort our party and
state policies and lines."

Said Aloud What Many Think

In the interview today, Colonel Tin said, "Very well, I say, let's have a public
discussion of how I did that."

"I have been thinking about the ideas in my petition for four years," he said,
"and before I left Vietnam I discussed them with intellectuals and journalists
in Hanoi. Some said that I would only be saying aloud what a lot of people
think."

Colonel Tin has a record as something of a maverick. He tracked down Ho Chi
Minh's last will and testament and proved that Ho's successors had doctored it.
Ho had wanted his ashes scattered around Vietnam. But instead the party leaders
built a huge mausoleum to Ho, which Colonel Tin felt was a fraud.

Colonel Tin's statement, as published in translation by the Asian Wall Street
Journal on Dec. 3, said: "Our country is still confronting a grave general
crisis, which has recently become more serious in a number of domains, leading
to a further deterioration of our people's living conditions."

Later in the statement, he added: "Every Vietnamese is troubled by the country's
present situation. There are acute economic problems, a return of galloping
inflation, mounting prices and daily erosion of living conditions of civil
servants and cadres. Bureaucracy, irresponsibility, egoism, corruption and fraud
are becoming entrenched under an insolent reign of privileges and prerogatives.

"The decisions and measures thus far adopted remain ineffectual. There is an
alarming deterioration of traditional ethical, moral and spiritual values. There
is confusion among the youth, on whom the country's future depends."

Well over half a million Vietnamese "boat people" have fled the country's
catastrophic living conditions since 1979, when Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia
prompted China to attack it in retaliation. Several hundred thousand also fled
after South Vietnam fell to the Communists in 1975.

Seeks National Reconciliation

He told the British newspaper The Guardian earlier this month that a government
of national reconciliation -- uniting Vietnamese refugees and exiles around the
world with those at home -- could help build democracy and heal the wounds left
by mass arrests and other repressive measures taken by the Communists after
their victory.

"This caused many more to flee and die in the ocean," he told The Guardian. "The
motive was prejudice, revenge and hatred. If Ho Chi Minh had been alive, there
would have been an amnesty."

In his statement, he called for a reduction in Vietnam's army and security
forces over a three-to-five-year period. The army now constitutes 2 percent of
the country's 62 million people, he said, but it should only be about a quarter
of its current size.

"We have to withdraw our troops from Cambodia and let the U.N. take care of it,"
he said today. "But the most important thing is to make the world understand
that Vietnam is a factor of peace, stability and cooperation in the region. And,
at the same time, we should normalize our relations with all our former enemies,
in all directions -- France, Japan, the United States and China."

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Col. Bui Tin (United Press International, 1985)(pg. 1); Col.
Bui Tin, center, in March 1973 with the last United States troops to leave
Saigon. Colonel Tin, a disciple of Ho Chi Minh, is now broadcasting to his
Communist compatriots in Vietnam from the BBC in Paris. (Associated Press)(pg.
2)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1216 words



International 2-6

U.S.-Soviet cooperation will continue in keeping with Foreign Minister
Shevardnadze's policies. Soviet officials said they would still coordinate
efforts to resolve the Persian Gulf crisis and other conflicts. Page 1

News analysis: Reform or "razval"? The first Congress of Peoples Deputies began
with hope for democracy, but the fourth has ended with fear of what President
Gorbachev called "razval," or breakdown.  1

Accusations of voting irregularities in the second-round election of President
Gorbachev's Vice President surfaced as members of the Congress of Peoples
Deputies brandished two apparently excess ballots. 4

Vologda Journal: A Russian "palace" for a self-made man 4

Tensions between Iraq and Turkey have risen with the possibility that Turkey
could become a second front against Iraq if war should break out. Both countries
are boosting their forces along the border. 1

The specter of war haunts Baghdad. Markets are crowded as Iraqis stock up on
food. More anti-aircraft batteries have appeared. Shortages have been reported
at hospitals. Young men await the draft. 6

British troops will be innoculated against biological weapons. The announcement
by the British Defense Ministry came as the Pentagon confirmed that it planned
to vaccinate American troops in the gulf. 6

The jump in oil prices has helped oil-producing nations but not as much as many
presume. Saudi Arabia could spend half its windfall to help its needier
supporters and to pay some of the Pentagon's expenses. 29

Lebanon's Christian leaders met to consider concerns about a decline in their
community's influence under the newly formed Government. "We are at fateful
crossroads," the head of the Phalange Party said. 2

Three Arabs are shot by a sniper in the West Bank 2

A longtime Vietnamese Communist who accepted the surrender of Saigon in 1975 has
arrived in Paris and begun broadcasting statements over the BBC calling on his
country to abandon its Marxist economy. 1

A former Japanese Cabinet minister was indicted on charges he made more than $21
million from insider stock tips. The indictment was a setback to Prime Minister
Kaifu's efforts to clean up corruption. 3

Former military ruler of South Korea is to end his exile 3

Beijing shuffles Cabinet but not power structure 3

Prime Minister Shekhar of India met with an increasingly radical Sikh political
leader, Simranjit Singh Mann, in an effort to contain a spreading separatist
movement in Punjab State. 3

Raid on fuel depot in Somalia reportedly leaves dozens dead 3

 National 8-10

A Florida man faces felony charges in the death of his 3-year-old daughter in a
car accident. Prosecutors said that if he had put the girl in a child restraint
seat, as state law requires, she might have lived. 1

Nancy Cruzan was buried in a simple ceremony. An unknowing symbol of the debate
over the right to die, Miss Cruzan died quietly on Wednesday, 12 days after the
feeding tube keeping her alive was removed. 8

Yellowstone National Park's bison have left the high elevations of the park for
the grasslands outside where the weather is less severe, but where they risk
being shot by hunters and livestock officials. 8

Massachusetts adopts California's clean air standards 9

The speaker of the Texas House, Gib Lewis, was indicted on two misdemeanor
ethics charges by a grand jury in Austin that has been investigating the links
between legislators and lobbyists. 9 Facing bias charges, Dallas City Council
backs redistricting 10

Quayle faces controversy over playing golf at country club 9

A woman is sentenced for her actions at a flag-burning in Ohio 9

The Student Loan Default Act of 1990, a Federal law designed to stem loan
defaults and abuses by trade schools, has rankled college administrators who say
it stigmatizes some students and undermines recruiting. 9

A law distinguishing crack from cocaine is overruled 8

Boston subway trolleys collide, injuring 33 passengers 8

The index of leading indicators fell for the fifth straight month. The 1.2
percent drop suggests there will be no early end to the economic downturn that
lacks only a formal designation as a recession. 29

S.E.C. favors steps to reduce sharp swings in stock prices 29

Stock mutual fund sales down after strong November rise 29

 Regional 25-28

A fire in a Brooklyn subway tunnel filled a packed train with thick, acrid
smoke. One rider was killed and 150 were injured. The fire, sparked by a freak
electrical explosion, disrupted service for thousands. 1

Passengers on the train panicked as smoke billowed through the car, turning an
ordinary inconvenience into a subterranean nightmare. They rushed from exit to
exit amid conflicting instructions from the crew. 27

Fires, once common, have been reduced, but threat remains 27

An explosion at a housing project in Brooklyn blew out walls and collapsed much
of the top floor of the building. The explosion, apparently caused by a ruptured
gas line, injured 14 people, one seriously. 25

A Suffolk County murder case took a new twist: The doctor arrested and charged
with the murder of his 47-year-old wife had been having an affair with the
organist at their church for six months. 25

Youths held in robbery spree are charged in a murder 26
 The first real snow in New York City in several years delighted an generation
of children too young to remember 1983, when 17.6 inches of snow fell over two
days. For many grown-ups, it was a miserable day. 1

New York City's many public murals have been ravaged by decades of neglect and
vandalism. Next month, 17 of the 430 city-owned murals will be put up for
private adoption in an effort to save them. 28

Plan is reached to complete unfinished midtown skyscraper 28

Businesses are courting cabdrivers in New York City with cookies, cakes and
coffee, hoping to reach customers in the back of taxicabs by wooing the drivers
in the front. 25

 Neediest Cases 28

 Business Digest 29

 Sports

Baseball: Yanks still trying for Sanderson 44

Basketball: One player's victory over fear 41

Pressure to leave college early mounts 43

Nets stop Olajuwon, but lose to Rockets 43

Hawks end Celtics' streak 43

Ohio State rolls to victory 43

Column: Berkow on college sports 41

Football: Seminoles capitalize on Penn State's mistakes 41

N.F.L. winding up regular season 44

Hockey: Rangers beat Capitals 41

Penguins shut out Red Wings 44

 Obituaries 11

William F. Pederson, architect

 Consumer's World 46

Are ads for infant formula fit for parents' eyes?

 Arts/Entertainment

Japan sings along with Beethoven 13

Blacks dance with Royal Ballet 13

Eighth-graders write for Spielberg 13

Music: P.D.Q. Bach 12

Book: The gay experience in the military 14

 Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials 22

Is Mr. Gorbachev turning tail?

Crying "quotas" is crying wolf

California adolescents

New blast from Hazel Dukes

Letters 22

Flora Lewis: People make history 23

Harvey F. Wachsman: A radical proposal -- abolish cash 23

Carl Diehl: Another proposal -- revise the Constitution 23

Jonathan Lang: A third -- scrap transit fares 23

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The Gay Experience in the Military

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 905 words


My Country, My Right to Serve
Experiences of Gay Men and Women in the Military, World War II to the Present
By Mary Ann Humphrey
285 pages. HarperCollins. $19.95.

Mary Ann Humphrey was a captain in the United States Army Reserve for nine
years. By the Army's own standards, she had a perfect record. After receiving
medals and commendations for her work as an administrative officer, she
qualified for military intelligence as well as for the quartermaster branch. She
intended to stay in the Army Reserve at least 20 years. Suddenly, Captain
Humphrey was questioned about her sexual orientation by her male superiors,
denied promotion to major and forced to resign her commission in 1987. Her
response to what she considers unjust and hypocritical regulations that have not
followed the customs and laws of civilian life is "My Country, My Right to
Serve," a challenging and controversial work.

Her case histories cover the experiences of homosexuals and lesbians from World
War II to the present. In the main, these men and women served with distinction.
Many volunteered for combat duty and were decorated. The gay men and women
interviewed by the author ranged from noncommissioned officers to colonels. Some
gave pseudonyms; others allowed their names and photographs to be used because
they felt the subject should be brought out of the closet and aired to bring
change.


Two gay servicemen who stood up against the Pentagon were Tech. Sgt. Leonard
Matlovich of the Air Force and Ens. Vernon Berg 3d of the Navy. They took their
cases into the Federal courts and were partly vindicated, and they tell their
stories of public humiliation and of private courage in the book.

Mr. Berg, now an artist, was proud of the fact that the admiral who headed the
Naval Academy when he graduated testified at his trial that he considered Mr.
Berg to be in the top 10 percent of his class and would have no difficulty
serving with him in combat. In a Federal appeals court, Mr. Matlovich, who died
of AIDS in 1988, eventually received $160,000 in back pay, a promotion and an
honorable discharge. The headstone he chose for his grave reads: "A Gay Vietnam
Veteran. When I was in the military, they gave me a medal for killing two men,
and a discharge for loving one."

As a military matter, there are arguments on both sides. The author gives the
Defense Department's official reasoning for its stand. A 1982 policy statement
holds that homosexuality is incompatible with military service. It says that
homosexuals adversely affect the ability of the armed forces to maintain
discipline, to foster mutual trust, to insure the system of rank and commmand,
to prevent breaches of security and to maintain the public's respect for the
military services.

Current Army regulations against homosexuality resemble the archaic century-old
state statutes on sexual conduct, which are rarely enforced. (Otherwise,
civilian courts and jails would be bursting with consenting adults.) The
military definition that leads to separation from the service contains bizarre,
all-inclusive language: "Homosexual means a person, regardless of sex, who
engages in, desires to engage in, or intends to engage in homosexual acts." By
contrast, civilian law covers an act, not a gleam in the eye.


A comparison with past racial discrimination in the armed forces is repeatedly
offered in the book. Segregation existed in both World Wars; the Korean and the
Vietnam wars sped desegregation. Similarly, it took a breakdown of prejudice to
allow women to go to West Point and Annapolis and serve in many military jobs.

Ms. Humphrey's book, unfortunately, doesn't have an index, but it does include a
useful appendix on judicial trends involving homosexuality in the armed forces.
A three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
ruled 2 to 1 in 1988 that the Army's discrimination against homosexuals was
unconstitutional. The court held that the regulation violated the constitutional
guarantee of equal rights. Writing the majority opinion, Judge William Norris
included this analogy:

"For much of our history, the military's fear of racial tension kept black
soldiers separated from whites. Today it is unthinkable that the judiciary would
defer to the Army's prior 'professsional' judgment that black and white soldiers
had to be segregated to avoid interracial tensions."

In a foreword to "My Country, My Right to Serve," Representative Gerry E.
Studds, a Massachusetts Democrat, writes: "I submit that discrimination on the
basis of sexual orientation is as wrong and harmful as discrimination on the
basis of race. The difference is that, with homosexuals, the discrimination
often occurs after one has joined the military. Gays cannot, after all, be
detected simply by the color of their skin."

Mr. Studds, an openly gay member of Congress, is serving his ninth term in the
House of Representatives. He calls the Defense Department's policy of
discrimination against homosexuals "irrational, ineffective and incalculably
harmful to both our nation's armed forces and to the significant component of
those forces that is, notwithstanding the policy, lesbian or gay."

Ms. Humphrey, who has a doctorate in education and now teaches at Portland
Community College in Oregon, says changes allowing homosexuals and lesbians to
serve their country openly are bound to come. The book may help her cause.

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mary Ann Humphrey (David H. Evans/HarperCollins)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Guts and Brains

BYLINE: By Walter Kendrick; Walter Kendrick is a professor of English at Fordham
University. His next book, a history of scary entertainment, will be published
in the fall.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 6; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 993 words



HOUSES WITHOUT DOORS
By Peter Straub.
358 pp. New York: Dutton. $19.95.

The title and epigraph of Peter Straub's new book come from a poem by Emily
Dickinson:

 Doom is the House without the Door --
 'Tis entered from the Sun --
 And then the Ladder's thrown away,
 Because Escape -- is done --

Mr. Straub doesn't quote the second of Dickinson's two stanzas; he may not wish
us to remember it:

 'Tis varied by the Dream
 Of what they do outside --
 Where Squirrels play -- and Berries die --
 And Hemlocks -- bow -- to God --

Mr. Straub's doomed characters do dream of the life and death that go on,
inaccessibly, outside their "Houses Without Doors." The trouble is, dreams do
nothing to vary the relentless grubbiness of their (and the reader's)
experience.

To aficionados of horror and fantasy, Mr. Straub is known as the thinking man's
Stephen King -- a more slowly paced, more polished writer who wants his prose to
be savored rather than gulped down. Though the two collaborated on "The
Talisman," a 1984 best seller, they rule over separate districts of the horror
field. Mr. Straub is altogether more literary than Mr. King, who despite
occasional forays into art seems content to go for the gut rather than the
intellect.

Literariness abounds in "Houses Without Doors," from the title onward. The book
contains four longish stories and two unclassifiable items, "A Short Guide to
the City" and "Something About a Death, Something About a Fire," these last two
being by far the best things in the collection. There are also five brief
"Interludes" of a page or two each, and the ensemble is framed by a pair of
small enigmas, "She Saw a Young Man" and "Then One Day She Saw Him Again," the
point of which eludes me completely.

At the end, Mr. Straub appends an author's note, which informs us that "most of
these pieces had their origins or inspirations in other books." Any story about
a boy who hypnotizes and murders his younger brother ("Blue Rose") or a man
driven to madness and butchery in a haunted English country house ("Mrs. God")
must come from books rather than the writer's experience. At least, one hopes
so.

Mr. Straub also invites comparison with his own novel "Koko," noting that two
stories in the collection, "Blue Rose" and "The Juniper Tree," could be said to
have been written by the "secret hero" of that book. "Blue Rose" portrays a
10-year-old psychopath who gets away with murder and grows up to slaughter
babies in Vietnam. "The Juniper Tree" offers an evidently sane boy who is
half-willingly molested repeatedly by a tramp and grows up into a lonely,
repressed novelist. If these stories have themes, they are the inevitable
defilement of innocence and the grinding gloom of simply being alive. I'm glad
I'll never meet the secret hero who wrote them.

A pervasive air of dull frustration hangs over "Houses Without Doors," even when
-- as he does just once, in "Mrs. God" -- Mr. Straub employs the traditional
materials of the English ghost story. Young or middle-aged, Mr. Straub's
protagonists are both pitiful and repellent. One is mad to begin with, two
others drift into madness (though of very different kinds) and a fourth winds up
a stunted adult. Horrid parents seem at least partly responsible in the first
three cases, while in the last, one culprit is a horrid, unfaithful wife. Mr.
Straub provides no heroines; his women, all minor characters, are uniformly
grotesque.

Ordinarily, fiction of a scary or fantastic sort would be an odd place to go
looking for well-rounded characters and broad emotional range. But the fantastic
is used sparingly in "Houses Without Doors," and the book's arty construction
invites assessment on a larger scale than the generic one. It should be added
that Mr. Straub produces his disagreeable effects with a good deal of skill.

"The Buffalo Hunter," for instance, draws the reader insidiously into Bob
Bunting's deepening obsession with baby bottles. At a late stage in his
disintegration he glues hundreds of them, nipples pointing outward, to the walls
of his grubby studio apartment; by then, the mundane phrase "baby bottles" has
taken on a tone of idiotic, babbling malevolence. Indeed, the fantastic barges
rather rudely into "The Buffalo Hunter"; in between bouts of gluing, Bunting
seems to be able to physically enter the worlds of the books he reads. When
Bunting dies, smashed against a bottle-studded wall, he has been reading "Anna
Karenina" and is apparently a victim of the same train that ran over Tolstoy's
heroine.

Yet the result of Mr. Straub's skillfulness is merely that the reader has been
lured into partaking of a pointless, pathetic life that gets abruptly,
pointlessly snuffed out. Nothing lingers after "The Buffalo Hunter" but vague
puzzlement and a bad taste in the mouth; the same is true of the other stories
in "Houses Without Doors." The worst of it is that the storyteller seems to
despise his despicable characters, as if they were all rejected versions of what
he used to be. He asks us to share his glee in torturing, degrading and killing
them.

"Houses Without Doors" wobbles unpleasantly between the desire to raise goose
bumps and the wish to be mistaken for art. Oddly, though, the volume's most
chilling story is its most blatantly artistic one, "A Short Guide to the City."
Here Mr. Straub dispenses with psychos and haunted houses to provide a sort of
deranged chamber-of-commerce brochure for an unnamed Midwestern American city.

The place is symbolized by a half-built bridge across its unnamed river, "the
'Broken Span,' " which "has the violence of all unfinished things." "Violence,"
the weirdly complacent narrator goes on, "is the physical form of sensitivity.
The city believes this. Incompletion, the lack of referent which strands you in
the realm of pure idea, demands release from itself." Mr. Straub seems
intimately familiar with that cold feeling.

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 936 words



THE ANDY WARHOL DIARIES, edited by Pat Hackett. (Warner, $19.95.) For years
before he died, Andy Warhol called Pat Hackett, his former secretary, to report,
in his self-absorbed way, on what he had done the day before. "Ms. Hackett's
editing, one feels, is affectionate and scrupulous, yet correctly unprotective,"
Martin Amis said here last year. "And after a while you start to trust the voice
-- Andy's voice, this wavering mumble, this ruined slur."

A HISTORY OF THE WORLD IN 10 1/2 CHAPTERS, by Julian Barnes. (Vintage
International, $9.95.) Julian Barnes's version of world history begins with a
retelling of the legend of Noah's Ark, from the point of view of a termite that
stowed away on board. Last year our reviewer, Joyce Carol Oates, said that in
its own idiosyncratic way "this is a playful, witty and entertaining gathering
of conjectures by a man to whom ideas are quite clearly crucial: a
quintessential humanist, it would seem, of the pre-post-modernist species."
Vintage has also published a new edition of Mr. Barnes's novel FLAUBERT'S PARROT
($8.95), in which the story of a doctor's obsession with Gustave Flaubert is
turned into a very Flaubertian attempt to plumb the inherent weaknesses of
language. "The result is a splendid hybrid of a novel, part biography, part
fiction, part literary criticism, the whole carried off with great brio," Peter
Brooks said here in 1985. " 'Flaubert's Parrot' is high literary entertainment."

THE EMPEROR'S NEW MIND: Concerning Computers, Minds, and the Laws of Physics, by
Roger Penrose. (Penguin, $12.95.) After exploring some of the farthest reaches
of physics, an Oxford mathematician concludes that computers will never truly
think. Last year our reviewer, Timothy Ferris, said " 'The Emperor's New Mind'
ranks among the most innovative and exciting science books to have been
published in the last 40 years."

THE GROTESQUE, by Patrick McGrath. (Ballantine, $4.95.) Left for brain dead in a
wheelchair, Sir Hugo Coal, an English squire and amateur paleontologist, tries
to reconstruct the strange events that led to his "cerebral accident." Last year
our reviewer, Susan Kenney, said, "Contemplating Mr. McGrath's ingenuity, skill
and daring in creating this rare species of book, one can do no better than echo
Sir Hugo contemplating his life: 'As a connoisseur of ironies, I cannot, now,
help recognizing just how rich this one is.' "

DEEP COVER: The Inside Story of How DEA Infighting, Incompetence, and Subterfuge
Lost Us the Biggest Battle of the Drug War, by Michael Levine. (Dell, $5.95.) A
former undercover agent for the Drug Enforcement Administration says the enemies
in the war on drugs are not only the dealers but the Government bureaucrats he
calls "the suits." Michael Levine "has woven a fascinating, exciting and
sometimes horrifyingly comic tale of an investigation that in the end, despite
lofty possibilities, had startlingly little effect on the flow of drugs into
this country," Charles Salzberg said here in April.

THE MESSAGE TO THE PLANET, by Iris Murdoch. (Penguin, $9.95.) Marcus Vallar, a
mathematician, healer and philosopher of "pure thought," is suspected of putting
a curse on an Irish poet. Iris Murdoch "pretty nearly persuades me that her
philosophical clowning is the best way to treat men and women seriously in
modern fiction," Anatole Broyard said here in February. "It forces them beyond
themselves, flushes out their souls. . . . If her books are sometimes accused of
escapism, it's because she believes we can escape."

IN THE FACE OF DEATH, by Peter Noll. Translated by Hans Noll. (Penguin, $8.95.)
Stricken with cancer, the author, a Swiss legal scholar, decided to forgo
surgery and let himself die. Earlier this year our reviewer, Bruce Bawer, called
this "a remarkable piece of writing -- an evocative, harrowing, maddening and
ultimately poignant self-portrait of an enigmatic soul in extremis."

A DREAM OF OLD LEAVES, by Bret Lott. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $6.95.) In
one of these short stories by the author of "The Man Who Owned Vermont," three
estranged neighbors are brought together by a burglary. Bret Lott's "spare,
emotionally restrained fictions bring to mind a minimalist John Cheever," Eils
Lotozo said here last year.

VETERAN'S DAY: A Combat Odyssey, by Rod Kane. (Pocket, $4.95.) When this memoir
by a Vietnam medic was published earlier this year, The Times's Herbert Mitgang
called it "a powerful addition to the literature of that bitter war in the
jungles of Southeast Asia and in the streets of the United States. It breathes
front-line authenticity on every page."

A SEASON IN THE WEST, by Piers Paul Read. (Ivy, $4.95.) In the days before
glasnost, a Czechoslovak dissident moves to England, where he finds the liberal
orthodoxy of his newfound friends as stultifying as the ancien regime in Prague.
"In contrasting the values of East and West, 'A Season in the West' tackles an
important and serious subject that most modern fiction is content to ignore,"
Jane DeLynn said here last year. It is "a very good and entertaining novel."

BUREAUCRACY: What Government Agencies Do and Why They Do It, by James Q. Wilson.
(Basic, $12.95.) An expert in public administration argues that bureaucrats who
seem to be loose cannons may simply be responding to the complexities of their
institutions, which can act as though they have minds of their own. Earlier this
year our reviewer, Beryl A. Radin, said the author shows bureaucracy "as a
complex and varied set of institutions, not the monolith it seems in the classic
work of the German sociologist Max Weber."

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Julian Barnes (Nancy Crampton)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

1990: The Agony and the Ecstasy

BYLINE: By JAN BENZEL AND ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2822 words


Anything goes, but nothing lasts. Or so the events of 1990 would suggest. This
was, after all, the year of passing fancies: "Twin Peaks" peaked, Milli Vanilli
melted, and the lambada proved to be an NC-17 version of the
Hula-Hoop. Jesse Helms took on Robert Mapplethorpe, Florida went after the 2
Live Crew, and Broadway wondered whether "Miss Saigon" would be bygone.  What
follows is a highly selective calendar of the year's most memorable moments --
and a few best forgotten.

JANUARY

Jan. 8
All About Deb: Jane Pauley is replaced by the younger, blonder, bubblier Deborah
Norville on NBC's "Today" show, and America begins to tune out in droves.

There Is No Net: California Superior Court orders Paramount to pay Art Buchwald
for an idea that became the Eddie Murphy film "Coming to America." Showing more
originality in bookkeeping than in screenwriting, Paramount claimed a net loss
of $18 million for a film that grossed over $275 million, and concluded that it
owed Buchwald nothing.

Jan. 9
Un Bel Helicopter: Cameron Mackintosh says he can't find a theater in New York
big enough for his new musical "Miss Saigon," a retelling of the Madame
Butterfly story set in Vietnam, in which a chopper lands on the stage.

Jan. 10
The Bloom Is Off: Alan Bond, the Australian entrepreneur who had bought van
Gogh's "Irises" for a record $53.9 million in 1987, puts the painting back on
the market. The Getty got it.

Jan. 14
Pas de Misha: American Ballet Theater celebrates its 50th year with a gala at
the Metropolitan Opera House; notably absent is the former artistic director
Mikhail Baryshnikov, who had resigned in a dispute with the company's board.

Jan. 15
No Tomorrow: The $7 million production of "Annie 2: Miss Hannigan's Revenge"
flops on the road. Producers plan instead to revive the original "Annie" on
Broadway, but Miss Hannigan's had it: Dorothy Loudon, who created the role,
pulls out.

Jan. 21
You Say Lambada, I Say Lumbago: Kaoma, the group that has sold four million
copies of its single, "The Lambada," tours the country, setting off the most
hyped -- and least danceable -- disco craze since Da Butt.

FEBRUARY
Feb. 2
Not Even a Contender: The Philadelphia Museum of Art insists that an 800-pound,
8 1/2-foot bronze sculpture of Sylvester Stallone as Rocky Balboa be removed
from its plaza after the filming of "Rocky V" winds up.

Feb. 8
A Few Minutes Without . . .
: Andy Rooney is suspended from CBS's "60 Minutes" for three months after
suggesting that blacks were less intelligent because they "watered down their
genes." Previously he had offended homosexuals by commenting that gay sex led to
premature deaths.  But ratings slid, and he returned after only one month.

Feb. 10
He Learned It in Kindergarten
: The best-selling pop homilist Robert ("Everything He Needs to Know") Fulghum
leads the Minneapolis Chamber Symphony in Beethoven's Ninth, even though he
can't read music.

Feb. 16
Less Is More: The Guggenheim Museum acquires a collection of more than 300
mostly Minimalist works from the 60's and 70's, some of them no more than plans
on paper, for a price believed to be around $30 million. To foot the bill, it
sold major paintings by Modigliani, Kandinsky and Chagall.

Feb. 25
Die, Yuppie Scum: A new bad guy emerges in such films as "Blue Steel," "Bad
Influence" and what would be the year's biggest hit, "Ghost": Yuppa, the young,
urban professional assassin.

MARCH

March 2
Maestro Dearest: The conductor Zubin Mehta upbraids the audience at a New York
Philharmonic concert for coughing and generally making too much noise. March 4
Get Thee Behind Me, Ozzy Osbourne: John Cardinal O'Connor, preaching the Gospel
about Satan's tempting Jesus in the desert, cites reports of growing Satanic
cult activity among youth and the impact of satanic imagery in rock.

March 5
He Knew It When He Saw It: Congressional hearings begin on whether to keep the
National Endowment for the Arts in business. Senator Jesse Helms, reacting to an
exhibition of Robert Mapplethorpe's sexually explicit photographs, seeks tough
controls on Federally financed art.

March 16
Meanwhile, Back at the Lambada: Two movies about the exotic dance are released:
"Lambada!" (math teacher by day, dancer by night) and "The Forbidden Dance" (an
Amazon Indian princess goes to Los Angeles to save the rain forest and becomes a
lambadan).

March 18
The Bad News: Twelve works assessed at more than $200 million are stolen from
the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum in Boston by thieves dressed as police
officers.

March 19
The Worse News: They weren't insured.
March 21
Purple Haze: Kathleen Turner takes on Maggie in the Broadway production of "Cat
on a Hot Tin Roof," performing the first act in a lavender slip (lined) instead
of the de rigueur white.

March 25
But There May Be a Part in the Movie 'Cats': New York's party set, including Nan
Kempner, Glenn Bernbaum and Jerry Zipkin, show up for Brian De Palma's auditions
to play social X-tras in the film "The Bonfire of the Vanities." Many are called
back, few are chosen.

APRIL

April 7
Sin-cinnati: The infamous Mapplethorpe exhibition opens in Cincinnati:
protesters on both sides rally, and thousands line up for tickets. The
Cincinnati Contemporary Arts Center and its director, Dennis Barrie, are later
indicted on obscenity charges.

April 8
A Damn Big Piece of the Pie: "Twin Peaks" has its premiere and scores record
ratings for ABC when the series moves to its regular Thursday night time slot.
"Peaks" fever begins.

April 11
Can You Say Biomedical Research?: Mr. Rogers marks the 35th anniversary of his
neighborhood's television debut by saying that his is a blend between the
personalities of Albert Schweitzer and Arsenio Hall.

April 15
Alone, at Last: Garbo dies.

April 25
And the Wall Came Tumbling Up: Part of the Berlin Wall is reconstructed for
Roger Waters's performance of the Pink Floyd rock opera "The Wall."

April 26
But She Got to Keep Her Ears: Darlene Gillespie, an original Mouseketeer, sues
Disney, charging that she was cheated out of royalties from "The Mickey Mouse
Club."

A Much Smaller Piece of the Pie: "Twin Peaks" producers say Laura Palmer's
killer won't be revealed this season. By now the series has lost 30 percent of
its original audience.

April 28
The Zing Cycle: A few moments before the end of "Gotterdammerung" at the
Metropolitan Opera House, a beam from the scenery strikes Hildegard Behrens on
the head and knocks her flat, and out of the remaining performances.

April 30
The Video Thing: Barbara Bush says "America's Funniest Home Videos" is the First
Couple's favorite TV show.

MAY

May 7
No Dice: Nora Dunn of "Saturday Night Live" refuses to participate in this
week's show, claiming that the comedy act of the guest host, Andrew Dice Clay,
is degrading and repulsive. Sinead O'Connor, the scheduled musical guest, bows
out too.

May 10
No Kidding: Andrew Dice Clay describes himself as "the most vulgar, vicious
comic ever to walk the face of the earth."

May 11
Long Time Coming: "Longtime Companion," the first mainstream movie about AIDS,
is released.

May 14
Colorized: The 10-year restoration of the Sistine Chapel ceiling is unveiled;
the bright hues show that Michelangelo wasn't as somber as he seemed through
centuries of grime.

May 15
A Yen for Art: Van Gogh's "Portrait of Dr. Gachet" is bought by the Japanese
industrialist Ryoei Saito for a record $82.5 million. Two days later, Mr. Saito
buys Renoir's "At the Moulin de la Galette" for $78.1 million.

May 20
Rude at Heart: David Lynch's twisted road movie "Wild at Heart" wins the Golden
Palm at Cannes. French audiences boo.

Send in the Paddles: Madonna's album "I'm Breathless" from the movie "Dick
Tracy" is released; it includes three songs by Stephen Sondheim and one (by
Madonna) about the joys of being spanked.

May 21
Agent Cooper Gets Reassigned: ABC announces that it will move "Twin Peaks" to
Saturday night at 10, the least-watched prime-time hour of the week. Mark Frost
says he and his co-creator David Lynch withheld the identity of Laura Palmer's
murderer to keep the show alive.

May 30
Watch It, Dude: Fox reveals plans to pit Bart ("Underachiever and Proud of It,
Man") Simpson, America's favorite animated antihero, against NBC's mighty Bill
Cosby on Thursday nights.

JUNE

June 7
Mourning Glory: The Metropolitan Museum drapes paintings in black in response to
Congressional efforts to restrict National Endowment-sponsored artists.

Too Live Crude: Federal Judge Jose Gonzalez finds the 2 Live Crew's album "Nasty
as They Wanna Be" obscene; record stores across south Florida withdraw the
album, and Sheriff Nick Navarro threatens to arrest anyone selling it. A record
store owner, Charles Freeman, and the rappers are later taken into custody.

June 11
It Didn't Play in Peoria: The national tour of "Other People's Money," the
long-running Off Broadway comedy about a leveraged buyout that suspendered
audiences from Wall Street bought out, shuts down.

June 26
Any Roles for New York Socialites?: Steven Spielberg and Andrew Lloyd Webber
announce that they will create an animated feature film of "Cats," which will
differ from the stage version in that it will have a plot.

Beauty to Beast: Nyah-Nyah: The slip worn by Kathleen Turner in "Cat on a Hot
Tin Roof" goes for $1,200 at a charity auction; the mask worn by Michael
Crawford in "The Phantom of the Opera" fetches only $375.

June 29
Just Rope 'em, Tie 'em, Brand 'em: KRVN, a Nebraska radio station in the middle
of cattle country, bans records by the country singer K. D. Lang because she
appeared in an anti-carnivore commercial with a cow and announced, "Meat
stinks."

JULY

July 4
Merci for the Clarification: France's society of composers rules that the song
"Lambada" is Bolivian, not Brazilian, as was originally thought. But by now, the
lambada has gone bottoms up. July 21
In the Movie, He'll Be Played by Don Knotts: Sheriff Navarro says the 2 Live
Crew situation is a nuisance that has kept him from other important matters.

July 22
Lady Godiva: Karen Finley, the performance artist who was denied an arts
endowment grant, receives a standing ovation at Lincoln Center for "We Keep Our
Victims Ready," in which she strips and smears chocolate on her body.

July 25
The Fat Lady Sings: Roseanne Barr screeches through the national anthem, spits
and scratches herself at a San Diego Padres game. America cries foul.

July 31
Tseirp Saduj: In court over a lawsuit filed by the parents of two teenagers who
shot themselves after listening to heavy-metal music, Judas Priest's lead
singer, Ron Halford, testifies that he once recorded a phrase backward. But he
denies planting hidden messages in his music to promote suicide. Verdict: not
guilty.

AUGUST

Aug. 8
The Pryce Is Wrong: Actors' Equity forbids the English actor Jonathan Pryce from
appearing on Broadway in the role of the Eurasian he created in London in "Miss
Saigon" and urges that an Asian be cast. Cameron Mackintosh cancels the Broadway
run despite a record advance sale of $25 million.

Aug. 16
David Lynch Is Different From You and Me: (He Makes More Money.) David Lynch
directs a batch of commercials for Calvin Klein's Obsession perfume based on
snippets of stories by, among others, Hemingway and Fitzgerald.

The Pryce Is Right: Actors' Equity reverses itself, voting to permit Jonathan
Pryce to come to Broadway in "Miss Saigon"; Cameron Mackintosh eventually agrees
to bring the show to the States.

Aug. 18
Satisfaction: The Rolling Stones play Prague because President Vaclav Havel of
Czechoslovakia wants to meet Mick Jagger.

Aug. 21
Play Misty for Me: The payola trial of the record promoter Joseph Isgro begins;
he had been indicted on 57 counts of illicit and illegal payments to radio
stations for playing certain records. (A judge later dismissed the charges.)

Muzak Attack: A 7-Eleven store in Tillicum, Wash., discovers that playing
"easy-listening" music drives away loitering teenagers; several others in the
chain adopt the method, finding Mantovani particularly effective.

Aug. 22
Couch Potato Chips: A study by the University of Minnesota School of Public
Health found that food was referred to an average of five times every half hour
during prime time -- not including commercials -- in 1988; more than 60 percent
of references were for nutrition-free foods, and 72 percent of all food eaten on
the shows was consumed between meals.

Aug. 30
Yo, Somethin's in the Oven: Madison Avenue taps into rap, putting it in the
mouths of the Pillsbury Doughboy and the Campbell Soup Kids.

SEPTEMBER

Sept. 23
Atlanta Simmers, Ken Burns: Ken Burns's 11-hour documentary, "The Civil War,"
shown on PBS over five nights, becomes the most popular noncommercial series
ever broadcast, watched by 14 million people each night.

Sept. 26
An X By Any Other Name: The Motion Picture Association of America creates the
NC-17 (No Children Under 17) category to replace the X rating. The first film to
get the new designation is "Henry and June," about the menage a trois among
Henry Miller, his wife, June, and Anais Nin.

OCTOBER

Oct. 5
Selling Like Mapplethorpes: The Cincinnati Contemporary Arts Center and Dennis
Barrie are acquitted of obscenity charges: by now, some Mapplethorpe photographs
have tripled in value, fetching up to $57,500. Even the Japanese are buying
them.

Oct. 14
Requiem: Leonard Bernstein dies at age 72. Among the others who will be much
missed this year are Aaron Copland, Sammy Davis Jr., Jim Henson, Mary Martin,
Pearl Bailey and William S. Paley.

Oct. 17
Sidesplit Decision: The judge in the 2 Live Crew obscenity trial rules that
laughter is permissible after some jurors complained that they were in physical
pain because of attempts to keep straight faces. The group was ultimately
acquitted, although Charles Freeman, the record store owner who sold their
album, was found guilty.

Oct. 22
Spiritual Girl: Madonna waves the American flag and wiggles in red panties, bra
and combat boots in a TV commercial to get out the vote. Her rap: "Dr. King,
Malcolm X, freedom of speech is as good as sex . . . . if you don't vote, you're
going to get a spankie."

Oct. 27
The Buck Stops Over There: After heated hearings, Congress passes a bill
extending the life of the National Endowment for the Arts, leaving obscenity
rulings to the courts.

NOVEMBER

Nov. 5
A Heartbeat Away: Dan Quayle appears as himself on an episode of CBS's "Major
Dad."

Nov. 10
Daddy Did It: Laura Palmer's killer is revealed.

Nov. 13
Botchco: The most ballyhooed show of the season, "Cop Rock," Steven Bochco's
musical TV show in which police officers and even felons break into song, is
canceled.

Bonzai!: Philip Casnoff, the star of the musical "Shogun," is hit by a slab of
falling scenery during a critics' preview. The show opens a week late, and
Casnoff is in it.

Nov. 20
Girl, You Know It's Memorex: Fab Morvan and Rob Pilatus of Milli Vanilli are
stripped of their Grammy as best new artist of 1989 after their producer admits
that they didn't sing on their hit record "Girl You Know It's True." The real
singers don't get the award, either.

Nov. 26
No Sex Please, We're Skittish: MTV decides that Madonna's video "Justify My
Love" is too racy to broadcast. It shows erotic fantasies including voyeurism,
bisexuality, mild sadomasochism and a woman topless but for a pair of
suspenders.

DECEMBER

Dec. 3
Justify My Ratings: ABC's "Nightline" broadcasts Madonna's video "Justify My
Love." The program's overnight ratings are second only to those for Tammy Faye
Bakker's crying jag.

Dec. 14
What About Raggedy Ann?: Disney stops selling its new doll, Steve the Tramp, a
miniature bum modeled on a character in "Dick Tracy," after homeless advocates
protested. The doll was described on the package as "a lout who would just as
soon take your life as your wallet."

Dec. 21
Gross Justice: A California Superior Court judge calls Hollywood's system by
which only a powerful few receive percentages of a movie's gross profits
"unconscionable," and rules that Art Buchwald is entitled to a share of the
gross from "Coming to America."

Dec. 25
An Offer He Didn't Refuse: "The Godfather Part III," the sequel Francis Ford
Coppola said he'd never make, opens. It joins 1990 sequels some may wish were
never made: "Child's Play 2," "Rocky V," "Look Who's Talking Too," "Three Men
and a Little Lady," "Predator 2" . . .

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART/1990;
Same Old Stuff: Sex, Politics And Social Status

BYLINE: By ANDY GRUNDBERG

SECTION: Section 2; Page 37; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1292 words


In a year when photographs seemed to get more attention from prosecutors and
politicians than from art critics, the celebratory aura left over from the
medium's 150th birthday party quickly dissipated. But overall there was at least
as much to praise as to damn and, by the end of the year, photography seemed to
snap out of its post-party depression.

The best way to have kept from getting depressed throughout the year was to
visit the Dia Center for the Arts on West 22d Street in Manhattan, where an
entire floor was devoted to the photographs of Bernd and Hilla Becher. The two
German artists decided it was time to let their pictures of water towers, blast
furnaces and other industrial subjects be seen singly instead of in grids, and
the extra space around each made them seem even more breathtaking than usual.
There is also a new book of the Bechers' work, called "Blast Furnaces" (M.I.T.
Press), which begs to be savored. (The exhibition, which closed for the summer,
has reopened and will run through June 21, 1991.)

The Bechers' students were much in evidence this fall. (The couple teach at an
art school in Dusseldorf.) Thomas Struth showed strangely stylized portraits and
views of art museums at Marion Goodman, and Thomas Ruff exhibited his cosmic
pictures of stars for the first time in New York at 303 Gallery. Along with
other Becher students showing in Manhattan, like Candida Hofer, they helped turn
the photography world's attention in Germany's direction.

A number of historical reconsiderations proved fascinating, most notably summer
exhibitions devoted to Felix Teynard, at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and
Lady Hawarden, at the Museum of Modern Art. These two 19th-century photographers
worked worlds apart -- Teynard took pictures of pyramids in Egypt, Lady Hawarden
of her Victorian daughters in her English drawing room -- but their pictures
were equally odd and wonderful. Also of note were shows of the work of Henry
Peach Robinson, at the International Center of Photography, Josef Sudek, at the
Philadelphia Museum of Art, and Paul Strand, now at the National Gallery of Art
in Washington.

The 1960's work of Ray Metzker, at the Laurence Miller Gallery in October, and
of Wallace Berman, at the Louver Gallery the same month, looked all the better
for not having been seen for years. Mr. Metzker's "composites" and Berman's
copy-machine montages shared an experimental esthetic and a hermetic aura. Also
hugely appealing, because it was practically virgin territory, was the
photographic component of the "Czech Modernism: 1900-1945" show, organized by
Anne Tucker of the Houston Museum of Fine Arts and shown at the International
Center of Photography in March. The show made clear the contributions of Prague
photographers to the cross-fertilization of experimental modernist styles.

The year's best reach into the realm of popular culture was not the Museum of
Modern Art's "High and Low" show but possibly "Man Ray/Bazaar Years," at the
International Center of Photography Midtown. "Bazaar Years," organized by Willis
Hartshorn and Merry Foresta, did not contain the greatest Man Ray prints ever
made, but its tearsheets from the pages of old Harper's Bazaars told the story
of art's truck with commerce better than even vintage prints could have. The
same galleries were home to another worthwhile historical look at the printed
page, Marianne Fulton's "Eyes of Time: Photojournalism in America."

For contemporary art photography, 1990 was a vintage year. Cindy Sherman started
things off in January with her best show in years, transforming herself into
simulations of Old Master painting subjects as easily as she once approximated
film noir heroines. Adam Fuss had two compelling shows: one of circular color
abstractions, at Robert Miller Gallery, the other at Massimo Audiello in which
seemingly solid black prints eventually yielded the faces of children. And Sandy
Skoglund's straw-and-dog-filled "Green House," at Janet Borden Inc., opened the
fall season with a much-needed bark.

Mike and Doug Starn showed their sculptural pieces made from sheets of
black-and-white film at Stux Gallery in the spring and later included them in
their five-year retrospective exhibition, organized by the same Contemporary
Arts Center in Cincinnati that was on trial for exhibiting Robert Mapplethorpe's
photographs.

This brings me to the down side of 1990, starting off with the Cincinnati trial
(at least it ended happily, with an acquittal) and continuing with Senator Jesse
Helms's efforts to demoralize and demolish the National Endowment for the Arts
(he was re-elected in November).

Senator Helms's complaints about the agency continue to focus on photographs as
prime offenders of his sense of moral and religious propriety -- apparently
because no one has told him that the value of photographs is not identical to
what they represent. But then the status of photographs is always subject to
debate, as John Szarkowski's fascinating but ultimately unsatisfying survey
show, "Photography Until Now," at the Museum of Modern Art in February and
currently traveling, served to point out.

"Photography Until Now" was fun to look at, in part because the pictures were
intriguing and in part because one could see Mr. Szarkowski's complex mind at
work. But the curator's claim that the show offered a contextual rather than a
connoisseur's view of the medium seemed like a thin veneer intended to cover a
lack of cohesiveness. When it came to contemporary photographs, Mr. Szarkowski's
robes seemed terribly threadbare, and the point of the whole show seemed to
vanish into thin air.

Some shows were pumped up beyond the ability of the photographs to carry them,
notably the Lee Miller exhibition that came to I.C.P. Midtown from the Corcoran
Gallery in Washington. Miller's career, from Man Ray model to fashion
photographer to war correspondent to skillful cook, makes a fascinating story,
and she surely provides a case study of a liberated and uninhibited modern
woman. But most of her photographs look like jottings for further study.

Lorna Simpson's Projects show at the Museum of Modern Art last summer wasn't
bad; it was just disappointing, considering the interest her work has been
generating of late. But perhaps it wasn't Miss Simpson's fault; few artists'
work manages to prosper in the space the museum has set aside for its small
contemporary shows. Edward Maxey's photographs also suffered because of advance
expectations. Mr. Maxey, who changed his name so as not to be confused with his
older brother, Robert Mapple thorpe, does a good job of imitating the
Mapplethorpe style, but the effect, at the James Danziger Gallery, was like
listening to a choir of Elvis impersonators sing "Hound Dog."

The Professional Photography Division of Eastman Kodak Company, the new Daddy
Warbucks on the photography publishing and exhibition scene, managed to sponsor
more than a fair share of the year's clinkers. One egregious example: "L.B.J.:
The White House Years," at the International Center of Photography, a show that
tried to refashion the tarnished image of the President who fell from grace
during the Vietnam War.

Kodak's connection to the I.C.P. exhibitions program, which extended to shows of
work by Marilyn Bridges, Sam Abell, James Balog and others, is not coincidental:
part of the deal I.C.P. struck when it leased its midtown gallery from Kodak is
that it would present a certain number of Kodak-sponsored shows each year. This
year, the price of that pact became only too clear. The photography center has
long been something of a showcase for shows organized elsewhere; now it is in
danger of becoming the willing agent of a corporate marketing campaign.


LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Grain Elevator," by Bernd and Hilla Becher--staving off
depression (Dia Art Foundation); A fashion photograph by Man (International
Center of Photography); "Youth and Age," by Fallon Horne, in "Photography Until
Now"--fascinating
Ray--reaching into popular culture (The Museum of Modern Art) (pg. 37);
"Rebecca, New Mexico," by Paul Strand (1931)--a reconsideration (National
Gallery of Art) (pg. 39)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Bill of Rights, on Tour, Stirs Respect

BYLINE: By ALBERT J. PARISI

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 6; Column 4; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 805 words

DATELINE: MORRISTOWN


THE sheepskin parchment is old and faded, and its discolored fold is clearly
evident. Yet besides its marring and the fine hand of the scribe who penned it,
one name stands out among the others: John Adams.

"Is that really his signature, Dad?" a 10-year-old asked his father.

The father replied: "It sure is, son. And a whole lot more."

In a display more indicative of the film "Star Wars" than the Revolutionary War,
the document symbolically represents the foundation of a nation forged in battle
and determination.

It is the Bill of Rights, and its public display in Morris County could find no
better place, local historian and the exhibit's sponsor say, than this
community, which during America's spark of life served as an encampment and
headquarters for the nation's first Commander in Chief, George Washington.

The Bill of Rights was adopted by Congress in 1789, and later that year, on Nov.
20, New Jersey became the first state in the union to ratify it.

Found in a Desk Drawer

The document on display is the State of Virginia's copy, one of 15 drafted, of
which 12 are known to exist. The Virginia copy was lost for decades and
rediscovered in 1940, in an old desk drawer at the State Library there, folded
like a map and hidden between sheets of cardboard.

The Bill of Rights display, sponsored by the Philip Morris Companies of New
York, drew some 30,000 visitors at the Morristown Armory. The document was
sealed in a nitrogen gas-filled steel and glass case and shuttled between two
viewing rooms on railroad-like tracks, accompanied by resounding music. The
exhibit is on a 16-month, nationwide tour ending in 1992.

"For many people, this is the first and only opportunity for them to see a
document that they only read about in history books," said Taggarty Patrick, a
company spokeswoman.

Just as the document, which is the first 10 amendments to the Constitution of
the United States, outlines and insures the public's right of free speech and
guarantees of a speedy and public trial, among others, the exhibit provided a
sounding board for public groups here this month.

Protests Against Sponsor

At Pioneer Park near the town's square, the American Cancer Society and
representatives of antismoking groups protested Philip Morris's sponsorship of
the exhibit, contending that the company was violating the rights of nonsmokers
by polluting the environment and exposing the nation's youth to severe health
risks. The company is the largest exporter and producer of tobacco products.

Gay-rights and child-welfare groups also used the five-day event to bring
attention to their causes.

But for many who came to view the parchment, protesters' voices signified the
purpose of the Bill of Rights: the freedom to speak out without fear of
retribution.

"Hey, that's what this country's all about," said Paul Calefati of Jersey City,
a telephone company service representative. "This is what people fought and died
for." He said that he had "gone out of my way to get here," but that the effort
was worth the reward.

"That piece of paper over there is like no other," he said. "There are other
parts of the world where they don't have anything like it, and that's why we
have troops in the Saudi desert trying to protect its meaning for ourselves and
others."

A Lesson for Children

For Guy Gulbin, a marketing researcher from Morris Plains, his wife, Nancy, and
their two children, Glenn, 9, and Hilary, 7, the Bill of Rights stands for a
nation undivided in its goal of justice, no matter how divided it may be on
other issues.

"A couple of weeks ago, my daughter took part in a ceremony where many new
citizens took the oath and were sworn in," Mr. Gulbin said. "I wanted her to be
able to see this today to further understand what she took part in" -- welcoming
those who might not have enjoyed the same freedoms in countries they formerly
called home.

Mrs. Gulbin said, "For me, it's comforting to know that through that document we
are protected in a very special way."

For Robert Lamond, a lumber salesman from Morristown, and his family, the
exhibit meant a personal view of a history-book lesson dating to his childhood.

Shaped the Nation

"What it stands for has shaped the nation," he said. "If the people who drafted
it could only see us now!"

His 7-year-old son, Jamie, said, "That paper stands for our rights, no matter
what somebody's color may be or what their religion is."

For Harold J. Liberatore of Milton, the document stood for such things and much
more.

"The Bill of Rights is what we fought for, what many people lay down their lives
for," said Mr. Liberatore, an Army veteran who served during the Vietnam War
years. "The Bill served me then and it serves me today, and my kids will have
its same guarantees."

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
War And Malaise

BYLINE: BY Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 762 words

DATELINE: ROCHESTER , Vt.


Despite a flood of Christmas sentimentality about "the kids over there" -- this
time including women -- little appetite for war in the Middle East can be found
among the American people; quite the opposite.

As the announced deadline of Jan. 15 approaches, the problem seems more than the
natural reluctance of any nation to send its youth into war. It's more, I
believe, than the obvious truth expressed by Senator Pat Leahy of Vermont to
President Bush:

"Americans support defensive measures to contain the Iraqi Army, but there is no
consensus for . . . an offensive war that would cost the lives of thousands of
Americans."

The unease is palpable -- to some extent because memories of Vietnam remain so
corrosive, and because Mr. Bush has not provided convincing reasons for another
distant war in which, again, "allies" are likely to become fair-weather friends.
No doubt, too, many Americans have heard with anxiety their military leaders'
protests that U.S. forces, which will do most of the fighting and dying, are not
yet ready for combat.

The end of the cold war, being celebrated only last Christmas, now seems far
away and forgotten. The so-called peace dividend is fast disappearing into a
military operation costing at least $2.5 billion a month even before the
shooting starts.

Still, even more than all that is at the root of American malaise during a
holiday season overshadowed by threats abroad and at home. Americans, it seems
to me, are deeply troubled by the sheer incongruity of mounting a huge military
operation abroad, the necessary purpose of which remains unclear, while the
economy deteriorates at home, our children go begging and shooting, crime
spirals upward, the schools educate poorly if at all, millions neither have nor
can afford medical care and bridges fall down on the homeless sleeping beneath
them.

A sampling of holiday domestic news makes the point:

Dec. 20 -- The Commerce Department revised its estimate of third-quarter growth
in gross national product, from 1.7 percent to an anemic 1.4 percent. The fourth
quarter will be worse.

Dec. 21 -- In 1990, the New York metropolitan area lost about 100,000 private
industry jobs, according to a Federal survey. Three more of the nation's largest
banks reported millions in bad-loan write-offs or dividend reductions. For 1991,
U.S. businesses plan to expand spending by only 0.4 percent, the least in five
years.

Dec. 22 -- The Federal Home Loan Bank Board's senior economist said it would
take three to five years for growth to resume in New York City. U.S. health care
spending was announced to have reached $804 billion last year; but though the
law requires lead-poisoning tests for all the nation's 12 million poor children,
only a third actually are being tested.

Dec. 23 -- In Washington, five children, one only 6 years old, were shot by
other youngsters from a passing car; there have been 471 homicides in the city
this year. The Federal budget office sought about $1 billion in reductions in
aid to mass transit, despite a recent increase in the gasoline tax.

Dec. 24 -- Experts said the health of Americans in the inner cities had
deteriorated to "critical condition," while the rest of us are healthier and
living longer. Even the television networks suffered one of their worst years;
all lost market share and CBS announced a fourth-quarter loss.

Dec. 25 -- Retailers reported "the poorest Christmas season in years" as
shoppers didn't show up. Signs of the first U.S. price deflation since the
1940's also were reported -- bad signs for a government, businesses and people
burdened with debt.

Dec. 26 -- Further signaling recession, a wide spectrum of American
manufacturers, caught in a price squeeze, are deferring plans to modernize and
expand. Some are laying off employees.

And on and on. It's true that spending for another war might provide stimulus to
a sick economy. But that's not only a distasteful way to prime the pump; it's
inefficient, in lives and money. Already the Pentagon is having to pay premium
prices -- sometimes twice standard rates -- for shipping space to the gulf.

Anyway, it's not just economic problems but values that trouble the nation, as
Jan. 15 nears. In Britain in 1939, leaders sought "peace in our time" and shrank
from a war to defend a people "of whom we know little." Now, in ironic reversal,
many Americans sense that their most pressing problems are here at home, largely
unattended by leaders in the fatal grip of superpower illusions, who hasten them
into ill-considered war.

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 30, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Documentary Looks at 60's

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 11; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1166 words


IN the beginning, a demonstration against the House Un-American Activities
Committee, staged by students of the University of California's Berkeley campus,
turned into "a firehose festival for the police." That was in May, 1960.

By the end of a historic, turbulent decade, the student activists concerns,
which encompassed civil rights and the war in Vietnam, culminated in the women's
movement, proceeding "into the kitchen, into the bedroom," as one participant
put it.

With a cast of characters that includes the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.,
then-Gov. Ronald W. Reagan and Joan Baez in archival footage and on-camera
interviews with Bobby Seale, co-founder of the Black Panthers and 14 other
protesters of the era, "Berkeley in the 60's," an acclaimed documentary released
earlier this year, chronicles a revolutionary time in its multifarious facets.

These include the Free Speech Movement, Stop the Draft Week and People's Park,
among the activities conceived to create an image of a new society.

Film on View in Huntington

The 117-minute film, produced and directed by Mark Kitchell,who has ties to Long
Island, will be shown at the New Community Cinema, 423 Park Avenue,
inHuntingtonon Friday, Saturday and next Sunday.

The 38-year-old Mr. Kitchell, who was born in Boston and reared in San
Francisco, was spending summers in Dix Hills during the early part of those
teeming times, visiting "an aunt, uncle and lots of cousins, playing games and
being real kids, doing 10- and 12-year-old stuff."

While attending New York University's Film School in the 1970's, Mr. Kitchell,
who was then living on Manhattan's Lower East Side, made "The Godfather Comes to
Sixth Street," a student documentary about the filming of "Godfather II." He was
then spending his leisure time in the Bridgehampton home of his grandparents,
Henry and Athalie Eckhardt, he the founder of Kenyon & Eckhardt, the advertising
agency.

"Some of those genes went into something more worthwhile than advertising," Mr.
Kitchell said during a telephone interview from his home in Berkeley. "I learned
early on that you become an artist if you want respect and love."

He was referring here to his family, which consists of architects (his divorced
parents and one brother), a painter (another brother)and a musician, his sister.

Mr. Kitchell's approach to creating a filmed record of the restive 60's in
Berkeley was not as commentator, critic, intrepreter or prophet.

Old-Fashioned Film-Making

"It's actually old-fashioned, conservative film-making -- playing it straight
and letting the story be up front," he said. "Iwas constantly pressed to take on
the meaning of the 60's -- and getting opinions and advice from everybody -- but
I found that the most fundamental questions were more important than the
answers.

"This is homage to the spirit of the 60's, but it's not saying that everyone was
noble and succeeded. That's not true. It's more complex -- and ongoing. And
there are as many stories about how they failed."

In an epilogue, the film's interviewees are revealed as still committed.  Among
them, consider the narrator, Susan Griffin, a feminist intellectual, who is
involved in what she calls "planetary concerns."

"That shows how a lot of people are still pursuing what began in Berkeley," Mr.
Kitchell said. "We're used to the opposite notion -- that the party's over and
everyone sold out and went back to accumulating the goodies of America and lots
of moolah when, in fact, the people who were active then are active now."

To finance the film, which was 10 years in the making and took volunteer
researchers as far as Finland, Mr. Kitchell moved from Los Angeles to Berkeley
in 1984.

"That move was made to hustle money in the community," he said. "To make the
film, it was clear to me that I had to turn to the people whose story it was.
That meant almost entirely grass-roots fund-raising."

More than 1,000 people contributed $300,000 toward the film's cost, which Mr.
Kitchell estimates was between $400,000 and $450,000.

Distributors Rejected Film

"Every distributor in the country turned it down," he said, "and a lot of people
I have a lot of respect for turned it down. They wondered if it could play
outside of Berkeley. And every private and cable-television station turned it
down."

That was until Marc Weiss, the producer of the P.B.S. series "P.O.V." ("Point of
View") gave "Berkeley in the 60's" its premiere at this year's U. S. Film
Festival in Park City, Utah, where it received the Audience Award for best
documentary. By now, the film has been shown in more than 40 cities, with 30
more lined up.

As a fillip, Mr. Kitchell's move to Berkeley "brought me my wife, Debra," he
said. "She's a masseuse. In our initial round of production, my back gave way
and she worked on it.

"Later, she said she couldn't offer money for the film, but could make an
in-kind contribution: massages for me and my staff."

The Kitchells have been married for two years. They have a 2-year-old daughter,
Celia; another child is due in April.

Among the film's more-noted "on camera" absentees as interviewees, although they
are prominently seen and heard in the footage, are Mario Savio, who is
acknowledged as the Free Speech Movement's most significant leader, and Clark
Kerr, then Berkeley's president.

Savio Backed Out Twice

"I did everything I could to get Savio," Mr. Kitchell said. "He agreed to be in
the film, but backed out not once, but twice. He was concerned about whether it
would be good enough.

"He didn't really trust me. He wanted to set up a committee that would have
power of approval, but that's an impossible way to make movies.

"After six interviews in the first round, he saw the rough cut and said the film
lacked a certain something that only he could provide, which is exactly why I
wanted him in the first place.

"He agreed to be in the film, and then backed out again for personal reasons.
He's always been a private person; it's in his character not to be in it.

"But he came to the opening in Berkeley and said he was proud to have the film
represent a movement he was part of, and that he was wrong not to trust me. So
in the end, his apology, blessing and seal of approval were a small vindication.

"Other activists, Kerr and other administrators turned me down because of their
painful and complicated lives."

On the making of film, Mr. Kitchell said that it gave him "an official excuse to
be curious about these people's lives."

"It's that process -- the journey, the meeting of the people and pressing them
for their deepest thoughts -- that I love," he said. "Though it feels wonderful,
you never get enough applause at the end to make worthwhile all those years you
put into it.

"Now, I'm hoping I'm fundable. I can't go through grassroots fund-raising again.
And this is a once-in-a-lifetime film. Ultimately, making a film about the 60's
is making a film about the meaning of life."


LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Scene from the documentary "Berkeley in the 60's," directed by
Mark Kitchell, left (Jeffrey Blankfort)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Political Memo;
A Year in Sound Bites: 10 Seconds to Remember

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1125 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 30


It was a year when President Bush moved from "no new taxes" to "tax revenue
increases" to a strange request to "read my hips."

Almost every candidate running wanted to be an outsider and was urging voters to
"take your government back" and put "new blood and fresh thinking" in the
Capitol.

Almost everybody was learning a new language to talk about abortion. "Everybody
in every state was saying, 'I trust the women of blank to make that decision,' "
said Bob Shrum, a Democratic consultant.

Sound Bites' Echoes

For better or for worse, 1990's politics will echo in the 10-or-15-second
snippets of speech endlessly repeated in television commercials or on news
reports until they come to capsulize an issue, a politician, a mood. Sound bites
have become the language of politics, rarely approaching the grandeur of earlier
eras of political oratory but emblematic of the times, when a media consultant
is more likely to look for inspiration from Clint Eastwood movies than from the
Bible.

Many of the sound bites of 1990 were characterized by a rough edge of anger and
anxiety in a striking change from the expansive language of the Reagan glory
days. It was a year of "This will not be another Vietnam" rather than "America's
back," of "You needed that job" but "it had to go to a minority" rather than
"morning in America." It was a year when the language of politics got grim and
careful. And for those who needed further proof, 1990 also demonstrated how
unforgiving the modern campaign can be toward the unscripted sound bite.

Much of domestic politics this year revolved around a long, tortuous climb down
from a sound bite that was emblematic of the 1980's: "Read my lips: No new
taxes." Two years after Mr. Bush delivered it at the Republican National
Convention in New Orleans, he found himself trapped and tormented by a line that
would not die.

"Reporters used it, comedians used it -- every place you turned around in the
culture, it was identified with George Bush," said Kathleen Hall Jamieson, dean
of the Annenberg School for Communication at the University of Pennsylvania and
an expert in political speech.

The White House tried to back away from it quietly. When the budget negotiations
stalled in June and Congressional Democrats insisted that Mr. Bush take the
first step on taxes, the White House issued a carefully worded news release
saying that "tax revenue increases" were among the measures that would be
necessary. But every Democrat in Washington offered a full textual analysis of
the new White House position and how it broke with the past.

By October, no doubt weary of the digs of a thousand headline writers,
television news directors and late-night-comedy writers, Mr. Bush hoisted
himself on his own sound bite. When reporters pressed the jogging President for
his latest position on taxes, Mr. Bush declared, "Read my hips."

Mr. Bush did have his resonant moments in 1990. On Aug. 5, as he returned from
Camp David and paused to talk to reporters on the White House lawn, he set the
tone for much of what was to come in the struggle with Iraq. "This will not
stand," he said. "This will not stand, this aggression against Kuwait."

Another line that echoed at year's end was delivered amid growing public anxiety
as the United States sent additional troops to the Persian Gulf. "This will not
be another Vietnam," the President said. "This will not be a protracted,
drawn-out war."

Such statements become extraordinarily important as a nation confronts the
possibility of war, Ms. Jamieson said. "Ultimately, what war rhetoric does is
set the criteria by which you assess success or failure," she said. "If Bush
stands on that, he better make sure that it's a short war in which we get what
we went for."

Writing the Right Stuff

On the campaign trail, candidates struggled to find the perfect sound bite to
exploit the public mood, which was particularly sour in 1990. Many campaigns
sought to appeal to the voters' cynicism and anger toward Washington. In
Indiana, a Senate challenger asked, "Are you fed up with what's happening in
Washington?" In Oregon, his counterpart asserted, "The rich and powerful are
robbing us blind, and the politicians in Washington are not doing a thing to
stop them." There were variations on the theme from coast to coast.

The race issue seemed to be bubbling anew in the political dialogue, with a
recessionary twist. A sound bite from 1990 that will surely echo came in a
television commercial for Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican, in
the final week of his re-election campaign against former Mayor Harvey Gantt of
Charlotte, a Democrat who is black.

"You needed that job, and you were the best-qualified," the announcer intoned.
"But it had to go to a minority because of a racial quota."

At the same time, the political struggle over abortion was reopened by the
Supreme Court, and politicians were seeking the least dangerous path through a
verbal minefield. This meant, for many candidates, a language that emphasized
"choice" and "trusting the women." It also meant, for many candidates, beginning
one's position by noting, "I am personally opposed to abortion," said Doug
Bailey, a Republican consultant.

There was often a "but" after that. "Any candidate who did start that way, the
pro-life people would say, 'O.K., here it comes,' " Mr. Bailey said.

Those Worrisome Slips

The political year had its unscripted moments, with the spontaneous lines that
can become the stuff of consultants' nightmares. Clayton Williams, the
Republican candidate for governor of Texas, suffered death by a thousand sound
bites. The folksy oilman spent much of the spring trying to get over a remark he
made comparing bad weather to rape: "If it's inevitable," he told reporters,
"relax and enjoy it."

He capped the fall campaign with a sound bite that was widely, and
devastatingly, replayed. Asked in a televised interview about a critical ballot
measure that affected gubernatorial appointments, Mr. Williams said:
"Proposition One is which, excuse me?"

Mr. Williams was a political novice, but even veterans can falter.

Senator Claiborne Pell of Rhode Island, the chairman of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, was asked during this year's campaign what he had done
recently for Rhode Island. "I couldn't give you a specific answer," the
71-year-old lawmaker replied. "My memory's not as good as it should be." Mr.
Pell was returned to office by a large margin.

In the end, though, the sound bites that echoed said something about the times:
anxious, uneasy and often very angry. There was remarkably little whimsy in the
language and remarkably little humor. The buoyant cadences of the 1980's were
gone.

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1237 words



INTERNATIONAL 2-7

The European Community will meet for an emergency session to consider
independent action aimed at persuading Iraq to withdraw its forces from Kuwait
before the United Nations deadline of Jan. 15. Page 1

Iraq will summon Muslim leaders from 17 countries for a conference on Jan. 9 to
draw up plans for a response to any attack on Iraqi forces. 6

Bedouins banished, ancient Jordan caves lose tourists 6

Quayle has talks with Saudi royalty to seek more funds 6

Dole cautious on combat in gulf 6

Lebanon is celebrating the New Year with a gusto unseen in more than a decade
and a half. For the nation's people, 1991 brings a promise of peace unknown
since the first days of the civil war. 3

Tables at the Savoy on New Year's are already booked for the night of Dec. 31,
1999 -- despite confusion over whether the millennium starts then or in 2001.
But this year, seats are still open at the famous London hotel. 3

Economic change in Eastern Europe is ending its first year with only a few steps
toward capitalism. Next year is certain to be one of swift changes, mixed with
worries that things will get worse before they get better. 1

The shelves of Soviet stores are bare, giving rise to bands of civillian
inspectors -- officially-sanctioned food vigilantes -- who raid stores to make
sure they are not hoarding goods for sale on the black market. 1

Moscow police bulldozers razed a protesters' shantytown across from the Kremlin
gates that had become a squalid symbol of the society's new freedom and
frustrations. 4

Greece cancels plan to pardon ex-junta members 3

Karpov wins Game 23 and keeps hopes for a chess tie alive 28

A moderate blueprint for China in the 1990's was approved in a meeting of the
Communist Party Central Committee. They warned that the next decade could
determine the rise or fall of China's Communist system. 7 Beijing Journal:
Cartoonist is master of the fine line 2

South Korea's former ruler returns from voluntary exile 7

The guerrillas in El Salvador received weapons smuggled recently from Nicaragua
by the Sandinistas, the party's army officers acknowledged. But they pledged
that the assistance has been halted.  5

Argentine defends release of "dirty war" leaders 4

A North American common market is the aim of trade talks between the United
States, Canada and Mexico. Officials hope to reach agreement on the ground rules
for a three-way free-trade deal by Feb. 1. 29

NATIONAL 8-10

Leading makers of infant formula have been subpoenaed to hand over their
records. The Federal Trade Commission suspects that the manufacturers have
collaborated to raise prices. 1

The sub-minimum wage is not used by many companies, an initial survey shows.
This is a sharp contrast to the importance President Bush had given it.
Employers say they cannot attract suitabale workers for sub-minimum pay. 1

Remarks about Puerto Rican women made by a television commentator have enraged
Puerto Ricans and embroiled the nation's largest Spanish-language network in a
dispute threatening its advertising and viewer base.  1

Taxes from a nuclear power plant in Seneca, Ill., make its school system the
state's richest. Although few communities would accept a nuclear plant,
legislators want to spread the money from such plants evenly around the state. 1

Regulations on liquor advertising are being sought by Washington doctors.If
successful, this will be the last New Year's for advertisements linking alcohol
with gilded professionals, bathing suit romps and a party-loving dog.  8

Missouri father blocked from letting comatose daughter die 8

The fiscal crisis in Massachusetts is the biggest challenge facing William Weld,
who will take the Governor's office Thursday. Mr. Weld said he can balance the
budget, although he has yet to say how. 8

Political memo: The new language of politics,-- the 10- or 15-second sound bite,
was characterized by a rougher edge in 1990. It was a year of "This will not be
another Vietnam" rather than "America's back." 9

President Bush will soon name appointees to the Legal Services Corporation, but
there is little likelihood his action will reduce the ideological turmoil
surrounding the issue of legal services for the poor over the last decade. 10

Gangs are said to plot against Los Angeles police 10

REGIONAL 25-28

The issue of crime in New York City in 1990 was pushed into the conciousness of
the city and to the top of Mayor Dinkins's agenda. The police estimate that
homicides will reach 2,200 before Jan. 1 -- a new high. 25

A pregnant woman was shot and critically injured and her 23-year-old companion
was killed as the couple sat in a parked car in the Bronx and a man opened fire
on them with a semiautomatic weapon. 27

The first warnings of the subway fire by the Transit Authority gave no hint of
the calamity's magnitude and led medical and rescue teams to concentrate efforts
at the wrong place, city and state officials said. 25

A suspect in a theater shooting has been arrested. A Queens teen-ager was
charged in the shootout at a Christmas Day showing of "The Godfather, Part III"
on Long Island that left one moviegoer dead. 26 Homeless people in New York
City, who are making hard decisions about where to ride out the winter, ask the
same question as many city officials and advocates: where will the money come
from for solutions? 25

Inmates in some New York prisons will no longer have weekday visitors because of
budget cuts. Prisoners' advocates and correction officers are protesting the
decision. 28

A tenement on Orchard Street on the Lower East Side was the home of 7,000
immigrants between 1863 and 1939. An ambitious project seeks to identify each
person and reconstruct the life of the building. 26

"Babies" stolen in night at a museum in Harlem 27

A lesson in history of old ships 26

Neediest Cases 26

BUSINESS DIGEST 29

SportsMonday

Basketball: North Carolina tops Stanford 40

Wolfpack inquiry winds down 40

Knicks' coach isn't in hurry to press 44

Column: Anderson on the Giants 38

Features: Not all games for commissioners 44

Question Box 44

Football: Giants struggle to win 37

Jets beat Buccaneers 37

Colorado refuses to give up 37

A.F.C. going down to the wire 38

Sunlight has Giants beaming 38

Raiders win A.F.C. West title 39

Bowl victory after 42 years 40

Texas aiming for No. 1 40

Georgia Tech in a title role 41

Golf: Turning points of 1990 40

Hockey: Rangers tie Devils 45

Obituaries 24

Hubert Delany, ex-New York City family court justice

David Saperstein, lawyer who helped to create the S.E.C.

Richard Dunne, ex-director of the Gay Men's Health Crisis

Arts/Entertainment

Hard times for rare-book dealers 11

Sinatra birthday albums 11

Carlos Fuentes's new venture 11

Ben J. Wattenberg's rosy forecast C20

Music: A Soviet composer's piano trio 13

Mandy Patinkin concert 14

Dance: Ailey troupe performs 14

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials 22

Root for the foreign airlines

The latest joke in Albany

Living with the Louds, redux

Brent Staples: Black politics

Letters22

William Safire: Office pool, 1991 23

Anthony Lewis: Happy New Year?  23

Remember Christmas Island? It's now Kiritimati 23

Stewart I. Edelstein: Here's to a really New Year 23

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 343 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF;
Quayle Meets With Saudi Royalty And Seeks More Aid for Military

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 483 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, Dec. 30


Vice President Dan Quayle met with this country's rulers today and said he
wanted the Saudis and Kuwait's exiled Government to provide greater financial
support to the United States military effort in the Persian Gulf.

"They will have to be making more contributions" because of the likelihood that
American troops will remain in the gulf longer than initially anticipated, the
Vice President told reporters before his meetings.

"We do expect collective responsibility to be exhibited," he said.

American officials traveling with Mr. Quayle said King Fahd had given them the
impression that the Saudis would provide more financial aid, although no figures
were discussed.

Three-Day Visit

Mr. Quayle's three-day visit to the gulf comes two weeks before the Jan. 15
deadline set by the United Nations Security Council for an Iraqi withdrawal from
Kuwait.

He met separately with King Fahd and Crown Prince Abdullah shortly after his
arrival. He planned to meet with the exiled Emir of Kuwait on Tuesday after a
New Year's visit to some of the more than 300,000 United States troops in the
region.

Duration of Deployment

Aboard Air Force Two during his flight to Saudi Arabia, Mr. Quayle said he would
discuss with the Saudis the American determination to get the forces of
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq out of Kuwait and explain that the United
States expected greater financial support as its effort grew in size and
duration.

The Pentagon previously projected the cost of the deployment at $8.2 billion
through the end of 1990. But the costs are expected to increase because of the
additional troops currently being sent. It has been estimated that a full-scale
war would cost as much as $1 billion to $2 billion a day.

"You are seeing other nations making contributions," Mr. Quayle said on the
flight. He said he would thank the Saudis and Kuwaitis "for the contributions
they have made thus far, but point out that more contributions will have to be
made because the crisis is going to continue."

Billions Already Contributed

So far, Saudi Arabia has contributed $9 billion, nearly half of it in cash and
the rest in military support for United States troops in Saudi Arabia, according
to the State Department. Kuwait has given $2.5 billion, United States officials
said.

Saudi Arabia also has spent $3.9 billion and Kuwait $3.3 billion to help
countries like Turkey and Egypt, which have suffered severe economic
repercussions from the United Nations-imposed economic sanctions against Iraq.

Mr. Quayle will spend much of New Year's Day visiting with American troops.
Among those deployed to the region are units of the Indiana National Guard, in
which he served during the Vietnam War. He was later embroiled in controversy
over whether he had used family connections to get into the Guard unit rather
than risk being drafted and sent to Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
