



Download Request: All Documents: 1-275
Time Of Request: Thursday, November 23, 2017  13:02:39 EST
Send To:

MEGADEAL, ACADEMIC UNIVERSE
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
LIBRARY
CHICAGO, IL


Terms: ((Vietnam OR Viet Nam) and Date(geq(10/01/1993) and leq(12/31/1993)))


Source: The New York Times
Project ID:



                               1 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Colin Powell, Who Led U.S. Military Into a New Era, Resigns

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1060 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 30


Gen. Colin L. Powell, who defined the United States' post-cold-war military
doctrine, retired today as popular with America's armed forces as with the
average American who never served in harm's way.

That appeal, which has drawn speculation that the final chapter in General
Powell's soldier-statesman career may yet be written in the White House, derives
from his commitment to the armed services as well as to his stature as the first
black to serve as the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

General Powell has had a knack for separating various public personas into
discrete compartments. He talked tough to troops in the Saudi desert. He left
skeptical lawmakers spellbound. He oozed self-confidence to millions of
Americans when leading the United States into a Mideast war.

'It's Hard to Leave'

In a farewell ceremony today on the parade grounds of Fort Myer, Va., bands
played, flags flapped in a blustery fall breeze and fighter jets soared in
salute to a soldier who President Clinton said symbolized "a victory for the
American dream, for the principle that in our nation, people can rise as far as
their talent, their capacity, their dreams and their discipline will carry
them."

But as General Powell received his second Presidential Medal of Freedom --
President George Bush awarded him his first -- the 56-year-old general waxed
wistfully on a career that began amid the turmoil of Vietnam and ended amid the
crumbling of Communism.

"The Army has officially advised me that, for record purposes, I have served 35
years, 3 months, 21 days, and, as we say in the infantry, a wake-up," General
Powell said. "I loved every single day of it. And it's hard to leave."

In many ways, Colin Powell was at the right time at the right place. His blend
of combat experience and political savvy -- he served as President Ronald
Reagan's national security adviser -- vaulted him over several more senior
officers for the Chairman's job in 1989.

But much of his influence resulted from a change in law in 1986 to consolidate
the powers of the Chairman, leaving him as the single most important military
adviser to the President.

Protecting Status Quo

As the nation's most influential soldier-statesman in decades, General Powell
wielded these new, broader powers more to protect the core values of the armed
services than to act as an innovator.

His philosophy of decisive force, combined with a deep emotional attachment to
the traditions of the American military, made him largely a conservative figure.
General Powell resisted military intervention in Bosnia and Herzegovina, opposed
a major restructuring of the armed forces' roles and missions, and argued
against accepting openly gay soldiers in the military.

On General Powell's watch, American troops marched into 27 crises, including the
Persian Gulf war, the invasion of Panama, riot control in Los Angeles and the
military operation in Somalia.

In doing so, his philosophy on using decisive military force only when there are
clear political and military goals has come to define America's post-cold-war
doctrine on the use of force.

'A Conservative Tinkerer'

It is a doctrine born of the indelible lessons from his generation's seminal
conflict, the Vietnam War, as well as the failure of American policy in Lebanon.

But his record is also marked by a number of contradictions: the military's
greatest triumph -- the defeat of Iraq -- came in an operation he was initially
reluctant to launch. And the tremendous power he amassed from his public
standing, political skills and changes in the military's structure were employed
largely to brake against precipitous changes in the status quo.

"There's no question Powell is the smartest of the chiefs, but he's a
conservative tinkerer," said another member of the Joint Chiefs. "He prefers
working around the margins."

General Powell has been a professional soldier who has followed the orders of
his Commander in Chief. But he has been equally driven by an almost mystical
commitment to the 1.7-million-member armed forces and to a military culture that
has defined his 35-year career.

Won Over Many Critics

"You've got to see our force as a human, living organism and treat it as such,"
General Powell said in a speech last November.

Anything that threatened to disrupt that balance felt General Powell's scorn:
limited intervention in Bosnia, open homosexuality in the military, allowing
women to serve in all-ground-combat units.

Despite these stances, he won over many critics if not by persuasion than by his
principles and charisma.

Few Harvard University graduates, for instance, agreed with his stance on
homosexuals in the military. But when he delivered the commencement address at
the university in June, a wave of applause from the 35,000 students and
spectators swelled to a roar when he was introduced.

Armed with a razor wit, General Powell is also a bit of a ham. At a dinner given
last week by the admirals and generals on his staff, General Powell stunned the
guests when he joined a Navy steel band to belt out a soulful rendition of Harry
Belafonte's 1950's hit, "The Banana Boat Song."

Not since Douglas MacArthur and Dwight D. Eisenhower has a soldier's retirement
prompted such political speculation. But friends say General Powell likens
himself more to his idol, George C. Marshall, a politically skilled general who
remained above the fray of electoral politics.

With a $6 million book contract in hand and speeches at $60,000 each filling his
schedule, General Powell has plenty on his mind for now. But he has not ruled
out future public service.

As his final week wound down, a blur of testimonial dinners and visits from
family and friends enveloped General Powell. At his last staff meeting this
morning, the 25 officers gave him a standing ovation.

Adm. David E. Jeremiah, the Vice Chairman, will serve as the acting Chairman
until President Clinton's nominee, Gen. John M. Shalikashvili, is confirmed, as
expected, by the Senate in the next few weeks.

Meantime, General Powell has received his retired military identification card.
"The young Army captain who gave it to him said he could start using it on
Friday," said a friend of General Powell's. "I think it really hit him then.
This is a lot more emotional than he thought it was going to be."


NAME: Colin L. Powell

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Colin L. Powell and his wife, Alma, watched a parade
yesterday in honor of his retirement at Fort Myer, Va. With the Powells were,
from left, former President George Bush, Barbara Bush, Tipper Gore, Vice
President Al Gore, Navy Secretary John Dalton, Hillary Rodham Clinton, President
Clinton and Defense Secretary Les Aspin. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NO OUTSIDE REVIEW IN THE BROWN CASE

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 587 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 30


Attorney General Janet Reno said today that she would not appoint an independent
prosecutor to investigate accusations by a Vietnamese businessman that Commerce
Secretary Ronald H. Brown agreed to be paid $700,000 in exchange for his help in
lifting a trade embargo against Vietnam.

Ms. Reno said that the case might have warranted the appointment of an
independent prosecutor under the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 but that the
law, which established a procedure for judicially appointed prosecutors, expired
in December 1992 and had not been reinstated by Congress.

Justice Department regulations permit Ms. Reno to appoint an outside prosecutor
with the same powers as a prosecutor appointed by the judiciary. While legal
experts consider a prosecutor appointed by the judiciary more independent than
one appointed by an Attorney General, both kinds of special prosecutors operate
with the same degree of autonomy and can be removed by the Attorney General only
for a specific cause.

Ms. Reno insisted any appointment she made would not quell concerns about the
independence of the inquiry.

'Try My Level Best'

"If I appoint the person or select the person, you're still going to question
the conflict as long as I am involved in that process," Ms. Reno said at her
weekly news conference with reporters. "Thus, what I've got to do is make sure
that I do it the right way, and I'm going to try my level best."

Still, the Attorney General's comments were somewhat surprising given her
longstanding support for the principle of having disinterested, outside
prosecutors investigate accusations against high-level Administration officials.

Moreover, the course she has chosen leaves the investigation in the hands of the
Clinton Justice Department, managed by some of Ms. Reno's closest associates.
And she said today that they have reported to her on the case -- although she
asserted that her role was limited to advising "the U.S. Attorney that I want to
make sure it's being done the right way."

President Clinton seemed to set the tone for the Administration's approach to
Mr. Brown on Wednesday, with his warm expressions of confidence in his Commerce
Secretary, whose dealings with a Vietnamese business are under scrutiny by a
Federal grand jury in Florida.

On Monday, Reid H. Weingarten, Mr. Brown's lawyer, acknowledged that Mr. Brown
met three times with the businessman, Nguyen Van Hao. The lawyer said Mr. Hao
was interested in seeking Mr. Brown's professional advice on trade issues
involving Vietnam, but denied the two ever discussed any payment in return for
Mr. Brown's services.

Call for Hearings

The lawyer's comments represented the first time Mr. Brown had admitted any
contact with Mr. Hao, although he had been asked about it by reporters for
months. Until this week, Mr. Brown's explanations, made through his
subordinates, suggested he did not know Mr. Hao and had never met him.

The accusations against Mr. Brown were made by Ly Thanh Binh, Mr. Hao's former
business partner in Florida. Mr. Binh has said that he never met Mr. Brown but
that Mr. Hao told him of the prospective business deal with Mr. Brown.

Today, Republican House members brought Mr. Binh to Capitol Hill for a
well-publicized meeting that seemed designed to discomfort the Clinton
Administration over the issue.

Representative Dana Rohrabacher, Republican of California, said that after the
meeting the Republican lawmakers agreed there should be Congressional hearings
on the matter.


LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: An independent prosecutor will not be appointed to investigate
accusations against Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown, seated, said Attorney
General Janet Reno. Mr. Brown conferred yesterday at a Cabinet meeting with
David R. Gergen, counselor to the President. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 4; Style Desk

LENGTH: 406 words


Twenty-five years ago, JOHN WALL, an assistant United States attorney in Boston,
prosecuted Dr. BENJAMIN SPOCK, the Rev. WILLIAM SLOANE COFFIN and three other
defendants on charges that they conspired to counsel, aid and abet young men
evading the draft during the Vietnam War.

Tomorrow evening, Mr. Wall, now in private practice in Boston, will break bread
with them at the annual Bill of Rights dinner of the Massachusetts Civil
Liberties Union. The organization will award the five -- Dr. Spock, Mr. Coffin,
MITCHELL GOODMAN, MICHAEL FERBER and MARCUS RASKIN -- the Roger Baldwin Award,
named for the founder of the national A.C.L.U.

Many of the lawyers in the case, which led to the conviction of four of the five
defendants and then to a reversal on appeal, will be among the guests at the
Park Plaza Hotel. They include TELFORD TAYLOR, who had been the chief American
prosecutor in the Nuremberg war-criminal trials, and JAMES ST. CLAIR, who became
President Richard M. Nixon's lawyer during the Watergate investigation.

It is sure to be a memorable reunion between former co-defendants -- some of
whom have not seen each other since the trial -- and one-time opponents.

When Mr. Wall received the invitation, "My reaction was that I would be honored
to go, but please check with the defendants because of the pain I caused them,"
he said yesterday. "I don't want to antagonize them. "

He recalled that even as he was arguing for conviction he told the jury, "If Dr.
Spock goes down in this case, he goes down like a man with dignity, worthy of
respect."

"I said those exact words then and I believe them now," he said. "All of the
defendants were acting according to their conscience and that, in large part,
was what the trial was about.

"I thought that they had violated the law, but I had mixed emotions about
whether it was good judgment to prosecute them. I believed that we were
prosecuting and putting in jail and driving out of the country some of the
people with the most tender consciences, some of our best and brightest. I was
given the chance to re-prosecute some of them, and I refused. Today, I wouldn't
prosecute at all."

Speaking of the accolades that are sure to be bestowed on him and his former
colleagues, Mr. Coffin said yesterday from his home in Strafford, Vt., "If you
know religion and American history, you know that the lawbreakers of yesterday
are often the heroes of today."

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Art in Review

BYLINE: By CHARLES HAGEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 23; Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 238 words



Judith Joy Ross
 James Danziger Gallery
 130 Prince Street (near Wooster Street)
 SoHo
 Through Oct. 23

Like a post-office display of mug shots, Judith Joy Ross's portraits of visitors
to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington ring the walls of a small room in
this gallery's new space. The portraits, taken in 1983 and '84, have a shallow
focus and purplish color that give their subjects a dreamy, intense air.

The people in these pictures tend to stare glumly into the camera. For the most
part, they are an awkward-looking bunch, seemingly lost in thought as they stand
next to the wall of the memorial and face the camera. Young men look stern;
women wear blank expressions. Two Marines in dress white uniforms hover before
the reflecting wall like ominous ghosts.

Ms. Ross's shaping hand is obvious in these unflattering images. She emphasizes
the grotesque features of the people she photographs -- their beady eyes and
squeezed heads, scrawny necks and bad skin -- to such an extent that some of the
pictures verge on being caricatures.

It's not clear what point Ms. Ross is aiming at. Are the stunned-looking people
meant to signify the emotional trauma of Vietnam? Is she commenting on the kind
of people who visit this charged spot? The air of deep emotion in these pictures
seems forced, more the result of the photographer's devices than of the
subjects' reactions.   CHARLES HAGEN

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

For a 60's Radical, Temper Justice With Mercy

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 346 words


To the Editor:

I was moved by your Sept. 16 and 17 front-page articles on the voluntary
surrender to the police by Katherine Ann Power after 23 years underground as an
anti-war radical wanted for bank robbery. Your sympathetic study of how a
middle-class college girl got caught up in the 1960's guerrilla youth struggle
against an unending Vietnam War evoked an era.

But I was disappointed by "The Prodigal Daughter" (editorial, Sept. 18), a
tight-lipped inadequate conclusion to the brilliant recapturing of 60's turmoil
of the two articles. I am old enough to remember an earlier pre-ideological
climate, when Americans were universally admired for our pragmatism, softened by
tolerance and magnanimity.

Your editorial suggested that Ms. Power may be considered, along with the
unfortunate policeman killed in the band's armed holdup, a nonmilitary casualty
of that hateful polarizing war she was desperately trying to halt (a motive
shared by nonviolent thousands, myself included, who marched in New York and
demonstrated in Washington for peace). Your editorial concluded that "she can be
understood." What I missed in your final paragraph was a note of compassion and
perhaps also an appeal for a mitigation of the penalty.

I would not ask that Ms. Power go scot-free. She was implicated in the
commission of a vicious crime, though she herself engaged in no act of violence.
What I had hoped for from you was a final appeal for a lessening of the sentence
she faces.

Would not one year of incarceration, separating her from her husband and child,
satisfy the public demand for justice? After all, the duration of a prison term
is commonly determined by the success of the rehabilitation, to which our
justice system is committed.

For 23 years Ms. Power has expiated her guilt through suffering its torment,
finally compelling her surrender. During that time, she reconstructed her life
as a businesswoman and teacher, wife and mother -- at no cost to the taxpayer.
Justice without mercy is unjust.

LOUIS GOLOMB
Lido Beach, L.I., Sept. 20, 1993

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

For a 60's Radical, Temper Justice With Mercy;
Too Much Tolerance

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 289 words


To the Editor:

In "The Prodigal Daughter," your Sept. 18 editorial on the surrender of
Katherine Ann Power, you reach the appalling conclusion that the behavior of Ms.
Power and others like her could perhaps be considered "logical" in the context
of the 1960's.

Do you think the family of Officer Walter Schroeder, who was shot in the back of
the head by one of Ms. Power's accomplices, sees any logic in robbery and
murder? Do you believe the individuals who brutally beat the truck driver
Reginald Denny acted logically in view of "rage" during the Los Angeles riots?
Maybe the man who recently killed an abortion doctor acted logically out of his
strong belief that abortion is murder.

The philosophy that underlies your stunning conclusion holds that tolerance is
the ultimate goal of society, and that therefore rights and wrongs do not exist,
since virtually all behavior is to be tolerated. In your view of the world, all
truth is relative.

Unfortunately, this philosophy has, in one short generation, led to a rending of
our fragile social fabric and a near-collapse of moral values. For a society
with no limits on tolerance cannot recognize and confront evil behavior. What
Katherine Ann Power did was wrong and cannot be excused under any circumstances.
Your rationalization of robbery and murder is as shameful as Ms. Power's
incredible claim that the Vietnam War is to blame for her actions.

This country was founded on the principle that individual freedom and equality
provide the surest way to a just society. This is a much nobler concept than the
limitless pursuit of tolerance and compassion, which constitutes the core of
today's bankrupt liberalism.

ALAN B. MENKES
New York, Sept. 21, 1993

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

For a 60's Radical, Temper Justice With Mercy;
Our Vietnam Blunder

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 159 words


To the Editor:

You are to be commended for "Now Shake Hands With Vietnam" (editorial, Sept.
17). This gesture is long overdue, especially now that we have an evaluation
from our former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm. William Crowe Jr.,
telling us that Vietnam was "a war in which neither America's survival nor its
future was at stake." In my vocabulary that is close to admitting Washington was
wrong to get involved in Indochina, especially with our absymal ignorance of the
territory.

It is time our Government admitted what all the world has long known, that we
were wrong, and that it is up to Americans to make amends, whether or not the
Vietnamese have dissembled on prisoner of war and missing in action figures. We
might even start focusing on the fate of the thousands of Amerasian children
fathered by our soldiers and abandoned when we withdrew from Vietnam.

WALTER A. SHELDON
Lido Beach, L.I., Sept. 18, 1993

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 922 words



International     2-6

IN THE OPEN, ISRAEL AND JORDAN

After 45 years of secret meetings, Israeli and Jordanian leaders shook hands at
the White House, confirming that they are normalizing their diplomatic and
economic ties.  1

More than 40 nations pledged $2 billion to help the Palestinians.  2

IN INDIA, A DISASTER'S AFTERMATH

As funeral pyres burned for victims of the largest earthquake to hit India in 50
years, the death toll -- estimated at 10,000 to 30,000 -- is unknown since many
are buried in rubble.  1

JAPAN IS SHIFTING TO MERIT PAY

Japanese companies are abandoning a seniority-based pay system and introducing
merit pay, under which those who perform better are paid more and promoted
faster.  1

Buckingham Palace workers should lose perks, a consultant says.  6

IN MOSCOW, HIGH TENSION AGAIN

The standoff at Russia's besieged Parliament building returned to high tension
after defiant lawmakers disavowed an agreement on disarming defenders inside.  4

Boris Yeltsin says he opposes NATO membership for East Europe.  4

Toronto Journal: Russian in Canada creates a boon for business.  4

U.N. ACTION ON SERBIA DELAYED

Russia delayed Security Council action against the President of Serbia by
objecting to efforts intended to encourage him to press separatist Serbs in
Croatia to resolve their conflict with the Government.  3

U.S. TO PRESS U.N. ON SOMALIA

Administration officials plan to press the United Nations to move faster on a
political accord in Somalia and deploy troops from other nations but set no
deadline for withdrawing American forces.  3

PERUVIAN HOLDS FIRM ON REBELS

Showing confidence in subduing Shining Path guerrillas, Peru's President told
the General Assembly that he had rejected an offer for peace talks by their
imprisoned leader.  5

U.S. SEEKS TO EASE CHINA TENSIONS

The White House has scheduled high-level meetings with Chinese officials in an
effort to ease tensions between Washington and Beijing.  5

U.S. POLICY AIDS JAPAN ENERGY

Tokyo is relieved that Washington's new nonproliferation policy allows Japan and
Western Europe to keep producing near-weapons-grade material for nuclear power
plants.  6

National     6-9

NAVY LEADER FACES DISMISSAL

The Navy Secretary asked that the Navy's top officer, Adm. Frank Kelso, be
removed for failing to show proper leadership at a convention of naval aviators
where scores of women were assaulted.  1

REPORT SPARES TOP F.B.I. OFFICIALS

A Justice Department report on the fire that killed most members of a cult near
Waco, Tex., will criticize agents who were at the scene, but generally exonerate
officials in Washington, officials said.  1

EVIDENCE IN BROWN CASE

Federal investigators examining a claim that Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown
sought $700,000 to help end a trade embargo against Vietnam uncovered evidence
that the Vietnamese were preparing to establish a bank account.  7

TURMOIL IN MORMON CHURCH

Early Mormon leaders feared the wrath of outsiders. Lately they have viewed
their gravest threat as coming from within: intellectuals and feminists in the
temples.  7

MORE TAX AT THE PUMP

The public made its first contributions to reducing the budget deficit as
motorists paid a new gasoline tax at the pump.  7

CONVICTION IN RACIAL CASE

A man with ties to white supremacists was convicted of making illegal weapons,
and his wife was convicted of conspiracy, in the first trial growing out of a
sweep in July of Los Angeles hate groups.  9

GINSBURG JOINS SUPREME COURT

Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg took her seat on the Supreme Court, the first time
two women have sat on the nation's highest court.  9

The index of leading economic indicators rose in August.  45
Chrysler and its unions reached a tentative labor agreement.  45
Beliefs: Medical ethicists look back on their role in the health plan.  9

Metro Digest   25

SOCIAL PROBLEMS AWAIT MAYOR

In the four years since they last ran for mayor, David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W.
Giuliani have developed distinctly different approaches to homelessness and
welfare reform. In the same time, the already staggering scale of the city's
social ills has worsened.  1

Business Digest   45

Arts/Entertainment  11-19
Fire in Paik work at Dusseldorf museum is under investigation.  11
Moscow Ballet Competition.  19
Film: "Raining Stones." 11
"Freaked." 14
"Shades of Doubt." 16
"The Blue Kite." 16
"Blue." 16
Music: "Fidelio." 11
Joe Henry's country sound.  19
Gathering of trombonists.  19

Sports   31-35
Baseball: Braves topple Rockies.  31
Yanks clinch second place.  33
Boxing: Lewis retains title.  31
Column: Rhoden on college football.  31
Football: Don't laugh at Northwestern.  31
No favors for Giants' Moore.  35
Sports People 34

Obituaries   30
Alexander A. Drabik; first G.I. across the Remagen Bridge in 1945.
Reizl Bozyk, star of Yiddish theater.
Gustavo E. Brillembourg, lawyer.

Editorials/Op-Ed   22-23
Editorials
The real costs of Mideast peace.
Don't rush a bad crime bill.
A legislative infant, needing care.
Lighting up the lawyers.
Letters
Russell Baker: In russet mantle clad.
Robert V. Daniels: Yeltsin's no Jefferson. More like Pinochet.
Gordon C. Haber: The great Alaska wolf kill.
Melissa Mathison: Where is Gendun Rinchen?

Bridge 14
Chronicle 24
Crossword 15

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Inquiry on Commerce Secretary Finds Vietnam Bank Account Plan

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 640 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 1


Federal investigators examining a Vietnamese businessman's assertion that
Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown sought $700,000 to help end a trade embargo
against Vietnam have uncovered evidence that the Vietnamese were preparing to
establish a special bank account in Singapore, Administration officials said
today.

The evidence, in the form of transfers of an undisclosed sum of money in East
Asian banks, appears to corroborate portions of the account of Ly Thanh Binh,
the businessman who told the Federal authorities that a former associate
approached Mr. Brown last fall to enlist his help to improve trade relations
between the United States and Vietnam.

Mr. Binh has said the Vietnamese Government was trying to use the Indosuez Bank
in Singapore as a conduit to pay Mr. Brown. But it is not clear whether the
transfer of funds being scrutinized by the Federal authorities involved Indosuez
or, indeed, whether the financial records drew any connection between the funds
and Mr. Brown.

Mr. Brown has denied any wrongdoing, but he acknowledged through his lawyer that
he had met three times with Mr. Binh's former associate, Nguyen Van Hao, a
former Vietnamese official. Mr. Brown's lawyer, Reid H. Weingarten, has denied
that the Commerce Secretary ever discussed accepting money from the Vietnamese.
The lawyer said that two of the meetings occurred before Mr. Brown was appointed
Commerce Secretary and the third took place in February, after his confirmation.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation is trying to learn whether Mr. Brown took
money as a public official in return for favors.

Authorities Hear of Plans

Mr. Binh has said that Mr. Brown was to receive $700,000, plus a percentage of
new business he generated for Vietnam, in addition to concessions from oil and
gas reserves opened as a result of ending the embargo.

Mr. Binh said the money was to be funneled from Vietnam through a Hong Kong bank
to a Singapore bank. In Singapore, he said, it was to be deposited in an account
in the name of Mr. Hao or Marc Ashton, a Haitian friend of Mr. Brown's who first
introduced Mr. Hao to the Commerce Secretary, or Lillian Madsen, Mr. Ashton's
sister-in-law and a friend of Mr. Brown's.

Mr. Binh said a total of $1 million was to be deposited in the account, $700,000
for Mr. Brown and $300,000 for the Vietnam Development Corporation, the entity
that Mr. Hao intended to establish to funnel American investment to Vietnam.

U.S. News & World Report said tonight in a news release describing an account in
next week's issue that the F.B.I. was looking at NVH Associates, a company that
Mr. Hao incorporated in Hong Kong and the United States. The magazine said
Federal agents were seeking to determine whether the company might have been
involved in directing any payments to Mr. Brown.

Thus far, no evidence has emerged to indicate that Mr. Brown received any money
from the account, nor is there any evidence that he engaged in any unlawful act,
the Administration officials said. A telephone call to Mr. Brown's lawyer today
was not returned.

This evening, ABC News reported that Mr. Hao had sent at least two faxes from
his house in Florida to the chief of staff for Vietnam's Prime Minister, Vo Van
Kiet. The communications summarized Mr. Hao's meetings with Mr. Brown and
described the meetings as positive and indicated that Mr. Brown had agreed to
work with the Vietnamese representatives.

Today, the head of a Vietnam veterans' group that opposes normalization of
relations with Hanoi pending a full accounting of all missing Americans said
that Mr. Brown should resign because of the accusations swirling around him.

Mr. Brown's supporters have said that opponents of improved ties with Vietnam
have quietly helped spread Mr. Binh's accusations in order to maintain the trade
embargo.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Not Vietcong's Fault

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 121 words


To the Editor:

The brief Associated Press article on the retirement of the aircraft carrier
Forrestal (Sept. 12) repeatedly refers to a "Vietcong firebombing" in 1967. This
is in error.

At 10:51 A.M. on July 29, 1967, the Forrestal was in the fifth day of its first
(and last) period off the coast of North Vietnam. Fire broke out at the aft end
of the flight deck as the ship was preparing to launch the second strike of the
day. Fed by fuel and exploding ordinance, the fire spread forward, almost as far
as the island structure, eventually causing the death of 134 crewman.

Tragic as this accident was, it cannot be attributed to any action by the
Vietcong.

RICHARD V. PORCELLI
Yonkers, Sept. 17, 1993

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: October 3, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1431 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  60   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 2          1   LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues
                the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour."

 3      2   6   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 4      5   4   THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                Concluding the "Griffin & Sabine" trilogy.

 5          1   SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two
                Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics
                and murder.

 6      3  25   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 7      4  29   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 8      6   8   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction
                of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and
                woman and for the woman's first lover.

 9      8   4   STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The problems,
                political and sexual, of a Florida Congressman.

 10     7   9   STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a
                train robber and killer.

 11    12   4   THE DEATH AND LIFE OF SUPERMAN, by Roger Stern.
                (Spectra/Bantam, $19.95.) A novel about the comic-book hero,
                including his rebirth in the near future.

 12     9  15   PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.)
                The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted
                Cherokee daughter.

 13         1   POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $23.) A single
                mother and her teen-age daughter go on a spree after winning
                $60 million in a lottery.

 14    10  12   THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) A Zurich
                hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers, dope smugglers
                and international terrorists.

 15    16  37   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                illustrated cards and letters.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   4   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 2      2  21   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 3      6   6   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 4      3   7   MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays
                suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected
                ways and places.

 5      4  12   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A
                psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their
                effects on a person's self.

 6      5  60   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 7      7  17   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 8     13   3   CASE CLOSED, by Gerald Posner. (Random House, $25.) A
                reassessment of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.

 9      8  42   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A
                psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.

 10         1   MORE MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Putnam,
                $21.95.) Stories about country music stars from the host of the
                "Nashville Now" television show.

 11         1   UNDER THE TARNISHED DOME, by Don Yaeger and Douglas S. Looney.
                (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A critique of Notre Dame's recent
                football program.

 12         1   THE FOUNTAIN OF AGE, by Betty Friedan. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                A call for men and women to regard life after age 60 as an
                exciting adventure.

 13    10  15   DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf,
                $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.

 14     9  17   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley,
                $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher
                and radio commentator.

 15    12  16   THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A
                journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history
                of the 1950's.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  10   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 2      3  20   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication and
                relationships between the sexes.

 3      4   2   THE WINNER WITHIN, by Pat Riley. (Putnam, $22.95.) The
                basketball coach's advice for achieving successful teamwork in
                sports and other endeavors.

 4      2  14   EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.)
                Counsel about diet.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 18, at 3,050
bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops,
department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

ACROSS THE BRIDGE: Stories, by Mavis Gallant. (Random House, $19.) In these 11
lucid urban stories, most of which are set in Paris or Montreal, Mrs. Gallant's
wit and exactitude subvert the antiquity of her material.
THE BEAST WITHIN, by Adam Douglas. (Chapmans/Trafalgar Square, $24.95.) The
battle with the Devil is at the center of this careful dissection of the
werewolf legend, an illegal border crossing between man and beast.
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT IN AMERICAN HISTORY, by Lawrence M. Friedman. (Basic Books,
$30.) A law professor's impressive panoramic history of the criminal justice
system, which, he argues, hasn't controlled crime since Plymouth Rock and will
not control it now.
THE CULTURE OF DISBELIEF: How American Law and Politics Trivialize Religious
Devotion, by Stephen L. Carter. (Basic Books, $25.) A professor of law at Yale
examines what he calls a 20-year-old tendency to ban religion from public
discourse, and argues that a just balance of mutually respectful forces is
required, not a victory for church or secularism.
FEATHER CROWNS, by Bobbie Ann Mason. (HarperCollins, $23.) In Kentucky in 1900,
the birth of quintuplets stirs apocalyptic speculation and brings plenty of
unwanted change to the population of this substantial, attentive novel.
FIDEL CASTRO, by Robert E. Quirk. (Norton, $35.) An indictment, often
devastating, of its ego-driven subject and his works, drawn chiefly from public
materials by orthodox scholarship.
FLY FISHING THROUGH THE MIDLIFE CRISIS, by Howell Raines. (Morrow, $22.) The
editorial page editor of The New York Times nobly describes his passionate
fishermanship and the fly-fishing guru who helped him attain it.
THE GRISLY WIFE, by Rodney Hall. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) This volume of
Mr. Hall's Australian trilogy is narrated by a female missionary who has seen 32
years of dark and bloody doings since coming to New South Wales.
LENI RIEFENSTAHL: A Memoir, by Leni Riefenstahl. (St. Martin's, $35.) That she
put her art at the service of the Nazis is not seriously addressed in this
nevertheless spellbinding autobiography by the film maker, actress, mountaineer,
dancer and all-round uberachiever.
THE NORTON HISTORY OF CHEMISTRY, by William H. Brock. (Norton, $35.) A
discipline that has formed society far more than any war or revolution is here
made clear and accessible.
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) This
seductive meditation on the human condition by a Danish writer takes the form of
a suspense novel whose irresistible heroine is a Greenland Eskimo.
UTOPIA UNARMED: The Latin American Left After the Cold War, by Jorge G.
Castaneda. (Knopf, $27.50.) A scholar's history of the left since World War II,
and a program for leftist conduct now that revolution is a moribund ideal.

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

China in the Year 2000 -- Repressive? Expressive? Anarchic?

BYLINE: By Nicholas D. Kristof;  Nicholas D. Kristof, who recently completed
nearly five years as chief of the Beijing bureau of The Times, is now writing a
book about China with Sheryl WuDunn.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4924 words


The emperor appears to be dying.

Deng Xiaoping is a fighter, and it is possible he will hang on for months or
even years. But each time China's 89-year-old paramount leader hobbles a few
steps in one of his rare television appearances, his trembling hands and blank
stares invite a fundamental question: what next?

When an emperor last died in China, in 1976, the country changed course. Mao
Zedong's death led to basic changes in the way people lived: black miniskirts
replaced Mao jackets; angry rock music succeeded tunes like "The Party Is My
Mommy"; living standards surged so that many peasants could enjoy a measure of
prosperity for the first time in thousands of years.

The death of Emperor Deng may be just as significant, for the Communist Party
today faces a fundamental crisis of legitimacy. The expression in Chinese for
crisis is wei ji. It is made up of the term for danger, "wei," and the word for
opportunity, "ji." So a crisis, in Chinese, holds both danger and opportunity.
That is precisely the situation now for a country with a fifth of the world's
population. Imagine the possibilities: the Balkans, but with 1.1 billion people
and nuclear weapons. Or Japan, but with 25 times the territory and nine times
the population.

What will China be like in the year 2000? Predicting its course even a year from
now is like forecasting next year's weather. Nonetheless, while a return to
radical Maoism seems unlikely, three scenarios -- based on actual characters and
settings -- may best reflect the immense promise and perils of China in the
1990's.

THE AUTHORITARIAN STATE
May 4, 2000. Paoju Detention Center, one of Beijing's oldest jails. Rats and
roaches scurry along its dank hallways, and generations of prisoners have left
their graffiti on the stone walls. Torture has long been common in prisons
throughout China.

LIU YANWEN COUGHS quietly from a corner in Interrogation Room No. 4.

She never imagined pain and humiliation of this kind. When it began, she didn't
think she would last another minute, and yet the minutes, and days, have passed.
She never knew there was such a thing as a shackleboard -- an old door, the knob
still attached, with a set of handcuffs in each corner. Yet here she is,
fastened by her wrists and ankles to a shackleboard propped against a wall. A
hole in the door functions as her toilet. Twice a day, a guard hoses her off.

"We want to help you," says an Army officer -- the chief interrogator -- from
his chair several feet away. He pulls out a Marlboro, lights it with a gold
lighter and inhales twice. Like the two other men in the room, he wears a neatly
pressed Army uniform.

"Little Liu, you must realize that you're just an egg attacking a rock," the
Army man continues. "On May Day, when you threw the paint at the great portrait
of the Generalissimo at Tiananmen, you only hit the frame. We washed it off in
10 minutes. You accomplished nothing."

Liu grits her teeth. "You should never have taken down the portrait of Mao and
replaced it with one of Chi Haotian."

"Chi Haotian is the great Generalissimo who keeps our country strong," responds
the chief interrogator. "China is rich now. It's the envy of the world."

"Chi Haotian is a fascist tuzaizi" -- a little rabbit -- "and this is a
Government for the rich. Aaaaah!" She screams as a cigarette sizzles against her
left cheek. She wriggles violently, aggravating the raw sores on her ankles. The
youngest of the interrogators laughs shrilly; he isn't used to seeing naked
women being burned with cigarettes. The others watch obsequiously as the chief
interrogator relights his cigarette.

Liu Yanwen closes her eyes, remembering how it all began with Old Meng, hating
him, hating them all. She wonders if they will kill her.

She never thought it would end like this. Like most Chinese, she welcomed the
coup of '95. In her new brick home in Tongzhi Village, she watched as Chi
Haotian, then the Defense Minister, appeared on television to announce the
overthrow of the Gang of Three. Chi explained that corruption and inflation had
eaten away at the country. Yet the Gang of Three lived lavishly, even spending
$7,000 each to buy American-made whirlpool baths, skimming off the cream of the
nation's profits and harming the war effort. The war could have been won months
earlier if it hadn't been for their mismanagement. The People's Army had not
wanted to intervene, but there was no alternative.

Even after the war, with the South China Sea secured and the Vietnamese
aggressors defeated, the Gang of Three had squabbled among themselves as prices
soared and social order collapsed. "Corruption and crime are attacking China
today, and they are just as dangerous as any invading army," Chi Haotian said.
"It is time for the People's Army to defend the motherland."

When she heard that, Liu Yanwen whooped in delight. Since Deng Xiaoping's death
in early 1994, corruption, chaos and inflation had increased tenfold. After the
Vietnamese attack on the Chinese Spratly Islands in '95, inflation soared. Now,
at last, someone was taking charge again and talking about order.

The Generalissimo's decision to dismantle the Communist Party and create a new
umbrella organization, the Patriotic Association to Save China, was welcomed at
home and abroad. President Clinton, narrowly winning re-election, characterized
the fall of the Chinese Communist Party as an achievement of his tough foreign
policy. The new British Prime Minister, John Smith of the Labor Party, said it
would be inappropriate to impose sanctions against military leaders who had
deposed "an odious Communist dinosaur."

There was, of course, some diplomatic unpleasantness when the Patriotic
Association showed the executions of the Gang of Three on national television.
Hardly anyone in China, however, felt the least bit sorry for Li Peng, Jiang
Zemin or Zhu Rongji.

Through this mist of memories, Liu hears the chief interrogator speaking.

"So, tell us," he is saying, "when did you form this underground clique to
overthrow the Patriotic Association?"

Liu closes her eyes, trying to remember. Fire sears her other cheek. She screams
again and as she writhes the handcuffs bite into her flesh, bringing on a pain
so great she feels on the verge of blacking out.

The chief interrogator looks at his watch. Almost 11:30 -- time to hurry things
up a bit if he's to make it to lunch on time. He lights another cigarette.

"Two years ago," she whispers. "October '98. I was working at a shoe factory.
Worked 14 hours a day, seven days a week. The factory manager -- Old Meng --
rode around in a Mercedes-Benz."

She pauses but quickly struggles on. She doesn't want to be burned again.

"It was a little factory along the coast, in Wenzhou. My sister and I worked
there. Old Meng wanted me. Said he had hired me; said he owned me. I kept saying
no. Finally, he put me and my sister on the sole-making machine. It's a huge
machine. We couldn't manage it. My sister got caught in the gears. She was 16."

"So you've been a bandit since '98?"

"A freedom fighter!"

He raises his cigarette and Liu screams: "You're right, a bandit! A bandit!
After I heard about the Beijing University uprising at the beginning of last
year, I came to Beijing. After Beijing University was closed down----."

"Suspended," the chief interrogator interrupts.

"Suspended. After the university was suspended, lots of students formed
underground groups. I joined a cell in the underground Communist Party. A fair
society -- that's all we want. No rich capitalists and no poor peasants. No more
exploitation of the people." She pauses. "Tell me something" -- her voice is
stronger now -- "you were all Communists 10 years ago. Why are you hurting me
for being a Communist?"

The chief interrogator takes a drag on his cigarette.

"We never really believed," he says dismissively. "The main thing is we need to
build the country. We need order. We need to make China strong and rich. And
we're getting there. You know, you Communists represent a tiny number of
lunatics. Economic growth was 8.9 percent last year. Peasants, workers --
everybody's happy! Everybody's living better than ever. The world respects
China. Beijing will probably get the Olympics in the year 2008."

"The Americans----."

"Those turtle eggs!" The chief interrogator is contemptuous. "They complain
about human rights, but what they really care about is money. This is the
fastest-growing economy in the world -- 8.9 percent last year. That's what
Americans respect."

Liu is silent. She remembers her first hint of disillusionment with the
Generalissimo. Listening to a BBC broadcast, she heard that the 1995 war in the
South China Sea had not been started by Vietnam, as the newspapers claimed.
Instead, the BBC described it as a military adventure by the Generalissimo to
consolidate authority and depose the Gang of Three.

"So?" The chief interrogator looks quizzically at her. "Are you going to
cooperate?"

He approaches her with his cigarette.

"Yes! Yes!"

The chief interrogator stands and speaks to the young man.

"You stay here and hose her off. Let her down and return her clothes. Give her
some water to drink and a bite to eat. Then give her a pen and paper and see
that she writes down the names of the other bandits and where we can find them.
If she's uncooperative, you know what to do."

The young man hefts his electric cattle prod and smiles eagerly. The two older
men unlock the iron door and walk wearily down the corridor. China is
prospering. It's 11:55. They will be at the head of the line for lunch.

THE DEMOCRATIC STATE
June 11, 2000. Pudong Broadcast Center in Shanghai.

XUE FEI LOOKS directly at the camera and smiles, displaying the easy
self-confidence that has made him the most popular anchor in China. His income
last year was more than $1.5 million, including salary, product endorsements and
"gifts" from companies hoping to get a favorable mention on the evening news.
Not that he needs the money. After he was fired by the Communists in 1989, he
went into business, and the gossip magazines say he earned his first million
even before returning to television in 1995.

"Viewers, we're pleased to bring you a special presentation tonight, an hourlong
session of 'Meet the Press' with President Zhu Rongji. Before we turn to our two
panelists, I'd like to ask a question myself, Mr. President."

"I'd be delighted," President Zhu responds warmly. As always, he faces the
television camera at a slight angle so that his mangled right ear is in full
view. It is a reminder that he, too, has taken risks and suffered. If, during
Chi Haotian's attempted putsch of '96, the bullet had veered slightly to the
left, it would have cost the President not just his ear but his life.

"Mr. President, as you know, Larry Yung, the chairman of the board of Citic,
announced today that Citic will buy Rockefeller Center from the Japanese for
$580 million. Do you expect resentment in the United States?" (Citic, or China
International Trust and Investment Corporation, is China's powerhouse investment
arm. In the early 90's, Yung, the multimillionaire son of then Vice President
Rong Yiren and head of Citic's Hong Kong operations, first became known as an
accomplished player in the international game of high-stakes corporate
takeovers.)

"No, I don't," the President replies. "Even the World Bank and the I.M.F. now
recognize that we've passed Japan and now have the second largest economy in the
world, as well as one of the fastest growing. At current growth rates of about 8
percent per year, we'll surpass the United States within another decade and
become No. 1. It's natural that an economic (Continued on page 40)
superpower like China will invest in other countries, and I think our friends in
the United States understand that."

"Thank you, Mr. President. Now I'd like to call on Chen Ziming, the editor of
People's Daily."

Chen Ziming's eyes gleam with hostility. He is absorbed by one bitter thought:
he, not an apparatchik like Zhu Rongji, should be President. It was he, Chen
Ziming, who sacrificed six years of his freedom for democracy -- and yet he is
expected to be grateful to Zhu Rongji for releasing him in 1995. Chen stares
balefully at Zhu, knowing that the President released him and other political
prisoners simply to destabilize the hard-liners. Chen remembers the day Zhu
telephoned and offered to make him Ambassador to Washington. "I know a velvet
gag when I see one," Chen said curtly, hanging up on the startled President.
Chen then used his wealth -- returned to him after his release from prison -- to
purchase the demoralized and nearly defunct People's Daily. The paper is his
platform, and he uses it to make the Government squirm.

"President Zhu, you always refer to China as a democracy and you go on about how
you won 74 percent of the vote in the '97 elections," Chen begins. "But your
Patriotic Democratic Party seems to be just a new name for the old Communist
Party. The Patriotic Democratic Party has the money, the news media and the old
Communist network in the coutryside. How can anybody else compete? It's still a
one-party system."

"Now that's just not true," the President says, smiling amiably. Inwardly, he's
seething. I'll audit that turtle egg's taxes, he promises himself. I'll take
that newspaper away from him. This is his gratitude for my getting him out of
prison? "There are 142 political parties registered in China," the President
continues smoothly. "Anyone with 500 signatures and 500 yuan can register a
political party and compete freely in elections. And in the end, with all that
competition, I was given 74 percent of the vote. If you don't like that,
complain to the people."

"A follow-up, please!" Chen speaks quickly, before anyone can cut him off.
"President Zhu, you know you didn't come to power through democratic elections.
You were a lifelong Communist. You were on the Politburo beginning in 1992. Then
after Deng Xiaoping's death, you edged out Jiang Zemin and sent Li Peng to
prison as the scapegoat for the '89 Tiananmen massacre. You came to power as a
Communist strongman, and then you held a rigged election to win some legitimacy.
So where's the democracy?"

Zhu Rongji chuckles for the cameras. Maybe I'll arrange for a corruption
investigation against Chen, he thinks. State Security must have something in its
files.

"Where's the democracy?" the President repeats. "Why right here! I banned
shackleboards. I stopped torture in prison. I let you out. I allow you to ask me
insulting questions, live on television."

Xue Fei calls on Johnny Lau from Ming Pao, a Hong Kong newspaper, for the next
question.

"Mr. President," says the paunchy, middle-aged journalist, "when your Vice
President, Li Ka-shing, visited Taipei last week, he called for establishment of
a confederation of China and Taiwan. If Taiwan continues to stall on
reunification, will you consider the use of force to invade Taiwan?" (The
incomparably suave Li Ka-shing used to be Hong Kong's richest tycoon; now he is
one of a few dozen in the former British colony whose personal worth run in the
billions.)

"No, we're not going to threaten our compatriots on Taiwan. But let me say a
word directly to them."

Zhu Rongji turns in his chair to look directly at the camera, sacrificing for a
moment a clear view of his mangled ear. "I'd like to say to you how much we want
to reunite our family again. As I told your President, Lien Chan, during our
historic meeting in Singapore last year, we are prepared to unite under the
principle 'Two entities, one confederation.' We are prepared to adopt the name
Republic of China. We are even prepared to consider a new national flag. So,
come home, Taiwan."

As he watches the President perform, Xue Fei wonders if it's true what people
have been saying -- that there was no assassination attempt in '95. Did Zhu
Rongji allow his ear to be shot to gain credibility and to use it to dislodge
his military opponents? Chi Haotian can't give his version of events -- he
supposedly committed suicide by jumping off the roof of the Great Hall of the
People.

Suddenly there is a commotion in the studio. In the audience, a man and a woman
are shouting and running down the aisle with an orange banner. Xue Fei motions
for the producer to get a camera on them, and he strains to read the words on
the banner. "Free Tibet," it says in English and Chinese. Members of the
presidential bodyguard jump on them, muffling them with the banner. The
wriggling protestors are carried out a side door.

President Zhu, who ducked below the anchor desk during the disturbance,
straightens up. He notes angrily that the camera has caught him in that
humiliating crouch and imagines the People's Daily front page the next day, with
a photo of him cowering under the desk. He wonders angrily whether the prison
interrogators still have a shackleboard or two around to teach these Tibetan
tuzaizi a lesson.

"Some of our friends in Tibet don't understand democracy," he protests. "We've
allowed the Dalai Lama to return to Lhasa. We've apologized for the mistakes of
the past. We've given them autonomy -- the same deal that Hong Kong has, and
look at how Hong Kong is prospering. The Hang Seng index there just hit 20,000.
That's four times its level after Deng Xiaoping died. But instead these Tibetans
insist on independence. They trick our American friends in Congress to pass a
resolution recognizing their independence. Independence! Well, we're not going
to betray the motherland! Our generation has no right to destroy a country that
hundreds of generations put together. If we give in to these Tibetans, then the
Muslims in Xinjiang will want to go their own way. Hong Kong's chief executive,
that Martin Lee, is always talking about a referendum on independence, but we
can't allow it there either. We are one nation!"

The studio audience erupts into cheers, but a few scattered jeers can also be
heard.

"What about relations with Washington?"

It's Chen Ziming again, and Zhu Rongji braces himself for a nasty question.

"The likely Republican nominee for President, Jack Kemp, has attacked your
Administration for not controlling illegal immigration to the United States.
They say there are now four million illegal Chinese in the United States. And on
the Democratic side, Janet Reno has blasted you for stealing American copyrights
and trademarks."

"We respect both Mr. Kemp and Miss Reno, and we can work well with either one as
President, just as we have worked with Mr. Clinton for the last eight years. The
illegal migration is a nuisance for us, just as it is for receiving countries
like the United States. But we are doing our best to control it. As for
intellectual property, that is probably the biggest dispute in Chinese-American
relations right now. We don't understand why our American friends are so quick
to blame us, when it's their investors who are coming here and setting up
factories to make fake Rolex watches and Compaq computers."

"President Zhu, I'd like to ask a question," interrupts Xue Fei. "A year ago,
the grand portrait of Mao Zedong was taken down -- for repairs, we were told. It
still hasn't gone up. What about Mao's body in the mausoleum in Tiananmen
Square? When will Mao be cremated?"

"Well, as you know, I've appointed a national commission to look into this
complex issue. We all know Mao made terrible mistakes, but we mustn't lose sight
of what he achieved. After all, the French still celebrate July 14 as a holiday,
even if they acknowledge that the French Revolution got out of hand. I think we
can learn from them, and celebrate Mao and his revolution even if we don't
always share his ideas or values."

"But Mr. President, if I can continue," Xue Fei goes on, knowing he has to ask a
question that will boost his ratings. Chinese viewers still get a kick out of
journalists asking their leaders nasty questions. "The question of the Mao
mausoleum has been linked to the corruption scandals that are constantly
unfolding in your Administration. Two months ago, the Chinese partner of
McDonald's publicly revealed that your eldest son received 150,000 shares of
McDonald's China Inc. for 'services rendered.' Now there is talk that the Mao
mausoleum will be turned into the largest McDonald's restaurant in the world.
It's supposed to be the 1,000th McDonald's to open in China. Is this----."

"Nonsense!" President Zhu interrupts, catching himself before allowing too much
irritation to show through. Why do these guys always see me as the enemy? Some
gratitude for all I've done to open up the system. "My son is an
American-trained consultant who came back to China out of patriotism. I'm proud
of him and his work, and I deeply resent these kinds of baseless charges on my
integrity or his. But let me say that I'm deeply dismayed by the amount of
corruption in China today, and I pledge. . . ."

NO STATE AT ALL
Aug. 3, 2000. A small clump of trees on the southern bank of the Yangtze River
in Hubei Province.

THE COMMANDOS, IN black, are invisible in the darkness, aside from the glow of
their cigarettes. At first the lone woman and four men tried to cup their hands
over their cigarettes, but it's hard to smoke for long that way. And they are
too tense not to smoke.

In a few hours, if all goes well, a million people will be dead.

Liu Yanwen looks at her watch -- 9 P.M. Still more than two hours to go. The
idea is to detonate the explosives late enough, when everyone is asleep, but
early enough so that the remaining hours of darkness will hamper rescue efforts.
That, she thinks, will teach the tuzaizi. That will keep Hubei Province busy for
a while -- too busy to bother Hunan Province.

She remembers when Hunan and Hubei were perfectly friendly. When she was growing
up, she had never particularly thought of Hubei as an enemy. But when China
started breaking up in '98, Hubei began to force itself on Hunan. First raiding
parties from Hubei tried to oust Hunan's warlord, and then they began attacking
civilians.

It's like this all over China, Liu thinks sadly. Region against region. China is
splintering like a shattered vase, as it did in the 1920's . . . in the 1850's .
. . in the 1640's -- all the way back to the time when the Yellow Emperor
founded China. "Yi fang, jiu luan," she thinks. Control eases, chaos follows.
Last month, she heard on BBC that the civil war has already killed more than
four million.

"Little Li," she whispers to the man next to her. She needs to talk, to distract
herself from the thought that all those sleeping people are about to die.
"Little Li, what do you think would have happened if there hadn't been a war
with Taiwan in '97? Would we still be one country?"

"What do you mean?"

"Suppose the Taiwan election had gone differently in 1996. Suppose the
Nationalists had stayed in office in Taiwan? What if the opposition hadn't been
elected and moved toward independence?"

"What if Taiwan hadn't opted for independence?" Little Li is uninterested in
hypotheticals. "I suppose we wouldn't have attacked. But we had to. The
Government always said it would use force to keep Taiwan from becoming a
separate country. So we did. We imposed a naval blockade."

"What if we hadn't?" Liu persists. "If our Army hadn't been bogged down in the
Taiwan Strait, if the West hadn't cut off trade as punishment for our attacking
Taiwan, what then? Don't you think that then we could have held on to Tibet and
Xinjiang?"

"Old Liu, what if . . . what if . . . what if -- all these ifs are just chicken
feathers and garlic skins. The point is, that's what happened. Anyway, we might
still have lost Tibet and Xinjiang. The Tibetans were always looking for an
opportunity to go their own way. And Xinjiang -- I hear the problem started when
a Muslim girl got gang-raped by some Chinese soldiers. Her clan lynched the
soldiers. There was a crackdown and -- well, then you had the Muslims storming
the armories."

"Yeah, I know there were local problems, but I think it was the war over Taiwan
that did it," Liu insists. "If there hadn't been the trade sanctions on China
after we attacked Taiwan, Guangdong and Hong Kong wouldn't have formed the
Southern Republic in '98. The Guangdong military command went for independence
because the province couldn't afford to be hurt by the international embargo."

They lapse once more into silence. Liu is lost in thought. Poor Hunan. It's her
province's fate to be caught between the Southern Republic and Hubei. The
warlord of Hubei has been making all those attacks on Hunan, and the Southern
Republic hasn't offered any help. Hubei has the guns, the tanks, the flame
throwers, the napalm. Hunan has only peasants.

Liu's thoughts drift to her sister, who, four months ago, paid a "snakehead"
$80,000 to take her to America. There has been no word since the boat sailed
away. Tens of millions of Chinese boat people are seeking refuge in Indonesia,
Australia, Thailand and America, and the seas are full of pirates looking for
victims.

Way off, on the distant northern bank of the Yangtze, is the Jinjiang Dike.
Fifty feet high, the dike was built in the Ming Dynasty and it protects Hubei's
industrial belt. Every year the Yangtze deposits more silt, raising the riverbed
a fraction of an inch. And every now and then the peasants raise the dike a few
inches to match. The result is that the Yangtze here has a water level well
above that of the surrounding countryside. Only the dike prevents disastrous
flooding. Last night, Liu and her team of commandos buried several tons of
dynamite in the dike. Millions of people living on the north side of the Yangtze
River are about to be engulfed by a tidal wave.

Liu looks at her watch. Almost 11:30. She stubs out her cigarette. "All right,"
she says, standing up. "Old Wu, you start the truck. It's time. Little Li, get
ready."

They peel off their black clothes, putting on peasant clothing. A moment later,
Liu hears Old Wu starting the getaway truck. They will have to race through the
night to get back to safety; she figures there will be such chaos that extensive
roadblocks will not be in place.

"Everybody ready?" Liu looks around. Everything is just as they have rehearsed
it. "Goodbye, Hubei!"

Little Li hits the electronic ignition switch for the explosives, and a few
moments later they hear a roar as the dike flies apart on the opposite bank. Liu
wishes she were able to see the Yangtze plunging through the embankment to
engulf Hubei.

"Wah!" she shouts, forgetting her caution. "We did it! We slaughtered those
tuzaizi!"

AFTERWORD

WHICH SCENARIO IS most likely?

Perhaps none. Predictions about China often end up more embarrassing than
insightful.

The third scenario, of civil war and vast upheaval, seem to me the least likely.
Still, Chinese officials and foreign scholars alike say there is some risk that
the nation will fall apart as it has done every few centuries in the past.

The authoritarian scenario is more of a possibility, as a dictatorship led
either by today's Communists or by an army strongman. If there is an army coup,
China is likely to lose what remains of its Communist gloss and look rather like
South Korea or Taiwan in the 1970's.

My own bet is on the second scenario -- the emergence of a prosperous
quasi-democracy. Beginning in the 1980's in several other parts of Asia, from
Taiwan to South Korea, rapid increases in education and income levels have led
to the withering away of repressive regimes and the birth of a middle class and
growing pluralism.

Deng Xiaoping's death may well accelerate and consolidate that process of
rapid-fire economic development and more measured political liberalization. If
China can sustain its economic boom, if it can tolerate and nurture the openness
and pluralism that cross-fertilize economic growth -- if these ifs come to pass,
historians may eventually record the 1990's as the decade that paved the way for
the Chinese century.



WHO'S WHO

Chen Ziming, 41, a democracy campaigner serving a 13-year prison sentence for
helping to organize the 1989 Tiananmen demonstrations. A short and pudgy man, he
financed a think tank in the 1980's by running a hugely successful
correspondence school.
Chi Haotian, 63, a sober and stolid soldier since he was a teen-ager, now the
Defense Minister commanding strong loyalties throughout the military.
Jiang Zemin, 66, Communist Party leader nicknamed Weathervane for his tendency
to shift with the political winds.
Li Peng, 64, Prime Minister and a hard-line Politburo member, perhaps the most
hated man in China. Even his mother, on her deathbed in Beijing Hospital in
1985, complained about him to anyone who would listen.
Liu Yanwen, 25, a peasant living in Tongzhi Village in Hunan Province. An
ambitious woman brimming with self-confidence, Liu worked in a factory making
stuffed toys for export and then tried, unsuccessfully, to start a cottage
industry in her own village.
Xue Fei, 35, an earnest and soft-spoken television anchor fired in 1989 for
announcing the establishment of martial law -- part of the Tiananmen crackdown
-- in a dull and obviously disapproving monotone. Since then he has gone into
business selling consumer products to Eastern Europe.
Zhu Rongji, 64, a thin man with an even thinner face, who is Deputy Prime
Minister and economic czar. He is sometimes called China's Gorbachev because of
his willingness to accept political and economic change.

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CALL FOR REMOVAL OF CHIEF ADMIRAL SHAKES PENTAGON

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1342 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 2


A call to remove the Navy's top officer for failing to prevent a sexual
harassment scandal two years ago has stirred turmoil among senior Pentagon and
White House officials, who today sought a way of punishing offenders without
disgracing a distinguished Naval officer.

The fate of the officer, Adm. Frank B. Kelso 2d, remained undecided today, even
after he met with Defense Secretary Les Aspin for about 20 minutes. Navy
Secretary John H. Dalton has asked that Admiral Kelso be dismissed and that 12
other admirals and Marine generals be disciplined, but Pentagon officials said
Mr. Aspin would make no final decision before Monday.

"He wants to take the time to be sure that any decision is fair to the flag
officers, but appropriate given the serious nature of the Tailhook episodes,"
said a Pentagon spokeswoman, Kathleen deLaski.

Civilian Versus Sailor

In essence, Mr. Aspin must choose between his new civilian Navy Secretary, an
appointee who took office in late July, and a 37-year Navy veteran who has been
the most prominent among all service chiefs in urging expanded opportunities for
women in the military. Indeed, Admiral Kelso's efforts contributed to Mr.
Aspin's decision this year to open fighter aircraft and most combat vessels to
women.

Ms. deLaski acknowledged that the reports late Friday of Mr. Dalton's
recommendation "doesn't leave us much room to maneuver." In an unusual twist of
protocol, Mr. Aspin met with Admiral Kelso in the officer's Pentagon office, in
what Ms. deLaski called an "information session."

The Defense Secretary also met with President Clinton for about 15 minutes to
update him on the process being followed in the investigation into the assaults
at the 1991 Tailhook convention, said the White House press secretary, Dee Dee
Myers.

"The President wanted to insure that the process is fair both to the Navy
officers, including Admiral Kelso, and to the women involved," she said. Ms.
Myers said Mr. Clinton was satisfied that proper procedures were being followed.


Unlikely Rejection

Since he entered office, Mr. Clinton has sought to mend fences with a military
establishment that distrusts his views on homosexuals in the armed forces and
his own draft record in the Vietnam War.

Mr. Dalton needs the approval of Mr. Aspin and Mr. Clinton to remove Admiral
Kelso, the Chief of Naval Operations, but it is unlikely that either would risk
undermining the new Navy Secretary's authority by rejecting his recommendations.

Admiral Kelso, the Chief of Naval Operations since 1990, "has said that if he's
asked to resign, he will resign, but for now he's still the C.N.O.," said a
senior Navy official.

No one has connected the 60-year-old admiral to any of the assaults on 83 women
and 7 men at the convention, but he gave a speech and sipped cocktails with
fellow officers on a patio just outside the hallway where many of the victims
were fondled and pushed along a gantlet of drunken aviators. In fact, once the
admiral learned of the assaults, he took steps to insure that such incidents
would not be repeated.

But in the end, Admiral Kelso's undoing may stem not from what he did or knew
about the debacle, but for who he is. As the Navy's top admiral, he is trapped
by the service's barnacled tradition that holds commanders responsible for their
sailors' actions. At the same time, he has fallen victim to a newer code of
behavior, one driven more by contemporary social values than by traditional
military violations.

Unusual Move



The dismissal of a service chief is highly unusual. Defense Secretary Dick
Cheney cashiered Gen. Michael J. Dugan, the Air Force Chief of Staff, in
September 1990 when the general publicly discussed possible plans to attack
Saddam Hussein and as well as Israel's involvement in the Persian Gulf crisis.

The last Chief of Naval Operations to be dismissed was Adm. Louis E. Denfeld in
1949; he had publicly criticized the Air Force.

Mr. Dalton's recommendations, however, sweep up not only Admiral Kelso, but
about a dozen other senior Navy admirals in one of the largest single
indictments of Navy leadership.

Indeed, some officers today grumbled that Mr. Dalton was making the admirals the
scapegoats for what critics say is the bungled handling of criminal cases
stemming from the scandal.

More than 40 lower-ranking officers named in the Pentagon's April report have
been fined or disciplined, and 10 others face trial, military grand juries or
special fact-finding boards that could end in courts-martial.

But the Navy has already dropped half of its 120 cases for lack of evidence, and
senior Navy officials last month dropped all charges against the first officer
to go to trial, citing a lack of evidence.

While the scandal has haunted the Navy since late 1991, the Navy and Pentagon
were not able to begin punishing most offenders until a Pentagon report's
findings were made public last April. The report recommended that the Navy and
Marine Corps create panels to review the cases of lower-ranking officers, but
left the fates of 35 admirals and Marine generals who attended the convention in
the hands of the civilian Navy secretary.

But President Clinton's choice for that job, Mr. Dalton, did not take office
until late July. Since then, he and a handful of legal advisers have been poring
over the six-inch-thick case files of each officer.

Pentagon officials said today that the timing of Mr. Dalton's recommendation was
in no way connected to the retirement on Thursday of Gen. Colin L. Powell as
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. General Powell had played no role in
reviewing the Tailhook scandal.

Mr. Aspin had not even consulted with Mr. Dalton before news of his
recommendations became known public. Admiral Kelso said he learned of Mr.
Dalton's call for his removal from a television news report Friday night.

Senator John W. Warner, a Virginia Republican on the Armed Services Committee
and a former Navy Secretary, said in a statement today that he had met with Mr.
Aspin last Wednesday, and had "strongly urged" the Defense Secretary to consult
with committee members before any final decisions were made on "this large
number of senior flag and general officers."

The news of Mr. Dalton's recommendations has angered many Navy officers at the
Pentagon, who complain of what they view as an injustice to a distinguished
admiral.

"The call for the resignation of the C.N.O. comes as a complete surprise," said
one admiral.

Nonetheless, despite the protests of Admiral Kelso and other admirals and Marine
generals that they knew nothing about the misconduct at the convention, the
military's strict chain of command still holds senior officers accountable for
the actions of their subordinates.

And the Defense Department's Inspector General found in his April report that
senior Navy aviator admirals were generally familiar with the debauchery at the
annual Tailhook meetings.

'Deteriorating Standards'

"Senior aviation leadership seemed to ignore the deteriorating standards of
behavior and failed to deal with the increasing disorder, improper and
promiscuous behavior," said the report.

"At the highest levels of the command structure, accountability becomes less
dependent on actual knowledge of the specific actions of subordinates," the
report said. "At some point, 'the buck stop here' applies."

Even if they agreed with this point, many officers said today that the handling
of Admiral Kelso's case was shoddy, and could further poison relations between
the military and the Clinton Administration.

"If someone told me something like this on the evening news, I'd be pretty
upset," Carlisle A. H. Trost, a former Chief of Naval Operations, said in a
telephone interview. "It's not the way you treat flag officers."

If Admiral Kelso were to resign, the Vice Chief of Naval Operations, Adm.
Stanley R. Arthur, would become acting chief. A Vietnam veteran, Admiral Arthur
was commander of American naval forces during the Persian Gulf war.

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The fate of Adm. Frank B. Kelso 2d, remained undecided yesterday
after he met with Defense Secretary Les Aspin over his role in a sexual
harassment scandal two years ago. (Associated Press) (pg. 30)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 749 words



International 3-21

STANDOFF HOLDS IN RUSSIA


Supporters of the Parliament clashed with riot police in Moscow while envoys
from the lawmakers and President Yeltsin bargained over conditions for ending
their armed standoff.  1

VALOR NOT SAVING GEORGIA

Although Georgia's soft-spoken leader became a fearless commander in defense of
the capital of the region that fell to rebels, it is clear that it will take
more than personal courage to restore peace.  1

CANADIANS OPPOSING FREE TRADE

With Canada's prolonged recession and other economic problems, many residents
feel that the free trade pacts with the United States and Mexico are bad ideas.
1

VIETNAM EMBARGO CRUMBLING

The Hanoi Government is opening Vietnam's economy to the world after many years
of central planning, and from the signs there, it is clear that the 18-year-old
American trade embargo is crumbling.  1

INDIA'S RELIEF EFFORT LAGGING

The number of deaths in India's worst earthquake in 50 years is still uncertain,
and the relief effort is proving inadequate. Survivors are digging for bodies,
and the promised relief camps are not appearing.  3

BOSNIAN AGONY OF CONSCIENCE

When the Muslim-led Parliament of Bosnia walked away from a peace plan, some
members said they had given up their last chance of salvaging a territory of
their own from the wreckage of their country.  10

Intense debate over a new peace initiative in Northern Ireland.  9

Kasparov and Short draw Game 13.  43

National 22-34

TURMOIL OVER NAVY SCANDAL

A call to dismiss the Navy's top officer for failing to prevent the Tailhook
scandal has resulted in turmoil among top Pentagon and White House officials
trying to punish offenders without disgracing a distinguished admiral.  1

A TIMELESS, UNIVERSAL MORALITY

In his new encyclical, Pope John Paul II asserts the existence of a basic
morality that transcends all eras and cultures and absolutely forbids certain
actions.1

RETIREES SKEW HEALTH PLAN COSTS

The Administration's health planners acknowledge that a politically important
part of their plan, covering early retirees, could cost billions of dollars a
year more than they anticipated.  1

WEARY CALIFORNIA AWAITS CLINTON

When President Clinton arrives in California, he will face growing impatience
over his Administration's response to the state's battered economy.  22

CARNAGE IN THE CAPITAL

With the recent rise in drug-related violence, Washington is once again being
called the nation's murder capital, and once again there are loud demands for
action.  22

WOES OF A POWER BROKER

Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown, accused of using his influence to help
Vietnam, faces the most scrutiny of his career.  27

JOBS AND FREE TRADE

Hanging over the Administration's push for a free trade agreement is the
prospect of millions of middle-class workers losing their jobs in the next
decade because of tremors in the world economy.  28

Metro 35-46

HOUSING PROTEST ENDS

An 18-hour occupation of a new public housing project in Williamsburg, Brooklyn,
came to a peaceful end. City officials promised the 200 protesters, most of them
Hispanic concerned that Hasidic applicants would get preference, that they could
closely monitor tenant selection.  35

NEW ACTIVISM ON CANCER

In part because of the higher rates of breast cancer among women in Long Island,
the area has become a center of grass-roots organizing to improve research,
detection and treatment of the disases. Now the groups are becoming more
critical of the Government and the medical establishment.  35

A NEW NEWSPAPER ERA

With the successful completion of Rupert Murdoch's long struggle to buy back The
New York Post, newspaper, analysts and executives expect a new era of resilient
nonprosperity for the city's three money-losing tabloids.  37

THE POLICE AND THE MAYOR

Under most circumstances, the Mollen Commission hearings into police corruption
would damage Mayor Dinkins's re-election effort. But Rudolph W. Giuliani's
association with the police has cut down on his ability to criticize.  38

AFTERMATH OF A CAMPAIGN

In the year since the 1992 New York Senate primary, each of the three veteran
Democrats in that race has moved off the political stage. Some see in this the
dangers of negative campaigning.  39

Obituaries 44

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In Hanoi, U.S. Goods Sold but Not by U.S.

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1616 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Oct. 2


Wandering the narrow streets of what was the enemy capital in the Vietnam War,
American visitors to Hanoi can find themselves wondering, what American trade
embargo?

Vietnam Airlines flies many of them here on its shiny new Boeing jets. The
city's electronics stores carry I.B.M. and Apple computers, and even the
computers that bear Taiwanese or Korean brand names are powered by a computer
chip manufactured by the Intel Corporation. Those familiar yellow boxes of Kodak
film are on sale in plenty of photo shops and for Hanoi teen-agers, Coca-Cola is
the soft drink of choice.

Not far from Ho Chi Minh's hulking gray marble mausoleum, video shops are
promising the first pirated copies of "Jurassic Park" some time this fall.

Foreign Middlemen Profit

To a degree that the United States Government seems unwilling to admit, the
18-year-old American trade embargo on Vietnam is crumbling.

After generations of Communist central planning, the Hanoi Government is opening
its economy to the world. And the technology that Washington had fought for so
long to keep out of Vietnamese hands is getting here, usually through
third-country middlemen who are delighted to profit from the sale of technology
that Americans pioneered but cannot sell in Vietnam themselves.

American business executives eager to profit from one of the developing world's
most promising markets insist that they -- not the Vietnamese -- are now the
chief victims of the embargo.

'Losing a Market'

Many Vietnamese agree. After years of accusing Washington of using the embargo
to force this nation into submission, Vietnamese officials acknowledge that they
are now getting most of the technology and foreign investment money that they
can use, at least for today.

"Americans are losing a market of 72 million people that we don't need to lose,"
said James Rockwell, an American business consultant based in Hanoi whose
clients include the Chrysler Corporation.

"Vietnam is not waiting for us anymore," he said, the American flag flapping in
the humid breeze outside the window of his company's offices here.  "Capitalism
has run amok here, and the Vietnamese have decided to put together an economy
with or without us."

Mr. Rockwell is helping Chrysler prepare to open car manufacturing plants in
Vietnam when the embargo is lifted. But there is no guarantee that President
Clinton will lift the embargo any time soon.

Japanese Open Factories

And as Mr. Rockwell and Chrysler wait anxiously, Japanese car makers,
unencumbered by the embargo and eager for a new beachhead in southeast Asia, are
opening their first Vietnamese factories.

The complaints of American businesses ring hollow to the families of some of the
more than 2,000 Americans still listed as missing in action from the Vietnam
War.

Their fate is the issue that continues to divide Washington and Hanoi, and
organizations representing some of the families say the Vietnamese Government is
still giving only grudging cooperation to American military investigators.

Larry W. Rivers, a Vietnam veteran who is the executive director of the Veterans
of Foreign Wars, said in a telephone interview from Washington that "our only
concern is whether Vietnam is giving us a full accounting on the missing --
whether the embargo helps or hinders the American business community is not our
focus."

Call for Brown to Quit

On Thursday, an umbrella organization of 75 groups that represent Vietnam
veterans or the families of missing Americans called for the resignation of the
United States Commerce Secretary, Ron Brown, because of accusations that he
accepted $700,000 from a Vietnamese businessman to lobby for an end to the trade
embargo.

While Mr. Brown has denied the accusations, the controversy could further delay
the lifting of the embargo. A group of Republican members of Congress has asked
President Clinton to hold off on any move to improve relations with the
Vietnamese Government until an investigation of Mr. Brown by a Federal grand
jury in Miami is completed.

The American embargo was imposed when the Communist forces of North Vietnam
overran the South in 1975. For more than a decade, the sanctions were undeniably
effective in punishing Vietnam. Its economy stagnated, both because of the
embargo and because of inept Government policies, and Vietnam remains one of the
world's poorest nations.

But that is changing rapidly. Vietnam's fortunes began to improve in the late
1980's, when the nation's leaders abandoned Marxist economic theory and accepted
free markets under a policy known as doi moi, or renovation.

At the same time, Vietnam moved to placate Washington. It released most of its
political prisoners, pulled its troops out of Cambodia and, most important of
all, expanded its cooperation in trying to determine the fate of Americans
missing from the war.

Embargo Gradually Eased

Washington has gradually eased the embargo. Shortly before he left office,
President Bush allowed American firms to open representative offices in Vietnam.

In July, President Clinton decided to lift the American veto that had blocked
billions of dollars in loans to Vietnam by the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and other international organizations. Those loans are expected to
permit the Vietnamese to begin to rebuild their road network and power plants,
and to create a modern telecommunications system.

When the embargo came up for renewal in September, President Clinton decided to
allow American businesses to bid on projects financed by the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund.

But he kept in place what for most American businesses is the heart of the
embargo. With few exceptions, American companies cannot manufacture or sell
their goods here, even as their foreign competitors, mostly from Japan and
elsewhere in Asia, move quickly to sew up the Vietnamese market before the
Americans arrive.

Fear of Antagonizing Veterans

More than 500 international investment projects, worth more than $5 billion,
have already been approved by the Vietnamese Government. Only about $55 million
of that directly involves American companies.

While eager to move into Vietnam -- with its well-educated, low-wage workers and
great natural resources, including oil -- many large American corporations do
not take a formal position on the question of whether the United States should
lift the embargo.

Their reluctance to fight for an end to the sanctions reflects in part a fear of
antagonizing veterans groups or the families of missing Americans. So far only
three large American corporations have sent representatives to live in Vietnam
-- International Business Machines, General Electric and Price Waterhouse.

I.B.M. is among the companies that take no formal position on the embargo.
Still, the company's Hanoi representative, William Howell, who has lived in a
hotel room here for the last five months, cannot hide his frustration at having
to turn down so many inquiries from customers who are eager to buy his
computers.

Frustration Over Lost Sales

"It's very frustrating to look at a big market that we can't sell to," said Mr.
Howell, who figures that I.B.M. could reap $50 million in annual sales in
Vietnam by the end of the decade if the embargo is lifted.

That is not to say that the company's computers are not for sale in Vietnam.
I.B.M. personal computers -- as well as computers made by big American
competitors, including Apple and Compac -- are sold openly in both Hanoi and Ho
Chi Minh City, the southern Vietnamese city once known as Saigon, and can be
found in use in Government ministries.

"It's easy to buy an I.B.M. in Vietnam, but we're not the ones selling it,"
grumbled Mr. Howell. American computers are imported by Asian middlemen who rake
off much of the profit the manufacturers would otherwise make if they were
allowed to sell and service their own computers here.

Among those who cannot buy I.B.M. computers in Vietnam are the large
non-American foreign corporations -- banks, airlines, construction companies and
the like -- that have set up offices in Hanoi. Many of them are loyal I.B.M.
customers elsewhere in the world. But in Vietnam, they are usually forced to buy
I.B.M. clones made outside the United States, often in Taiwan or Korea.

Boeing has a similar problem. Under the embargo, it cannot sell its jets to
Vietnam Airlines, so the American company's planes must instead be leased to
Vietnam by a non-American company that takes much of the profit that would
otherwise go to Boeing.

Embargo Hurts Oil Companies

Foreign middlemen bring to Vietnam a vast range of American brand consumer
goods, from Eveready batteries to Kleenex tissue, by transshiping them through
other Asian countries. Because the embargo has prevented the Hollywood studios
from policing the video market here, the latest films are widely available on
black market cassettes, smuggled across the border from Cambodia and translated
into Vietnamese.

Almost certainly the biggest corporate losers as a result of the embargo are
American oil companies, which have been barred in Vietnam from bidding on rich
offshore tracts in the South China Sea.

For several years, Vietnamese officials had hinted that they were willing to set
aside some of the most promising tracts for the American oil giants. But soon,
all of the best oil-drilling zones will be committed to non-American companies.

"The opportunities for American companies are getting very narrow now," said Do
Duc Dinh, an economist with Hanoi's Institute of World Economies. "We want to do
business with the Americans. But Vietnam cannot wait forever."

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: American companies can open offices but not sell goods in Hanoi,
Vietnam. (Timothy Karr for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

COMMERCE LEADER FACES MAJOR TEST

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 867 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 2


Ronald H. Brown, who easily weathered questions about ties to wealthy and
powerful interests when he was confirmed as Commerce Secretary, is facing the
most withering scrutiny of his career.

Mr. Brown is confronting accusations by a Vietnamese businessman that he sought
$700,000 in return for his help lifting the trade embargo against Vietnam, at a
time when he was moving from his quasi-official role as a political party
official to the Government.

For years Mr. Brown has been a powerful lobbyist in Washington, and his
connections have at times led to accusations that he skirted the edges of
propriety. In January, as he awaited confirmation to the Cabinet, he was forced
to cancel an inauguration tribute in his honor financed by large corporations,
including some companies that could have been affected by his actions as
Commerce Secretary.

Nevertheless, Mr. Brown glided easily through his confirmation hearings,
becoming the country's first black Commerce Secretary. He had come from Harlem,
where his parents managed the Hotel Theresa, and worked his way into a lucrative
legal practice, several successful business ventures, the top position in the
Democratic Party and finally, the highest echelons of power in the Clinton
Cabinet.

Meetings With Businessman

Two months after his confirmation, the questions arose about Mr. Brown's
involvement in the Vietnam deal. His aides suggested that Mr. Brown did not know
the principal figures involved. But this week, Reid H. Weingarten, the
Secretary's lawyer, acknowledged that Mr. Brown met three times with Nguyen Van
Hao, a former Vietnamese Government official who wanted to hire Mr. Brown to
help ease the trading restrictions against Vietnam.

The first meeting was in November 1992 in Florida at a time when Mr. Brown was
widely speculated to be under consideration for a Cabinet post, but had not yet
been nominated. The second meeting was held in Washington at the townhouse of
Lillian Madsen, a friend of Mr. Brown and the sister-in-law of Marc Ashton,
another friend who introduced Mr. Hao to Mr. Brown.

The third meeting occurred in February after Mr. Brown's confirmation, when he
gave Mr. Hao a brief tour of the Commerce Department. Mr. Weingarten said that
Mr. Hao sounded out Mr. Brown about a proposal to set up a company that would
provide advice to American concerns hoping to operate in Vietnam, but never
discussed any payment to Mr. Brown in return for services.

Mr. Brown has said that he never participated in the Clinton Administration's
deliberations over easing trade restrictions against Vietnam. The Administration
has taken steps toward improving trade ties, dropping longstanding opposition to
lending from the World Bank and International Monetary Fund and allowing
American companies to bid on projects in Vietnam financed by the international
lending institutions.

Evidence Uncovered

By the end of last week, Federal investigators had uncovered evidence supporting
the assertions of Mr. Brown's principal accuser, Ly Thanh Binh, who said Mr. Hao
told him that he was preparing to funnel money from Vietnam to Singapore to open
an account to pay Mr. Brown. But there was no indication that Mr. Brown had
received money from any overseas bank account.

A Government official familiar with Vietnam, who spoke on the condition of
anonymity, said that Mr. Hao was the only top official of the South Vietnamese
Government who was allowed to stay on after the country fell to the Communists
in 1975.

Mr. Hao was appointed South Vietnam's deputy premier for economic development in
November 1974, but held only lesser posts under the Communist government, the
official said. The official said Mr. Hao entered the United States in 1982 after
leaving Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, aboard an Air France Flight to Paris.

As a Federal grand jury in Florida investigates Mr. Binh's accusations, anxiety
at the White House seems to be rising rapidly, with President Clinton forced
into a protective mode, publicly defending his Commerce Secretary. Attorney
General Janet Reno chose not to appoint an independent prosecutor, giving her
own prosecutors 60 days to complete their inquiry, Administration officials
said.

Successful Career

As chairman of the Democratic National Committee from 1989 to 1992, Mr. Brown
was considered highly successful, a conciliatory and energetic figure who helped
revive the Democrats after the defeat of Michael S. Dukakis in 1988. He never
flinched from his role as a critic of the Bush Administration, even when George
Bush looked unstoppable.

But although he was party chairman, he never gave up his partnership in Patton,
Boggs & Blow, one of Washington's largest lobbying firms known for its
Democratic clientele. Mr. Brown insisted that he spent all his time on
Democratic Party matters.

Over the years, Mr. Brown's talents had brought in clients like the Haitian
Government, American Express and Japanese electronics companies. Gradually he
was compared to lawyer-lobbyists like Robert Strauss of Texas, who headed the
Democratic Party when Jimmy Carter won the Presidency. Mr. Brown resigned his
partnership when he joined the Cabinet.

NAME: Ronald H. Brown

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Gunfire Holds Poor Residents of Washington Hostage

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 991 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 2


One thing Rufus Johnson enjoyed most after retiring was walking about his
apartment complex in the city's Greenway neighborhood, chatting with friends,
taking the sun on a quiet corner and just being free to do anything, or nothing,
after a lifetime of hard work as a tile setter.

Now all that has changed.

Drugs wars have been raging unceasingly for five years in the predominately
black slums and projects of Washington. They have taken so many lives and have
lately escalated to such a horrendous level of violence that Mr. Johnson no
longer feels free to wander about Greenway or meander up Ridge Road to enjoy the
stunning vista of the distant Capitol dome and the Washington Monument.

"I feel like some sort of prisoner," he said the other day. "The only time I go
out now is in the middle of the day. Even then I worry that I'll get caught in
the middle of some shootout."

He is not alone in his prison or his worry. Because of the recent rise in
drug-driven violence, the nation's capital is once again being called the
nation's murder capital, and once again there are loud demands for action and
new plans to stop the carnage.

Named After a War

So far this year, at least three dozen young men have died in shootouts in and
around Greenway, which is sometimes called Little Vietnam because of the
frequent gun battles, and there were 353 homicides, most involving drug deals or
store robberies or sometimes both, in the entire city. The daily pace of
homicides in 1993 is almost even with the daily pace in 1991, when there were a
record 489 killings. There were 453 homicides in the city in 1992.

A week ago, a 4-year-old girl was mortally wounded when she was caught in a
shootout just down the hill from Mr. Johnson's apartment. She was hit as she was
watching a pickup football game.

On Monday night television news showed a holdup filmed in its brutal entirety by
a surveillance camera. Viewers watched three bandits pistol-whip a store clerk,
shove about a pregnant woman, then shoot the store owner in the legs as he
cowered on the floor.

Embarrassed and exasperated, city officials are sending new anti-drug units onto
the streets. And some city leaders and members of Congress have gone so far as
to suggest that the National Guard be called to help stem the violence. Among
them is Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly.

Deadly Mix of Guns and Drugs

"We need help to curb the availability of drugs and the easy access of weapons,"
she said on Tuesday after learning of still another killing. "Help from the
Federal Government is an absolute imperative."

A leading member of the City Council, John Ray, was less politic. "We look
defeated," he said.

After Representative John L. Mica, Republican of Florida, learned of the little
girl's death and the jewelry store holdup, he took to the House floor.

"My God!" he cried out. "If it takes bringing out the National Guard, I say, act
now! Act now, before another innocent child's life is snuffed out, another
merchant is brutally slain."

City officials say some guard troops may be called in to lend logistical support
in the policing effort, like providing lights to illuminate high-crime areas.
The guard has helped in this manner in the past. But while the guard has been
accompanying the police on regular patrols in Puerto Rico, no one expects armed
National Guard units to be patrolling the streets of the nation's capital
anytime soon.

In the meantime, however, other Federal help is on the way.

Federal Assistance

After a meeting on Tuesday with Mayor Kelly and other city officials, Louis J.
Freeh, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and Robert Bonner,
the head of the Drug Enforcement Administration, agreed to assign some agents to
a new anti-drug task force set up by the Metropolitan Police Department. The
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms will also provide some manpower.

"You should see more arrests," Chief Fred Thomas of the Washington Police
Department said as he announced formation of the 150-officer force and ordered
the first teams to take to the streets this weekend.

Their orders: search out and apprehend the dealers who supply neighborhoods like
Greenway with crack and other drugs and protect their turf and huge profits with
bursts of bullets from machine pistols.

Other police units have begun concentrating on store holdups in slum areas,
where the Asian-American merchants, mostly Koreans, are now the predominant
entrepreneurial force. So far this year, nine Asian-Americans have been killed
in robberies, and several others have been wounded, including the jewelry store
owner shot in the Monday holdup.

'These Are Animals'

Will the new police efforts have any effect?

Delores Smith, the great-aunt of Launice Smith, the little girl who was killed
at the football game shootout, has her doubts. She called for more drastic
measures the other day during a visit with Mayor Kelly.

"These are animals," she said of the drug dealers. "You need to replug the
electric chair over at the city jail."

The drug violence in Washington has been publicized more than the violence in
other big cities, like New York, Detroit and Chicago. Experts say statistical
comparisons among cities do not shed much light on drug-related killings for a
variety of reasons, but the reality is the same: the violence here, as
elsewhere, is mainly in the poor sections of the city and nobody has come up
with a satisfactory way to stop it.

Washington police officials are particularly perplexed. Though drug-related
violence is on the increase in some areas, other serious crime in the city is
mostly holding even or is in decline.

All earlier efforts by the city to end the carnage have accomplished little.
Even as Chief Thomas sent the new anti-drug units onto the street, he sought to
lower expectations.

"I'm not telling you this is a panacea," he said. "This is one piece of a large
puzzle."

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I feel like some sort of prisoner," Rufus Johnson said of the
crime in the Greenway section of Washington, where at least three dozen young
men have died in gun battles. "The only time I go out now is in the middle of
the day. Even then I worry that I'll get caught in the middle of some shootout."
(George Tames for The New York Times)

Graph: "Killings in the District," tracks the number of homicides in Washington
each year, 1991-Sept. 29, 1993 (Source: Metropolitan Police Department,
Washington)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SEPT. 26-OCT. 2: No Special Prosecutor;
Inquiry Into Dealings By Brown Heats Up

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 192 words


For months, an accusation that Commerce Secretary Ron Brown had sought a
$700,000 payment in exchange for help in lifting the United States trade embargo
against Vietnam only smoldered. It seemed vague, having originated with a
Vietnamese businessman in Florida, Ly Thanh Binh, who said his information came
from a former partner, Nguyen Van Hao, who denied the story. Mr. Brown and his
aides said the charge was preposterous; the aides suggested that the Secretary
did not know Mr. Hao.

But last week, Reid H. Weingarten, the Commerce Secretary's lawyer, acknowledged
in the wake of news reports that Mr. Brown had indeed met with Mr. Hao -- twice
before joining the Cabinet and once after. He said Mr. Hao wanted professional
advice on trade issues involving Vietnam. Mr. Weingarten denied, however, that
Mr. Brown discussed being paid.

As a Federal grand jury in Miami continued investigating and Republican
lawmakers called for an independent inquiry, the Clinton Administration stood by
Mr. Brown. President Clinton praised him and Attorney General Janet Reno said
she had no plans to name a special prosecutor.   DAVID JOHNSTON

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ron Brown (Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 3, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Never Out of Range

BYLINE: By Ken Bode;  Ken Bode, a correspondent for CNN, is the director of the
Center for Contemporary Media at DePauw University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 871 words



THE RUSH LIMBAUGH STORY
Talent on Loan From God:
An Unauthorized Biography.
By Paul D. Colford.
242 pp. New York:
St. Martin's Press. $19.95.


 HUEY LONG was one of the first politicians to understand the power of radio. It
is said that when he took to the airwaves on a summer evening to inveigh against
the New Deal, windows were open and radios played from living rooms all over New
Orleans. One could walk from one side of the city to the other without missing
one word of Long's speech.

Today, it is Rush Limbaugh who is never out of range. When he goes on the air
for his afternoon radio program from the studios of WABC, his "patriotic center
of the universe" 17 floors above Madison Square Garden, he can be heard on more
than 600 stations, coast to coast. He is the savior of small, struggling AM
radio stations; outside big cities, he may in fact be found simultaneously at
several points on the dial. In the cities, some restaurants are opening "Rush
Rooms" where his "dittoheads" can munch while listening to him lambaste
"feminazis," environmental "wackos" and the Democrats ("the party that can't
wait to fund every abortion in the world").

Add to this his highly rated television show and a book under his name, "The Way
Things Ought to Be," which has been on the best-seller lists for over a year,
and you see why he has been the subject of news magazine covers, an overnight
guest in the Bush White House and now the subject of "The Rush Limbaugh Story,"
a biography by Paul D. Colford. You also understand why Mr. Colford's book was
hurried to the stores before Mr. Limbaugh's next one arrives later this year. If
readers really want to know more about Mr. Limbaugh, they would be better off
waiting for that one.

Mr. Limbaugh himself declined to be interviewed for the book Mr. Colford and his
publishers bill as an "unauthorized biography" -- but no one else in his
firmament was reclusive. Mr. Colford,
who writes about the media for New York Newsday, compiled this portrait with the
cooperation of Mr. Limbaugh's mother and brother, his two ex-wives, his agent
and a legion of former co-workers from the half-dozen small-time radio stations
where he was fired before his blend of conservative politics and banter on the
border of bad taste caused him to hit it big. Mr. Colford also quotes from
virtually every interview Mr. Limbaugh has given over the past few years -- and
there are many -- causing this to read more like a lengthy term paper than an
actual biography.

We discover that Mr. Limbaugh began his radio career in McKeesport, Pa., as a
college dropout disk jockey (he attended Southeast Missouri State University for
two semesters and one summer), using the name Jeff Christie because it was
easier to remember than Rush Limbaugh. We are also told that Mr. Limbaugh, like
many of his contemporaries, did not want to serve in the armed forces during the
war in Vietnam. Mr. Colford says that Rush used a pilonidal cyst and a letter
from a friendly doctor to obtain an "unfit for service" classification.

Mr. Limbaugh is not hobbled by intellectual consistency. On the airwaves he
inveighs against abortion, but his mind changes closer to home. If he were
married and his wife wanted to terminate a pregnancy, Mr. Limbaugh has said, he
would try to persuade her not to, but would not stop her. These items, along
with the facts that he has trouble controlling his weight, rarely bothers to
vote, twice smoked pot and has many associates who attest that he is personally
very insecure, may be the most unfriendly findings in this book.

Audience profiles and polls have indicated that more than three-quarters of Mr.
Limbaugh's listeners are Republicans and 85 percent voted for George Bush in
1992. Still, as the acknowledged leader in a constellation of talk-show hosts
who can massage what H. L. Mencken called the "booboisie," Mr. Limbaugh is a
presence for the Democrats to reckon with. These panjandrums of telephone
populism can jam the switchboards on Capitol Hill and the White House on issues
from homosexuals in the military to Congressional pay raises, the appointments
of Zoe Baird and Lani Guinier, and President Clinton's budget proposals.

But according to Mr. Colford, Mr. Limbaugh understands it is all hype. The only
role for people in radio, he says, is to sell advertising. He also understands
that smirky humor appeals to his audience (on Anita Hill: "My guess is she's had
plenty of spankings, if you catch my meaning"). When the announcer on his radio
show proclaims that tapes are made available to world leaders for their daily
briefings, some of the attending carp may take that bait, but Mr. Limbaugh does
not. It's entertainment, he says; there is "no pretense toward journalism." All
this has made him wealthy, but, says Mr. Colford, not pretentious. He has a
Rolex watch now, flies first class and hires a car and driver. Apart from that,
the author says that Mr. Limbaugh lives pretty much as before, but he is not
specific.

Is there nothing that would embarrass this "talent on loan from God"? Yes. When
George Bush insisted on carrying Mr. Limbaugh's suitcase to the Lincoln bedroom,
Rush was mortified. It says a lot about both men.

NAME: Rush Limbaugh

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rush Limbaugh. (PAUL CONKLIN)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Businessman Details Case Involving Commerce Chief

BYLINE: By JASON DePARLE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1315 words

DATELINE: FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla., Oct. 3


Suddenly, Ly Thanh Binh has found an audience.

For seven months, the small-time businessman has been spinning a wild tale of
international intrigue, telling reporters and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation that Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown sought a bribe from the
Vietnamese Government in return for his help in lifting the trade embargo
against Vietnam.

Mr. Brown has dismissed the story as the stuff of pure fantasy, and there is no
evidence that he has received any money or done anything wrong. But the
emergence of new details last week has helped bolster Mr. Binh's credibility and
prompted criminal investigators to treat his story with a new respect, even
though his accusations of misconduct remain unproven.

In five hours of interviews over the weekend, Mr. Binh, a 37-year-old American
citizen who was born in Vietnam, recounted the unlikely adventure that he says
plucked him from a series of unsuccessful business dealings here and landed him
in a Hanoi guest house for a meeting with the Vietnamese Prime Minister.

It began, Mr. Binh said, in the summer of 1992, when Nguyen Van Hao, a former
Vietnamese official then running a convenience store in Broward County, Fla.,
recruited him into a sketchy plan to pursue investment opportunities in Vietnam.
It ended, he said, last winter, when he learned that Mr. Hao was arranging to
bribe Mr. Brown.

Since then, he said, he has been so determined to get out the story that he even
pawned a family ring to get gasoline money to drive to Washington to talk to
Congressional staff members.

His detractors say he is being manipulated by conservative veterans groups
opposed to normalizing relations with Vietnam. Mr. Binh angrily denies it,
saying he supports normalization. "My motive purely is that I do not believe in
unethical government conduct," he said.

Mr. Binh acknowledges that he has never met Mr. Brown. He said his entire
understanding of Mr. Brown's role comes from information relayed to him by Mr.
Hao.

His story got a flood of new publicity last week when Mr. Brown seemed to
contradict statements put out earlier by his aides. Asked about Mr. Hao, a
Commerce Department spokesman had previously said that Mr. Brown "didn't recall
meeting with this man."

But speaking through his lawyer, Reid H. Weingarten, Mr. Brown acknowledged last
week that he had met three times with Mr. Hao, once before his selection as
Commerce Secretary and twice there after.

Binh's Story Got Boost

Mr. Weingarten said Mr. Hao had sought advice on trade issues involving Vietnam.
But he said that his client and Mr. Hao had never discussed any payment, and
that once Mr. Brown had been nominated to the Cabinet he had told Mr. Hao that
he could not help him.

Mr. Binh's story got another modest boost last week when the authorities said
they had found evidence that suggested the Vietnamese were preparing to
establish a bank account in Singapore. Mr. Binh has said Mr. Hao told him that
$700,000 was supposed to be deposited there for Mr. Brown. But it is unclear
whether the authorities were drawing any connection between the money and Mr.
Brown.

Law-enforcement officials say Mr. Hao has testified before a grand jury in Miami
that is investigating the accusations against Mr. Brown. Efforts to reach Mr.
Hao have been unsuccessful.

In the interviews this weekend, Mr. Binh said he came to the United States in
December 1973 as a 17-year-old high school graduate to pursue his education and
was stranded in the United States when the Government of South Vietnam fell two
years later.

He moved to New Orleans, he said, enrolled at Tulane University, and graduated
in 1978 with an economics degree. Over the next dozen years, he pursued a
variety livelihoods, most of which encountered financial difficulties -- working
as a financial consultant in Louisiana, a restaurant owner in Mississippi and
founder of E.S.P. Inc., a company in Broward County that sold electronic devices
to remove barnacles from boats. He had closed that business and was looking for
a new niche in 1992, he said, when met Mr. Hao.

At that point, Mr. Hao was running the convenience store. But he later told Mr.
Binh something that Federal officials have confirmed: that Mr. Hao was the only
top official in South Vietnam allowed to remain in power after the country fell
to the Communists.

Government officials have said that Mr. Hao was South Vietnam's Deputy Prime
Minister for Economic Development, but that he held lesser posts under the
Communists. Mr. Binh said this weekend that the Communists appreciated Mr. Hao
because he had preserved for them some of the country's gold reserves. He said
Mr. Hao stayed in Vietnam for about seven years after the Communist victory,
then left for Paris, Haiti, and then the United States. He said Mr. Hao is 57
years old and holds a French passport.

Asked for Business Help

He said Mr. Hao had showed him a disorganized set of charts and that he had
sought his help in converting them into a business plan. The idea was to help
recruit businesses interested in investing in Vietnam in the event the trade
embargo against Vietnam was lifted.

Mr. Binh said he threw himself into the enterprise with the understanding that
he would be a partner and move back to Vietnam if normalization occurred. But he
received no salary, he said, and borrowed money from his sister to support
himself and his wife.

Though Mr. Hao rented a mailbox with a Manhattan address, Mr. Binh said, the
enterprise was being run out of Mr. Hao's home in Coral Springs, Fla., and
consisted mainly of sending their plan to potential investors. They called their
endeavor the Vietnam Development Corporation.

But the focus began to change in November, Mr. Binh said, after Mr. Hao told him
to send a copy of the plan to Mr. Brown. Mr. Binh said Mr. Hao and Mr. Brown had
a mutual friend, a Haitian named Marc Ashton. Shortly thereafter, he said, Mr.
Brown flew to South Florida on a private jet, met with Mr. Hao and told him he
wanted to be "the exclusive lobbyist" for South Vietnam.

Plane Trip to Hanoi

Mr. Binh was not at the meeting and says his understanding of it comes from Mr.
Hao. Mr. Brown has now acknowledged meeting with Mr. Hao at a restaurant in
South Florida in November.

Soon after, Mr. Binh said, he and Mr. Hao were on a plane heading for Hanoi,
seeking to persuade the Vietnamese Government to give the lobbying contract to
Mr. Brown.

Mr. Binh said they were treated as dignitaries in Vietnam, where they met with
the Prime Minister, Vo Van Kiet. Mr. Binh said that the meeting concluded with a
private discussion between Mr. Kiet and Mr. Hao and that afterward Mr. Hao had
said the Prime Minister had agreed to hire Mr. Brown. They returned with a
letter from Mr. Kiet to Mr. Brown, urging Mr. Brown to continue discussions with
Mr. Hao.

By the time they arrived home in December, Mr. Brown had been nominated to the
Cabinet.

Mr. Binh said Mr. Hao had then traveled without him to Washington, to meet with
Mr. Brown, and returned saying Mr. Brown wanted $700,000 and other economic
concessions. Mr. Binh said the money was to be placed in a Singapore bank
account controlled by Mr. Ashton.

Mr. Brown has acknowledged a December meeting with Mr. Hao and Mr. Ashton. But
Mr. Brown's lawyer said his client told Mr. Hao at that meeting that he could
not help the enterprise since he was going into the Government. Mr. Ashton, who
has also testified before the grand jury, has been unavailable for comment.

Upon learning of the plan, Mr. Binh said "my guts turned upside down." He said
he told Mr. Hao that he could not support it. He said Mr. Hao tried to persuade
him to stay with the group.

He said he last saw Mr. Hao on Feb. 15, when Mr. Hao offered "to pay me money to
keep my mouth shut." Instead, Mr. Binh said, he began his campaign to publicize
the plan.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ly Thanh Binh, the small-time businessman who has been telling
the press and Federal officials that Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown sought a
bribe from the Vietnamese Government. (Associated Press for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 5, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Aspin Overrules Navy Secretary, Saving Admiral

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1095 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 4


Overruling his new Secretary of the Navy, Defense Secretary Les Aspin said today
that he would keep Adm. Frank B. Kelso 2d as the Navy's top officer.

Navy Secretary John H. Dalton, who took office in July, had called for Admiral
Kelso's removal as Chief of Naval Operations for failing to show proper
leadership at a 1991 convention of naval aviators where 83 women were assaulted.

But Mr. Aspin rejected the recommendation after several of his top aides
reviewed Mr. Dalton's findings late Sunday and found that they had treated
Admiral Kelso unfairly compared with 34 other admirals and Marine generals who
attended the Tailhook Association convention in Las Vegas, Nev.

Embarrassing Rebuke

"An evaluation of his record under the criteria you have offered does not
suggest to me that he should have been asked to retire," Mr. Aspin said in a
memorandum to Mr. Dalton that the Pentagon made public today.

Mr. Aspin also handed back the Secretary's recommendations to discipline 12
other admirals and Marine generals and told Mr. Dalton to clarify by Oct. 15 the
rationale for the suggested punishments.

"The Secretary of the Navy felt the C.N.O. should be judged by a higher or
different standard than he was going to apply to the other flag officers, and
Mr. Aspin disagreed with that," a senior Pentagon official said.

Admiral Kelso, who is already scheduled to retire next summer, said, "I'm happy
to be able to continue serving as C.N.O."

While no longer in danger of being relieved, the admiral is still subject to a
lesser punishment like a mild reprimand, Pentagon officials said.

Mr. Aspin's decision to side with Admiral Kelso, a 37-year Navy veteran, in
reversing Mr. Dalton's first major decision is an embarrassing rebuke to the
Navy Secretary, a United States Naval Academy graduate who was an investment
banker in Texas before becoming Secretary. And it comes against a backdrop of
rocky relations between the Clinton Administration and top military officials,
who have made no secret of their distaste for Mr. Clinton's views on homosexuals
in the armed forces and his avoidance of the draft during the Vietnam War.

But Pentagon officials today dismissed suggestions that the episode would cause
any lasting damage to relations between Mr. Aspin and Mr. Dalton, or between Mr.
Dalton and Admiral Kelso. The admiral and Mr. Dalton, for example, attended a
Navy concert together tonight, as originally planned, Navy officials said.

"I understand his reasoning, respect his views and support his decision," Mr.
Dalton said in a statement about Mr. Aspin's decision. "My foremost desire is to
do what is right for the naval service."

Secretary's Reasoning

Admiral Kelso had faced dismissal because he did not know what he should have
known, Pentagon officials said today in explaining Mr. Dalton's reasoning. The
admiral says he never saw or heard about any trouble during his two days at the
gathering at the Las Vegas Hilton.

But, the officials said, Mr. Dalton believed that if he admiral had been doing
his job properly he would have known that Tailhook conventions were notorious
for debauchery and would have put a stop to it.

In addition, the officials said Admiral Kelso should have known that the Navy
violated its own rules to pay more than $190,000 to fly 1,500 officers on
military aircraft for what amounted to a three-day party at the Hilton.

They also said Admiral Kelso should have known that some senior admirals
expressed demeaning views toward women and should have prevented it.

Moreover, the Pentagon officials said, he should have reacted forcefully when
Navy fliers initially failed to cooperate with Navy investigators after
accusations of misconduct at the convention.

"I believe that the damage done to the Navy's reputation by the incidents of
Tailhook could have been prevented or minimized by aggressive leadership and
foresight by senior Navy officials," Mr. Dalton said today in his statement.

Offer to Resign

All these reasons may have justified Admiral Kelso's dismissal two years ago
when the assaults were first reported, or even a year ago when the Navy
inquiries into the scandal were made public, Pentagon officials said today. But
with his having been judged for these lapses and found fit to continue in office
despite them, the officials said, it would not have been appropriate to cashier
him now.

Admiral Kelso offered to resign in the spring of 1992 "for the good of the
Navy," an aide said, but President George Bush and Defense Secretary Dick Cheney
refused to accept the offer. The admiral, 60, is scheduled to retire July 1,
1994.

Mr. Dalton entered office against the backdrop of a troubled Navy prosecution of
the Tailhook debacle. Since a Pentagon report in April accused 140 fliers of
indecent exposure, assault and lying under oath, only about 40 lower-ranking
officers have been fined or disciplined. Another 10 face trials, military grand
juries or special fact-finding panels.

But the Navy dismissed 60 cases immediately for a lack of evidence, and last
month it dropped charges against the first officer to go to trial, also for lack
of evidence.

Navy and civilian Pentagon officials deny that Mr. Dalton's recommendations
intended to make Admiral Kelso and his high-ranking colleagues scapegoats for a
scandal that has produced few cases with enough evidence to go to trial.

Passing the News

In his memorandum to Mr. Dalton, Mr. Aspin emphasized that the Pentagon sought
to apply "strict accountability and fairness" as the main standards for
punishing the guilty in the Tailhook affair.

Since Mr. Dalton's recommendations became public through disclosures to the
press late Friday, before the Secretary fully consulted Mr. Aspin on them,
Admiral Kelso's supporters have flooded the Defense Secretary's office with
calls and letters urging Mr. Aspin to overrule Mr. Dalton.

Mr. Aspin, in an unusual twist of protocol, paid Admiral Kelso a 20-minute visit
on Saturday in the admiral's Pentagon's office and promised to review Mr.
Dalton's findings.

The Defense Secretary then ordered several high-ranking aides, including William
J. Perry, the Deputy Defense Secretary; Jamie Gorelick, the Pentagon's senior
lawyer; and Rudy de Leon, a top aide to Mr. Aspin, to review the findings that
Mr. Dalton compiled with the assistance of the Navy's top lawyer, Steven S.
Honigman.

Mr. Aspin relayed his decision this morning to Mr. Dalton, who in turn went to
Admiral Kelso's office and in a 30-minute meeting told him he still had his job.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE SOMALIA MISSION;
WHITE HOUSE TRIES TO CALM CONGRESS

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 848 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 5


A wave of hostility toward the military operation in Somalia swept Congress
today, forcing the White House to send two Cabinet secretaries to Capitol Hill
to try to calm critics and plead for additional time to formulate a new policy.

"It's Vietnam all over again," said Senator Ernest F. Hollings, Democrat of
South Carolina, who is in a group of conservatives calling for quick withdrawal
from Somalia. "There's no education in a second kick of a mule."

The rising wave of oratory grew more strident after a meeting of more than 200
members of Congress with Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Secretary of
Defense Les Aspin in an overheated basement hall below the Capitol Rotunda. The
anger was apparent across a broad spectrum, taking with it Democrats and
Republicans, conservatives and liberals.

"We were told more time was needed to put a Government in place," said Patricia
Schroeder, Democrat of Colorado, who is on the House Armed Services Committee.
"Members said we heard that in January. It didn't look like they were making a
sale to me."

John McCain of Arizona, a ranking Republican on the Senate Armed Services
Committee, emerged from the meeting angry. "I learned nothing I didn't already
know," he said. "Anyone who watches the local and national news would get more
information."

'He Will Pay Sooner or Later'

Mr. McCain said his office received 400 calls on Monday from constituents
favoring immediate withdrawal and two calls supporting the present policy. Mr.
McCain, a prisoner of war in the Vietnam War, said of Mohammed Farah Aidid, who
has been blamed for attacks on United Nations peacekeepers: "We should tell Mr.
Aidid that we want the Americans back. Otherwise he will pay sooner or later.
Then we should come home."

Mr. Christopher and Mr. Aspin parried the criticisms with promises to seek
additional forces from other nations to replace American troops. They said they
wanted to withdraw from Somalia, but after a semblance of order and security had
been established.

Democratic and Republican lawmakers left the one-and-a-half-hour meeting
expressing bemused wonder that the two officials would offer little more than
promises that they would return with a withdrawal timetable.

It is not clear whether the critics can assemble sufficient votes to force
President Clinton's hand by passing legislation requiring him to stop the
operations in Somalia. But Congressional anxiety, already high, was fueled by
calls from constituents expressing outrage over the prospect of a new hostage
crisis and television pictures of Somali crowds dragging dead American
servicemen through the streets.

'Don't Look Very Hungry'

"The people who are dragging American bodies don't look very hungry to the
people of Texas," Senator Phil Gramm, Republican of Texas, said. "Support for
the President in the country and Congress is dying rather rapidly."

The mission by the two Cabinet officials underscored the tug-of-war developing
between the White House and Congress over which branch will determine the
strategy for completing a mission that began as a relief effort but has evolved
into combat.

Last month Congress passed a nonbinding resolution calling on the President to
set the limits of his Somalia policy by Oct. 15, setting the stage for a
Congressional vote by Nov. 15 to authorize the mission or force a pullout.

Lawmakers are overwhelmingly skeptical of the policy, but they are divided
between those who want to wait until November before acting and those who want
to vote immediately to bring the troops home.

The efforts to force an immediate pullout centered on Senator Robert C. Byrd of
West Virginia, the powerful chairman of the Appropriations Committee. Mr. Byrd
said he was prepared to introduce an amendment to an appropriations bill to set
a date to withdraw all forces. Such an amendment could reach the Senate floor as
early as Wednesday.

Complications With Hostages

Administration officials and Democratic Congressional leaders worked behind the
scenes to put off voting on such an amendment, or to shape it to delay the
withdrawal, or to make a pullout conditional on first freeing any American
troops held captive by General Aidid.

"If we had a vote today, we'd be out today," Senator Robert Dole of Kansas, the
Republican leader, said. But, he added, "We can't get out with hostages there."

Representative Henry J. Hyde of Illinois, a ranking Republican on the Foreign
Affairs Committee, said: "We need an exit strategy, and I don't see one. That is
compounding the Johnsonian error in Vietnam of incrementally deploying forces."

Precious few Congressional voices expressed support today for the Somalia
mission. One who did was Senator Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska, who has
special influence because he is a decorated and wounded Vietnam veteran.

"What's happening is that 85 to 90 percent of the people back home are saying,
Bring the boys home," Mr. Kerrey said. "I think it would be a mistake for the
United States to unilaterally pull out of a United Nations operation."


LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Gerald J. Carroll, 46, Navy Pilot and Author

SECTION: Section D; Page 21; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 219 words


Gerald J. Carroll, a decorated naval pilot who wrote two novels based on his
experiences in Vietnam, died on Thursday at his home in Leonardtown, Md. He was
46.

The cause was a heart attack, his family said.

Mr. Carroll, one of the Navy's most decorated aviators of the Vietnam war,
served for 21 years and retired in 1990 with the rank of lieutenant commander.
He flew 198 combat missions, also serving in Grenada and Beirut. He was the
recipient of the Distinguished Flying Cross, the Air Medal and the Navy
Commendation Medal.

His writing career did not begin until after he left the Navy and only after
several years of encouragement by a former high school classmate, the author Tom
Clancy, to start a novel.

His first novel, "North S.A.R.," was published in 1991 by Pocket Books, a
division of Paramount Publishing. Mr. Carroll's latest novel, "Ghostrider One,"
about Navy and Marine pilots in the Tet Offensive in Vietnam, will be published
in October by Pocket Books.

Mr. Carroll was born in Washington and grew up in Norwich, Conn., and Baltimore.
He graduated from Boston College.

In his Navy career he was an instructor at the United States Naval Academy in
Annapolis, Md.

He is survived by his wife, Deborah, and three sons, Sean P., Kevin G. and Brian
J., all of Leonardtown, Md.


LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 9; Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 350 words


WILLIAM M. KUNSTLER'S name tends to conjure up images of a crusader for
unpopular causes and controversial defendants. But a star-struck movie fan? He
certainly seemed like one the other day when he hung up the phone after talking
with LEW AYRES, the film actor.

The call brought an end to the lawyer's long search for Mr. Ayres, whom he'd met
briefly in the Philippines while they were both serving in the United States
Army during World War II.

"Since meeting him in Leyte, I have had a powerful impulse to talk to him
again," Mr. Kunstler said. "After years of fruitless efforts to locate him, I
finally obtained his present address. I wrote to him and on Monday, he called
me. At long last, I realized my long-standing wish."

The two men plan to meet in three weeks in Los Angeles, where Mr. Ayres lives.

Over the telephone, they talked about the encroachment of age -- Mr. Ayres is
85, Mr. Kunstler 74 -- and of how they had each been affected by the 1930
antiwar film, "All Quiet on the Western Front," in which Mr. Ayres starred.

Mr. Kunstler said, "I told him that while it had not prevented me from working
with combat units, perhaps due to being in my early 20's during World War II
rather than his age, it had deeply influenced me during the 1960's when I began
to represent protestors against the war in Vietnam."

Paul Baumer, the character played by Mr. Ayres, "became my symbol of the tragedy
of young men becoming cannon fodder in wars started and continued by their
elders," he said, adding, "There is no doubt that it affected what I've become."

Mr. Ayres sought conscientious-objector status when he was drafted and served
four years as a noncombatant medic and chaplain's aide. "I said that I didn't
mind going to war, but I wouldn't kill anyone," he said this week, adding that
the movie was only one influence in that decision.

Now, he looks back at the movie wistfully. "I never had a role that was more
effective," he said, "something that is a little frustrating when you think that
I did 60 years of films and never again had quite that effect."

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: William M. Kunstler; Lew Ayres


                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE SOMALIA MISSION;
A Search for Words to Mourn Troops Who Died in Somalia

BYLINE: By DON TERRY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 785 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Oct. 5


Nine days have passed since the Rev. Thomas Jackson got the news, but he is
still unsure about what he will say at the memorial service for Sgt. Eugene
Williams at New Original Church of God in Christ on Friday.

Will the pastor say Sergeant Williams was a God-fearing young man who loved his
country and honored his parents? Of course. That's obvious from the way the
26-year-old soldier died. He was killed when his Army helicopter was shot down
over Mogadishu by Somalian militia fighters on Sept. 25.

But when it comes to explaining why Sergeant Williams and the other Americans
who have died in Somalia were placed in harm's way and kept there for so long,
Mr. Jackson is at a loss. Were the young Americans in Somalia to feed the
starving or to hunt down a defiant militia leader or to restore some kind of
civilian government? The reasons for the American presence in Somalia are all a
blur to Mr. Jackson now.

"Whatever the reason is, I think the deaths of so many of our young people
should make us re-evaluate why we are there," Mr. Jackson said. "To get
imbroiled in another Vietnam-type situation is crazy. And I'm afraid that's what
it looks like we're about to do."

Once again sorrow and confusion about a far-off war are being expressed in the
United States as young soldiers and marines return home not in triumph but in
body bags.

Death at Odds With Mission

Twelve more American servicemen were killed in a brutal fire fight on Sunday as
their unit captured three top aides of the Somali militia leader Mohammed Farah
Aidid. Twenty-seven Americans have now died since December in Mogadishu.

This time, however, the return of the dead seems even more painful because the
initial justification for sending Americans so far away from Chicago and Garden
Grove, Calif., and Lucas, Iowa, and scores of other cities and towns seemed so
right: Somalian children were dying of hunger, and Americans could save them.

Maybe, in the beginning, in December, that was true and many Somalis seemed glad
the Americans had come.  But Barbara Rider of New Albany, Ind., said, her son,
Sgt. Christopher Hilgert, 27, never had a chance to help Somalis. By the time he
reached Somalia in August, the attitude toward Americans had soured. Sergeant
Hilgert had been in Somalia for less than 48 hours when he was killed on Aug. 8
by a land mine in Mogadishu.

"My son didn't get to feed anyone or save anyone," she said. "I don't think my
son got to see first hand what was going on over there. My son's death was in
vain."

Mrs. Rider said she thought she had begun to recover from her grief. Then, on
Monday, the pain came back as she watched on television as a mob dragged a dead
American through Mogadishu.

"Since I got over the funeral, this has been the hardest part," she said of the
ugly scenes of war. "My heart goes out to the families."

Sergeant Hilgert had planned to make a career out of the military. For now, his
wife, Pauline, and two children, ages 6 and 4, will stay in New Albany, but she
said she might eventually return to her native Britain.

A Matter of Respect

But not everyone who has lost a loved one in Somalia wants the United States to
withdraw. Now is not the time to pack up and leave a bunch of American ghosts
and a job unfinished, said Larry Gean, whose step-son, Lance Cpl. Anthony
Botello of Wilberton, Okla., was among the marines killed in the Aug. 8 land
mine explosion.

If the United States leaves now, Mr. Gean said, then his son's death would be a
complete waste as well as the complete tragedy.

"To me there has to come a time we quit feeding our young people into these
spots and then turn around and walk off because of public opinion or differences
of policy by people on the Hill," Mr. Gean said. "I know there will be little or
no respect from me for this country if we up and leave right now."

Because of the heavy death toll on Sunday, a new batch of funerals with 21-gun
salutes and flag draped caskets will begin soon. And other clergy will be
struggling as Mr. Jackson is for the right words for Sergeant Williams. He
wishes them luck.

At the service for Sergeant Williams, Mr. Jackson will mention loyalty and love.
He's sure about that. He might also remind the mourners that the man they knew
as Gene was a quiet, polite boy who played football at Crane High School and
loved jazz.

Before the pastor finishes, he is thinking about saying something about how
Sergeant Williams always loved uniforms and had dreamed of being in the
military. It might ease the pain if he reminds everyone that Gene died doing
what he always wanted to do.

"The question is, was a life lost in vain?" Mr. Jackson said. "I don't think
so."


LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 7, 1993, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A picture of an American soldier yesterday appeared in some copies without a
caption and adjoining an unrelated article. The picture showed Sgt. Eugene
Williams, who was killed in Somalia on Sept. 25; it should have appeared with
the article about American mourning for troops killed in Somalia.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Sgt. Eugene Williams.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

William A. Corley, 76, Bureau Chief for NBC

SECTION: Section D; Page 21; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 188 words


William Angus Corley, former chief of the NBC News bureaus in Chicago, Saigon
and Moscow, and an Emmy-winning television producer and writer, died on Sunday
at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx. He was 76 and lived in Manhattan.

He died of renal cancer, his family said.

In 1966, while he was bureau chief in Saigon, Mr. Corley wrote and was the
executive producer of "The First Television War," a documentary about the
Vietnam War that won an Emmy. In 1968, he was the executive producer of a
year-end news review that won another Emmy.

Mr. Corley started his career as a reporter for The Washington Daily News in the
1930's and worked as an editor at Transradio, a national wire service. He joined
The Associated Press in Washington in 1941 writing radio news copy. He later
joined NBC News and in 1963 was put in charge of the network's Chicago bureau.

He was chief correspondent in Moscow for 19 months beginning in 1969.

Mr. Corley was born in Brooklyn.

A marriage to the former Ana Luisa Aguilar, now of Monterey Park, Calif., ended
in divorce.

He is survived by his niece, Tina Thronson of Laramie, Wyo.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 8, 1993, Friday

CORRECTION:

An obituary on Wednesday about William A. Corley, former chief of the NBC News
bureaus in Chicago, Saigon and Moscow, who died on Sunday, misstated his age. He
was 77.


TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

An Elusive Clan Father Is Peacekeepers' Nemesis

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1327 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 6


In the Somali language, the surname of Gen. Mohammed Farah Aidid, the powerful
clan leader waging the vicious guerrilla war in the streets of Mogadishu,
carries this meaning: "He who will not be insulted."

It is an admonition that United Nations troops have recognized at their cost.

For more than 100 days, General Aidid and his force of several hundred
irregulars have mocked the efforts of United Nations peacekeepers, reinforced
with American gunships and elite troops, to take their leader into custody.
Their hit-and-run attacks have pinned down 18,000 peacekeeping troops in virtual
internal exile. The latest strike by his militia, which occurred on Sunday
against an elite United States Army unit, inflicted the heaviest battlefield
casualties seen by a single unit since the Vietnam War.

The balding, pot-bellied General Aidid, a Soviet-trained officer whose forces
swept the dictatorial President, Mohammed Siad Barre, from office in 1991, is
adept in the tactics of urban warfare that have humiliated United Nations
troops. But experts on Somalia say the source of his power may lie more deeply
in his refusal to accept outsiders' efforts to take away what he and his Haber
Gedir sub-clan won by conquest.

Family Under Siege

In the muddy alleyways and crumbled white stucco villas of southern Mogadishu,
the 57-year-old general, his followers within the Haber Gedir, and other Somalis
as well have resisted a United Nations offensive with the cohesion of a family
under siege.

After months of an uneasy peace, the clash between the United Nations and
General Aidid flared into undeclared war in early June when his forces ambushed
a peacekeeping patrol and left 24 Pakistanis dead. United Nations commanders,
vowing that he would be captured within days, showered the city with
bright-yellow leaflets offering a reward for the man they regard as Somalia's
most dangerous force.

But American officials now acknowledge that they underestimated the skill,
determination and depth of support for General Aidid, as well as his ability to
turn the tactics he honed in clan-based battles into what he proclaims is a
campaign against "U.S. imperialism."

A Western diplomat who knew General Aidid during the late 1980's when he was
jockeying to succeed to Mr. Siad Barre said his steely resolve was apparent even
then. "I had the impression of someone who would take things to the limit, and
was very, very determined not to have anyone in charge in Mogadishu except
himself," the diplomat said today.

Today, General Aidid's control remains limited to the southern half of the
capital along with some pockets in southern Somalia. But his sector, won in
fighting against Mohammed Ali Mahdi, a leader of the Abgal, a rival sub-clan, is
home to Mogadishu's airport, port and about half a million people, most of them
now members of General Aidid's Haber Gadir. Both sub-clans are factions of the
Hawiye, one of six major Somali clans.

Urban Warfare

In the 123 days that have passed since his forces ambushed the Pakistani troops
as they approached his radio station, his base has proved to be an ample
foundation for his campaign of violence.

With increasing sophistication, General Aidid and his forces have used
remote-controlled land mines, rocket-propelled grenades and anti-aircraft guns
to halt convoys, shoot down helicopters, and bring United Nations patrols to a
virtual halt. And while United Nations officials have sought to portray General
Aidid's influence as dwindling, televised scenes of civilians joining in
celebrations of his triumphs and American deaths have suggested that his
xenophobic message has found some resonance, at least among members of his clan.

The thick-set, soft-spoken general, who favors a shoulder holster and a
silver-tipped cane and sports a yellowish diamond ring, enjoyed better relations
with the United States in the first stages of what was described as a relief
mission when it began in December.

It was General Aidid and his followers who welcomed Robert B. Oakley,
Washington's special envoy, to Somalia late last year as the representative of
the American effort to speed food aid to the country, and who embraced the first
arrivals of United States troops. But in retrospect, Clinton Administration
officials say, it should have been apparent that the General's hospitality was
contingent on his maintaining power.

As evidence of General Aidid's true sentiments, the officials point to comments
he made last fall when Western Governments were first deciding whether to offer
help. "We don't need outsiders," he declared in one interview.

Born in 1934 in the part of Somalia controlled by Italy, General Aidid showed
his appetite for power as he rose through his career. Trained in an Italian
infantry school near Rome, he returned to become chief of police in Mogadishu,
then chief of staff at a military training center there. In the early 1960's he
attended a three-year officers' course in the Soviet Union, which was wrestling
with the United States for influence in the Horn of Africa.

As an up-and-coming officer, Mr. Aidid was so ambitious that he was known for
arriving at work by 4 A.M., even in a country in which punctuality has never
been a virtue. When Mr. Siad Barre took power in 1969, Mr. Aidid was chosen as
the Army's chief of staff. But after the dictator grew suspicious about his
support within the military, he was imprisoned for nearly six years in one of
Somalia's notorious underground prisons, for the most part in solitary
confinement, United States Government officials said today.

After being released, however, Mr. Aidid was called back to military service as
a colonel to help command Somali troops in their border war with Ethiopia in
1977 and 1978. He later served as a military adviser to Mr. Siad Barre, and was
dispatched by him as Ambassador to India in 1984.

But General Aidid abruptly left the dictator's team in 1989 to join the Somali
opposition, and ultimately led a Haber Gedir guerrilla force in attacks from a
base in Biagadan near the Ethiopian border on garrisons controlled by Mr. Siad
Barre. Armed with weapons captured from those garrisons and purchased from
abroad, the Aidid forces drove Mr. Siad Barre from the capital and chased him
across the Kenyan border in early 1991.

It was as the spoils of that victory that General Aidid, whose sub-clan had been
a nomadic people of central Somalia, was able to divide control of Mogadishu
with Mr. Ali Mahdi, whose Abgal sub-clan had historically been dominant in the
capital.

No Plans for Exile

General Aidid has said that his wife is in Canada and that his 12 children now
live abroad, including a daughter in Milan and several sons in Los Angeles who
are employed as engineers. But while conquest has extended the Haber Gedir his
sub-clan beyond its traditional reach, General Aidid has shown no sign of
willingness, despite United Nations pressure, to relinquish the weapons
necessary to defend it or to join his family in exile.

Reporters who scoured his once-comfortable villa in June after United States
AC-130 gunships had reduced it to rubble found books in several languages,
including a tract on Chinese guerrilla tactics. Adm. Jonathan Howe, the top
United Nations envoy in Mogadishu, was still confidently predicting on Sept. 4
that the United Nations would "be able to arrest Aidid in due course."

But even after the furious battle Sunday between Somalis and United States Army
Rangers that left 12 Americans dead, 75 wounded, at least one taken prisoner and
others missing, General Aidid was brazenly speaking out on his clandestine radio
station this week, assailing United States colonialism.

Today, Pentagon officials said they believed that the Somali clan-leader had
foiled their efforts to locate him in part by communicating with his forces on
simple walkie-talkies difficult to monitor with high-technology American
listening gear.

NAME: Mohammed Farah Aidid

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Mohammed Farah Aidid in Mogadishu last June. (Associated
Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-Radical Gets 8 to 12 Years In 1970 Killing, and a Rebuke

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1167 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Oct. 6


Imposing a negotiated sentence that he said was not adequate to the crime, a
state judge sentenced Katherine Ann Power today to 8 to 12 years in a
Massachusetts prison for her role in a 1970 bank robbery that resulted in the
murder of a Boston police officer.

The judge, Robert Banks of Suffolk County Superior Court, rejected any
suggestion that the political views or psychiatric problems of Ms. Power, a
onetime antiwar radical, called for leniency. And he was openly sympathetic to
the police officer's eldest daughter, Clare Schroeder, who captivated the
courtroom as she spoke about the suffering of a widow and her nine children left
without the man they adored.

Under Massachusetts law, Ms. Power, who surrendered three weeks ago after 23
years as a fugitive, will be eligible for release in a little more than five
years.

Stopping Profit From Crime

The judge also imposed 20 years' probation and, taking account of dozens of
movie and book offers that Ms. Power had received through her lawyer, he ordered
that as a condition of her probation she could not earn any profit related to
her crime.

"I will not permit profit from the lifeblood of a Boston police officer by
someone responsible for his killing," Judge Banks said.

In court today, Ms. Power apologized for her role in the death of Officer Walter
Schroeder. But it was the Schroeder family, depicted in an impassioned voice by
Clare Schroeder, now a 41-year-old police sergeant in Waltham, Mass., that
dominated the day.

Walter Schroeder was a local hero, a man who in 1968 singlehandedly caught a
gang of armed bank robbers, and at the same bank where he later took a fatal
bullet in his back.

"One of the most vivid pictures I have of my father as a police officer is a
photograph showing him giving a young child CPR and saving his life," Sergeant
Schroeder told the court from the witness stand, facing her mother and her
brothers and sisters, as well as Ms. Power and her family.

"I remember being so proud of my father, seeing him on the front page of the old
Record American, saving a life. Years later, as a 17-year-old girl at my
father's wake, a woman introduced herself to me as the child's mother."

Ms. Power said at the time she surrendered that her anguish over the Vietnam War
had led to her participation in the bank robbery. But Sergeant Schroeder
dismissed that idea, saying in a voice full of contained fury, that the war was
not a justification for her father's death. "Murdering a policeman in Boston to
bring peace to Southeast Asia was utterly senseless then, and it is just as
senseless now," she said.

Ms. Power had also said that a lifelong, untreated depression had prevented her
from surrending earlier. Referring to Ms. Power's "so-called clinical
depression," Sergeant Schroeder said, "My mother could not afford such a
luxury."

At times during her 20-minute statement, Sergeant Schroeder fixed her gaze on
Ms. Power, who did not turn away but looked pale and meek.

Ms. Power submitted a letter of apology to the court today and spoke only
briefly. With her husband and 15-year-old son in the courtroom, she choked back
tears as she said: "Twenty years ago I undertook a course of action that
resulted in the death of another human being. I cannot possibly say in words how
sorry I am for the death of Officer Schroeder."

Reliving Painful Day

For everyone in the packed courtroom, Clare Schroeder relived Sept. 23, 1970,
when, as a senior at Mount St. Joseph's Academy in Brighton, she was called to
the principal's office.

"When I got there, I was surprised to see that my uncle Jack was standing there,
looking out the window," Sergeant Schroeder said. "My uncle just said that we
had to go; we had to go to the hospital. He said my dad had been shot."

The next day, at home, she learned that her father had died. "As absolutely
devastated as I was, as the oldest, my mother asked me to go tell my brothers
and sisters," Sergeant Schroeder said, her voice breaking. "I remember walking
from house to house where my brothers and sisters were staying with relatives. I
told each of my brothers and sisters and, each time, I cried again."

Their mother, Marie Schroeder, whom Clare Schroeder described as a deeply
private woman, was then 41. The youngest child was 11-month-old Erin. They have
all missed Walter Schroeder every day for 23 years, Clare Schroeder said.

He was not there for Little League games, school recitals, graduations, or
weddings, she said. "He wasn't there to teach my brothers how to throw a
football, or how to change a flat tire." Nor was he there to comfort them at the
funeral of one of Clare's brothers, Walter, who was hit by a truck and killed at
age 6. And he was not there to celebrate when four of his children were sworn in
as police officers.

"I became a police officer because of him," Sergeant Schroeder said. "So did my
brother Paul, my brother Edward, and recently my sister Erin. My sister Joan
married a police officer. Each of us in our own way have tried to follow in his
tradition of service and devotion."

A Negotiated Sentence

In sentencing Ms. Power, who pleaded guilty to manslaughter and armed robbery,
Judge Banks followed the recommendation of the District Attorney, Ralph C.
Martin 2d, who had negotiated her surrender. The judge said after the sentencing
that he did not fault the prosecutors for seeking a reduced sentence.

In a telephone interview later in the day, he said: "The gravity of the crime
was in imbalance to the sentence imposed. And the sentence recommended was
certainly inadequate."

But he told the court: "Some measure of justice, obviously, is better than
justice denied."

Massachusetts law prohibits criminals from selling their stories to publishers
or filmakers. But in a 1991 ruling, the United States Supreme Court found a
similar New York law unconstitutional because it singled out earnings from
speech and writing, in violation of the First Amendment.

Judge Banks's restrictions were imposed was as a "special condition" of
probation, apparently in an attempt to avoid a constitutional battle. Such
orders from the bench can go beyond ordinary laws.

Prof. William Cohen, a First Amendment scholar at the Stanford University Law
School, said Judge Banks's prohibition was probably constitutional because it
did not single out writing or speech, as the New York law did.

Ms. Power was the last of her accomplices to be brought to justice. William
Gilday Jr., who shot Officer Schroeder, is serving a life sentence in prison.
Robert J. Valeri became a witness for the state against his accomplices, served
time in prison for manslaughter and armed robbery, and was released. Stanley
Bond died when he blew himself up in 1972 trying to make a bomb to escape from
prison, where he was awaiting trial for Officer Schroeder's murder. Susan Saxe
was captured in Philadelphia in 1975 and served seven years in prison for
manslaughter and armed robbery.

NAME: Katherine Ann Power

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In a scene that recalled passions that once divided America,
Katherine Ann Power, above, a former antiwar radical, was sentenced for the 1970
slaying of a police officer. (Reuters); Clare Schroeder, the officer's daughter,
said committing such a crime to bring peace to Southeast Asia had been "utterly
senseless." (Associated Press) (pg. A1); Judge Robert A. Banks speaking
yesterday with Katherine Ann Power during her sentencing in Boston for the
killing of a police officer in 1970. Ms. Power surrendered last month after 23
years on the run. (Reuters) (pg. B15)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE SOMALIA MISSION;
Relatives Recount Dreams of 2 Killed in Somalia

BYLINE: By ROBERT HANLEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 786 words

DATELINE: LONG VALLEY, N.J., Oct. 6


Jamie Smith's brief letter from Mogadishu arrived in his family's morning mail
today, three days after he and 11 other United States Army Rangers were killed
in a firefight in the heart of the Somali capital.

In it, he expressed disgust about militiamen loyal to Gen. Mohammed Farah Aidid,
the fugitive Somali faction leader, and questioned the willingness of some
United Nations troops to back American soldiers in Mogadishu, his father, James
Smith, said today.

Mr. Smith, himself a retired Army Ranger captain who lost the lower half of his
left leg in combat in Vietnam in 1967, shared portions of his 21-year-old son's
letter, dated Sept. 25, at a news conference near their home here and talked
about his son's boyhood, his decision to enlist in the Army after graduating
from West Morris Central High School here in 1990 and his death after a month's
duty in Somalia.

"Was it worth it?" Mr. Smith asked, repeating a question about his son's role in
the operation in Somalia. He paused, then said: "It's not really a soldier's
position to decide whether or not it's worth it."

A Reason for Dying

Mr. Smith said the Army had told him that his son was part of the second wave of
Rangers sent in to aid those who had been pinned down by Somali militiamen. "I
believe he went in by helicopter," he said.

Mr. Smith said there were few good reasons to fight and far fewer reasons to
die, but added, "To keep people from starving to death is a pretty good reason."

Cpl. Jamie Smith was one of two Rangers from New Jersey killed on Sunday in
Mogadishu. The other was Specialist Dominick Pilla of Vineland, who was a
helicopter machine-gunner.

Like Corporal Smith, Specialist Pilla was 21, the son of a Vietnam veteran and
someone who enlisted immediately after high school graduation.

Specialist Pilla grew up amid the flatlands and farms of southern New Jersey.
Corporal Smith was raised in the hilly countryside of western Morris County in
northern New Jersey. Both wound up serving in the same elite Ranger unit,
Company B, Third Battalion, 75th Ranger Regiment, out of Ft. Benning, Ga.

"He felt good about being in the action anywhere," Specialist Pilla's mother,
Diane, told The Associated Press. "He wanted to be in the thick of things."

Explaining her son's enlistment, Mrs. Pilla said: "He felt it was something he
had to do. He always wanted to help."

Joining the Rangers was Specialist Pilla's lifelong dream, his older brother
Frank, 23, said in a telephone interview today.

"Ever since childhood, he wanted to do it," Mr. Pilla said. "He was always
playing Army in the woods as a little kid. He was interested then in strategies
and tactics. He liked to push himself as far as he could go."

Mr. Smith said much the same thing about his son's reasons for enlisting.

"Jamie's always been one who liked being pushed to do something special,"
striving to accomplish things that were "extremely difficult" mentally and
physically, his father said.

"He had very firm beliefs -- right was right, wrong was wrong," Mr. Smith said.
"He wanted that special feeling inside him that he did something others didn't
do."

Complaints About U.N. Troops

His son's Sept. 25 letter was written on the light beige notepaper that Mr.
Smith mailed to him in a care package of Kool-Aid and candy in early September.
In part of the letter, Corporal Smith complained that some United Nations troops
in the Somali capital did not fully support American soldiers, Mr. Smith said.

"He expresses his great disdain," Mr. Smith said.

Mr. Smith also said his son had written that General Aidid's militiamen often
"mutilated" their opponents after killing them.

"I've never felt so much hatred and contempt in my life," he quoted his son as
writing.

In another passage, Corporal Smith called regular Somali people "friendly and
hardworking."

"The problem is you can't tell the bad guys from the good guys," he wrote.

Wore Father's Beret

As a child and a teen-ager, Jamie Smith enjoyed hunting, canoeing, camping and
football, playing offensive and defensive tackle in high school.

"He was not a natural athlete," Mr. Smith said. "He had to teach himself. He
did."

Aside from often wearing his father's Rangers' beret until he was in eighth
grade, Jamie Smith said little about the military. Early in his senior year, his
father said, he talked at times about college and at other times about joining
the Army.

"Then one day he just announced he was just going into the Rangers," his father
said.

His son's death seems to have left Mr. Smith, 47, with mixed emotions.

"Sadness -- absolutely," he said. "But I am not bitter. It was my son's
decision. I could not have stopped him."

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: James Smith holding the letter he received in the mail
yesterday in Long Valley, N.J., from his son, Cpl. Jamie Smith, an Army ranger
who was killed with 11 other Americans on Sunday in Somalia. (Sam D'Amico for
The New York Times); Cpl. Jamie Smith (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

I.M.F. to Give Hanoi a $223 Million Loan

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 163 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 6


The International Monetary Fund announced today that it would make a loan to
Vietnam of about $223 million to help Hanoi rebuild the economy. The loan is
another step in Vietnam's bid to become a fully integrated member of the world
economy.

Last week Vietnam became eligible for new funds when it paid the I.M.F. about
$140 million in arrears on previous loans, with the help of a group of donor
countries, particularly France and Japan. That repayment was made possible when
the United States dropped its opposition to the French-Japanese plan in July.

More funds for Vietnam are expected to come from the World Bank and the Asian
Development Bank.

In a statement, the I.M.F. said Vietnam has made "major progress" in moving
toward a market-oriented system. The fund especially cited the move toward
family-based farming, the liberalization of agricultural prices, reform of the
tax system and the establishment of a two-tier banking system as positive
factors.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
We're Outta There

BYLINE: ANNA QUINDLEN;  Anna Quindlen's column will appear on Thursdays and
Sundays.

SECTION: Section A; Page 29; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 700 words


It began with the pictures. And now it will end with them.

A year ago there was the news footage of children, skeletons with black-hole
eyes, starving in the villages of Somalia, dying and being buried where they had
fallen because there were so many dead. It touched the heart.

Days ago there was the news footage of jubilant Somalis dragging the body of an
American soldier through the street, his naked torso dusky with the dust of the
roads. It fueled a fury.

After all the deja vu analyses of the conflict in the Persian Gulf, it is the
military action in Somalia that has overnight become the true child of Vietnam.
And that is why the President now needs a concrete short-term plan for
withdrawing from a place we entered with the very best intentions.

"The people who are dragging American bodies don't look very hungry to the
people of Texas," said Senator Phil Gramm, riding a tsunami of public opinion.

Food -- that was how we began. American intervention saved thousands of Somalis
from death by making sure that supplies got past warring warlords. But the next
step was to make sure the country would not relapse into clan warfare and
famine, and to do that we needed to "secure" the region for future relief
efforts.

Secure the region is, of course, not a humanitarian term. It is a military term.
Food shipments turned to fierce fighting with supporters of Gen. Mohammed Farah
Aidid.

We were as naive as we were in Vietnam, where we expected people whose language
the soldiers did not speak and whose customs they did not understand to be
universally grateful for salvation from Communism. At first it seemed we were
slow to act in Somalia because we were less moved by starving black children
than we might have been by white ones; maybe it was another kind of affront to
stay after the food had arrived, the American bwana telling the natives how to
run their nation. "Colonialism," General Aidid called it. That has a familiar
ring.

We were as naive about General Aidid as we were about his ancestor, Ho Chi Minh.
We learned a quarter-century ago that people can be inspired to fight tooth and
nail for the sovereignty of their own small country, where they know the turf
and we do not. Then we forgot it until American officials had to admit this week
that they had underestimated the ferocity of -- what? We can't even call them
the enemy, because we are not at war.

To the contrary: we came in peace, to bring aid and comfort, and we did. But the
military has never been comfortable in the comfort business. It is in the
business of getting the job done. As Somalis in Mogadishu peered at the wreckage
of a fallen copter and some advisers called for increased troop strength, that
job began to sound dangerously close to one articulated in Vietnam in 1968: "it
became necessary to destroy the town in order to save it."

The job now is to get out as quickly as we can. If the President does not do it
himself, the Congress will do it for him. It is not just that public opinion is
fiercely against our involvement, that American empathy has shriveled in the
face of domestic deprivation, that the new mantras of international relations
are "We have enough problems in our own country" and "We can't police the
world."

I favored sending American troops to Somalia. But I was naive, too, about what
would happen after the starving were fed. Just as we were flummoxed, flipping
and flopping like a fish with a hook in its mouth, faced with that ignominious
war in which we were to destroy Vietnam in order to save it, we are flummoxed by
how to be humanitarian in tanks.

The cold war over, we embarked on a warm one, and we were not ready for its
particular demands. There are organizations that feed people, and organizations
that do battle with them. Together they make an uneasy, perhaps impossible
marriage.

We won't be sending American troops to Bosnia any time soon after this, that's
for certain, no matter what the pictures tell us about the horrendous plight of
those poor people. And we'll be bringing them home from Somalia. Not because we
were wrong to go there in the beginning.  But because we didn't really
understand how it would end.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1037 words



International A3-16

U.S. DOUBLING SOMALIA FORCE
President Clinton said he will double the U.S. ground forces in Somalia for a
final six months, to enable U.S. troops to bring the mission to a successful
conclusion.  A1

A QUESTION OF IMAGE
News analysis: In making his decision to keep American troops in Somalia,
President Clinton appeared to be keeping in mind the need to maintain America's
image as a strong world leader.  A1


EEFING UP THE MILITARY
The decision to double the military in Somalia was made to help correct what the
military viewed as flaws in their Somalia mission and in their ability to carry
it out.  A14

BACK AT HOME, GRIEF
As Fort Benning mourns the soldiers who died in Somalia, family members
expressed deep rage at the taunting displays of the dead and confusion about
America's foreign policy.  A16

U.S. helicopters broadcast encouragement to captured soldiers.  A15

The U.N. is refusing a prisoner exchange for peacekeepers.  A16

Congress largely reacted favorably to the President's speech.  A14

The President's envoy to Somalia is outspoken on U.N. policy.  A15

U.S. CONFLICTS OVER HAITI FORCE
The Pentagon and State Department are locked in a struggle over whether to
deploy hundreds of American military trainers and engineers to Haiti in light of
the problems the U.S. faces in Somalia, officials said.  A1

STRIKE THREATENS HAITI PACT
Gunmen collaborating with the police enforced a strike to close down the Haitian
capital on the eve of a major international effort to support democracy and to
put the exiled president back in office.  A12

MOURNING AND ACTION IN MOSCOW
Russia observed a day of mourning for those who died in the siege of the
Parliament building while President Yeltsin continued to consolidate his power,
including suspending the nation's highest court.  A7

U.S. lawyer died in siege of Russia's Parliament building.  A8

BHUTTO NEEDS PAKISTAN COALITION
Benazir Bhutto's party captured the most seats in the new Parliament but fell
short of an absolute majority. She now must woo small parties into a coalition
government to become Prime Minister again.  A3

Bosnia's leader asked for a new approach to negotiating a peace.  A5

Ireland's Prime Minister endorsed a Northern Ireland peace move.  A9

South African government talks cover form as well as content.  A10

Capri Journal: Italy's hard times echo in a tourist haven.  A4

National A18-28

BOND FIRMS QUIT POLITICS
Nine Wall Street firms will abstain from making political contributions amid
increased scrutiny into how lucrative state and local bond-selling business is
awarded.  A1

HEALTH PLAN GUESSTIMATES
The estimates of insurance costs in the Clinton health plan were sophisticated
guesses based on incomplete and outdated information, say actuaries from several
large accounting organizations.  A26

EXECUTIVES ARE SKEPTICAL
Chief executives of some of the nation's largest corporations expressed strong
skepticism about the Clinton health plan.  A26

The Surgeon General said abortion should be covered.  A26

HELMS HOLDS UP NOMINATION
Senator Jesse Helms staged a filibuster to block the nomination of Walter E.
Dellinger 3d, a longtime opponent, to a senior Justice Department position.  A20


Newt Gingrich: The man who could be House minority leader.  A24

VIETNAMESE DENIES TIES TO BROWN
A senior Vietnamese official denied charges that his government had approved
payments to Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown for lobbying on behalf of Vietnam.
A26

PITFALLS OF SENSITIVITY TRAINING
The costly training program intended to promote greater tolerance among
employees at the Washington State ferry system has created a backlash,
highlighting the pitfalls of such programs.  A18

BLAMING U.S. IN TB EPIDEMIC
Tuberculosis has increased 20 percent since 1985, and the Federal Government has
failed to supply the money needed to curtail the epidemic, a report said.  A23

PACT ON RAISING GRAZING FEES
Breaking a long deadlock, Democratic lawmakers agreed to raise the fees that
ranchers pay to graze animals on Federal lands.  A27

A pact would allow logging in some ancient Northwest forest.  A27

NO 'RHINO SUITE' THIS TIME
Its ranks depleted by a scandal involving Navy aviators, the Tailhook
Association is gathering in San Diego for its first convention since its
notorious 1991 bacchanal.  A28

Law Page B10

An advertisment, a slaying and then a free-for-all over ethics.

At the Bar: The low-down on highfalutin law firms.

Metro Digest B1

QUALITY OF LIFE AT ISSUE
A majority of New York City residents believe the quality of life in the city
has declined over the last four years, according to the latest New York
Times/WCBS-TV News Poll. But in the midst of an election campaign, the poll also
found that most New Yorkers do not think either Mayor Dinkins or his challenger,
Rudolph W. Giuliani, is likely to change things significantly.  A1

Weekend C1-35

NOBEL WINNER
The novelist Toni Morrison, chronicler of black American life, was honored by
the Nobel Committee of the Swedish Academy, which said she "gives life to an
essential aspect of American reality." A1

Dead Sea Scrolls on view.  C1
Video at the Film Festival.  C1
Clinton honors cultural figures.  C3
Kasparov settles for a tense draw.  C7
Music: "Marilyn," the opera.  C3
Art: Lichtenstein show.  C1

Obituaries D16-17

AGNES de MILLE IS DEAD
The choreographer Agnes de Mille, who changed American dance with "Rodeo" and
musical comedy with her work in "Oklahoma!," died of a stroke at 88.  A1

Melvin Jacobs, ex-chief executive at Saks Fifth Avenue.  D16

Business Digest D1

Sports B11-18

Editorials/Op-Ed A34-35

Editorials

Somalia: time to get out.
Ron Brown's evasions.
Blissful ignorance in Detroit.
The essence of Toni Morrison.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Who's in charge here?
Anthony Lewis: Liberty or autocracy?
Bruce G. Blair: Russia's doomsday machine.

Chronicle B8

Crossword C7

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE SOMALIA MISSION: Analysis;
An Old Cold War Refrain

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1248 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 7


The phrases resounded through political Washington all week in an insistent,
Kissinger-esque echo of an era that had supposedly ended. "We can't just cut and
run," the policy makers said again and again after Sunday's battle in Mogadishu.
"It would send the wrong signal."

In his speech today, President Clinton joined the chorus. If the United States
left Somalia now, he said, "our leadership in world affairs would be undermined
at the very time when people are looking to America to help promote peace and
freedom in the post-cold-war world, and all around the world, aggressors, thugs
and terrorists will conclude that the best way to get us to change our policies
is to kill our people."

The Clinton Administration believes that the old verities, however timeworn,
retain their validity in the single-superpower age. That is the main reason
there will be no quick pullout from Somalia. But many critics, in government and
out, are profoundly skeptical.

More Troops, Different Goals

What signal? they ask. To whom, now that local conflicts no longer threaten to
turn into East-West showdowns? Does it matter enough to continue risking
American soldiers' lives on a murkily defined mission in a region where no one
believes the that nation's vital interests are at stake?

With many on Capitol Hill and in the nation at large demanding a quick exit from
an enterprise that has strayed far from its initial goals, Mr. Clinton offered
something very different -- more troops and heavy weapons, a much less ambitious
set of goals than the one in the United Nations resolution that the United
States eagerly supported only last month, withdrawal by next March 31, and no
explanation of why a withdrawal then would seem any wiser or any more practical
than it seems now.

Mr. Clinton asserted nothing more than "a reasonable chance" of success, even
under his revised policy. He disavowed any commitment to nation building with
this comment, so reminiscent of Lyndon B. Johnson's statements about Vietnam:
"It is not our job to rebuild Somalia's society or even to create a political
process that allow Somalia's clans to live and work in peace. The Somalis must
do that for themselves."

Doubt About Foundations

American officials speak confidently of handing responsibility over to other
nations after establishing political stability. But imposing political stability
on a country with no polity, no real governmental tradition and only a faint
sense of community, has proved impossible so far. It will be made no easier by
added firepower, despite the President's vague assurance that "through their
pressure and their presence, our troops will help to make it possible for the
Somali people, working with others, to reach agreement among themselves so that
they can solve their problems and survive when we leave."

So what has changed? Washington has hoped for months that the Africans would
somehow come to the rescue, and it apparently still does; that is said to
explain the dispatch of Robert B. Oakley, an old Africa and Somalia hand, to
search again for peace in the region.

But the United States has found no viable alternative to Gen. Mohammed Farah
Aidid, the elusive clan leader. It cannot find him, either, let alone engage him
in substantive political negotiation.

If disorder reigns six months from now, the temptation will be to shove the
deadline back. Klaus Kinkel, the German Foreign Minister, who is visiting
Washington this week, said that if Somalia's basic problems have not been
solved, there will be no one for the United States to turn over to, because
others will pull out, too.

"All of this talk of pulling out is a very bad sign," Mr. Kinkel said in a brief
interview. "One week, two months, six months, it's the same thing, if you leave
before the job is done. Europe will see this as a new tendency in American
politics, likely to spread."

American officials acknowledged today that he was probably right, that the
chances of a 25,000-strong American contingent in the Balkans looked suddenly
remote after this week, despite Mr. Clinton's earlier pledges.

Defense Secretary Les Aspin, who has taken a pounding this week for his handling
of the fallout from the Tailhook scandal, as well as the Somalia operation,
argued that an early pullout would wreck the Administration's strategy of
dealing with many problems through the United Nations -- a strategy to stretch
limited United States resources.

"If after we got a dozen guys killed on Sunday, we pull out," Mr. Aspin said,
"it tells people wherever we go -- the Golan Heights, Bosnia, Syria, Haiti,
wherever -- that all they have to do is give us double-digit casualties and they
can get rid of us."

The problems with that argument are many. The most important is that it leaves
no room for the United States to decide, having joined a United Nations
operation, that it should get out because it isn't working or no longer serves
American interests.

In addition, the argument is undercut by the President's pledge to get out by
March 31. If cutting and running is bad now, why is it good then, with the
United Nations presumably still committed to its ambitious resolutions on
building stable, modern institutions of government?

'Remember the Quagmire?'

Representative Patricia Schroeder of Colorado, whose career began in the antiwar
movement of the late 1960's, listened this week to Mr. Aspin, her fellow
Democrat, who spent years in Vietnam, explain the Administration's reluctance to
withdraw at once from Somalia.

She was horrified.

"We spent 20 years together on the Armed Services Committee, and we agreed on
most of the issues," she said.  "I kept thinking, 'Come on, Les, pull yourself
together. Have you forgotten everything you learned in Vietnam? Remember the
quagmire?' "

Even allowing for the difference in scale, the parallel is far from exact. But
there seems little doubt that Mr. Clinton got into the predicament from which he
is trying to extricate himself and the nation by failing to heed as well as his
predecessor did some of the lessons from the war in Southeast Asia.

Before sending American troops to Saudi Arabia for the war in the Persian Gulf,
George Bush talked constantly about the need to get Congress and the nation on
board, to define the mission and stick to it and to use overwhelming force. He
did most of that, and things worked out remarkably well.

A Legacy From Bush

Mr. Clinton, on the other hand, inherited a mission that Mr. Bush had limited
and allowed it to be widened, largely by the United Nations, to include
political and military aims.

Nor did he sell his policy to Capitol Hill or to the public. His initial effort,
when Mr. Aspin and Secretary of State Warren Christopher went to the Hill this
week, evoked little but fury, with Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican
who served seven years in a North Vietnamese prison camp, describing their
briefing as "by far the most pathetic performance I have encountered since I
came to Washington."

Facing that kind of condemnation, the President was forced to fall back.

The initial reaction to his speech was favorable, but much of Washington was
still wondering tonight how he could achieve enough political progress between
now and March 31 on the distant, intractable soil of Somalia to give real
meaning to his promise to achieve "an honorable withdrawal." That was what
Johnson and Richard M. Nixon sought, too, and they never did get it.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Teaching Tolerance in Workplaces: A Seattle Program Illustrates Limits

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1487 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, Oct. 7


When the nation's largest ferry system started a costly training program to
promote greater tolerance among employees, it was intended to be "shock
therapy," as one official called it -- a sort of cultural boot camp for the
deckhands, seamen, captains and mates steeped in sailor traditions.

One by one they came off the boats and into the training room, all 1,500
employees of the Washington State Ferry System. They were told not to say "gals"
or "ladies," instructed to call blacks "people of color" and reminded that while
some traditional maritime terms may be nautically correct on Puget Sound, they
are offensive to some people.

As intended, the seminars produced some obvious changes aboard the giant
ferries. Gone are the ubiquitous girlie calendars from the walls of crew
quarters. Female workers say they are less likely to hear sexual jokes from the
men. Black workers say whites treat them with a degree of respect that had been
missing, though it sometimes seems grudging.

But despite the $1 million program, many ferry workers say they are more
polarized than before the diversity training.

Their comments are similar to those heard in some other places where diversity
training has moved out of management seminars and into the lower ranks of
workers. Such critics say it is futile to try to change attitudes by forcing
people to sit in all-day seminars or by giving them lists of forbidden words, as
was done here.

Hesitation in Communication

"There's a huge backlash. Tons of anger," said Marcia Morse, one of the first
women hired at the ferry system nearly 19 years ago and a proponent of diversity
training.

Dozens of workers interviewed at the ferry system said they were afraid to talk
to each other, and some supervisors said they hesitated to give orders.

While most of those interviewed approved of the goals of diversity training,
they said the manner in which it is applied sometimes seems condescending.

"Let's face it, I'm a middle-aged guy and my mind is made up," said Dennis
Traxler, a backhoe operator with the City of Portland, Ore., which has spent
nearly $1 million sending each of its 4,700 employees through a day of films and
lectures on diversity.

Mr. Traxler, a white Vietnam War veteran who has spent most of his adult life as
a trench digger working with blacks, American Indians and other members of
minorities, considers himself a tolerant person with his own ideas. "Sitting in
a classroom all day isn't going to change me one iota," he said.

Less Backlash Elsewhere

Some diversity experts say the problems in Seattle and Portland may be part of a
natural tension that develops when white-collar trainers try to tell blue-collar
workers how they should behave and talk. Diversity programs tailored for certain
companies or cities elsewhere have produced less backlash, experts say.

But if, as ferry managers said, the goal of the system's diversity training was
to reduce the number of incidents of sexual harassment or racial bias, then it
seems to have failed at the ferry system. Less than a year after training ended,
there have been 25 new formal complaints about behavior deemed improper, and a
string of lawsuits. Among the complaints are those of two men who say they were
sexually harassed by women.

Ferry managers argue that the complaints, and the backlash among workers at the
lower levels, are merely part of the noise of change. "We are trying to change
the culture of an organization," said Princess Jackson-Smith, a spokeswoman for
the Washington State ferries. "What you're seeing now is the turmoil period."

But many workers say it goes beyond that. What they resent is the forced aspect
of the training, a process that they say ignores human nature.

"Diversity training has created a lot of friction," said Bradley Wells, a white
supervisor. "We used to all be just ferry workers, but now everyone's divided up
into little groups: blacks, women, gays, even white males. Can you give me one
reason why we need a white man's group? I don't need anyone to defend me."

Dissatisfacation Elsewhere

Similar problems are surfacing elsewhere. A recent survey of readers of Cultural
Diversity at Work, a national newsletter published in Seattle, found broad
dissatisfaction among clients and trainers in diversity programs. Most of the
complaints were about the ineffectiveness of the programs.

Ms. Morse and other women say the programs have made the men more aware of
things they should not say. But they have also prompted ridicule and cynicism
among many of those who were forced to sit through the lectures.

"It's gotten so bad around here that we refer to black garbage bags as bags of
color," said Ronald Bonich, a white quartermaster.

Ferry officials and the diversity trainers acknowledge that there is a backlash
on the boats, which carry 20 million passengers a year across Puget Sound.

To remedy the problems, officials say they are likely to order a new round of
training. The second phase, said Ms. Jackson-Smith, would help supervisors "who
worry that they are going to be accused of sexual harassment if they criticize
someone's work."

Others say managers should focus on trying to hire a diverse work force, enforce
the laws on harassment and bias and then let people hold to their own beliefs,
without sensitivity training or code-of-conduct seminars.

"To really teach tolerance you've got to start with a newborn baby and go on
from there," said Mr. Traxler.

Two-Thirds of Companies

Diversity training came into the mainstream American workplace in the late
1980's, on the heels of a 1987 academic report predicting that by the year 2000
about two-thirds of the work force would be people other than white males. Ann
M. Morrison, a San Diego consultant who recently wrote a book on diversity
training, "The New Leaders" (Jossey-Bass, 1992), said about 65 percent of major
American companies now conduct some kind of diversity training. But she said
there was a considerable backlash.

"If you force people to do things that they don't understand, they are going to
run into trouble," said Ms. Morrison. She said much of the resistance to
diversity training resulted from poorly run programs, hastily put together with
unrealistic expectations.

But if given a chance, diversity training can work, she said. She drew a
parallel with cigarette smoking, noting that most American offices have been
able to eliminate smoking in the workplace.

While some diversity training consists of daylong sessions of films and
lectures, other programs draw on techniques like reverse role-playing, in which
people are encouraged to see the world from someone else's perspective. Or
sessions can be confrontational, where stereotypes are exposed and openly
discussed.

Background of Complaints

The Washington ferry system, a quasi-military operation, came under fire a few
years ago when its handful of black employees began to complain of bias and its
female workers said they were continuously harassed.

"I was called boy by this one guy, and after I explained to him for the eighth
time that I didn't like it, he still called me boy," said Gordon Montgomery, a
black supervisor who has been with the ferry system for 18 years.

Alice Snyder Hunter, who with her husband, Jeffrey Hunter, was hired to to run
the system's diversity training program, said the workers "did not know how to
treat people."

"We had to start with the basics, diversity 101," she said. "We had a list of
what you could and could not say, because these people did not know the basics."

The list of banned words included "yuppies" and "geriatrics." Captain Sugden
said he was told not to use the word "lady" because it evoked a prostitute.

"I call my 5-year-old daughter 'little lady,' and I don't think she's a whore,"
he said.

The trainers said the Golden Rule -- do unto others as you would want them to do
unto you -- no longer applied. They introduced "the Platinum Rule," which is to
treat people as they want to be treated. "You have to know what they want, which
can be very confusing," said Captain Sugden.

Critics question whether the training is needed. The ferries generally run on
time, they say, and progress has been made on hiring a diverse work force.
Nearly 30 percent of the employees are now women or racial minorities. Trying to
change attitudes, they contend, is a waste of time and money.

But Mr. Hunter counters that the ferry system will continue to pay out money as
a result of the lawsuits it faces unless it makes progress with diversity
training. "They may have spent $1 million on training, but they have paid out
$1.6 million in lawsuits," he said

The Hunters acknowledge the complaints about their training program but say that
it has nevertheless shown progress.

"We have moved them from denial to resistance," Mr. Hunter said. "We consider
that a healthy move."


LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "There's a huge backlash. Tons of anger," Marcia Morse, right, a
19-year employee of the Washington State Ferry System, said of a $1 million
program to try to promote greater tolerance among employees. Ms. Morse, a
proponent of the diversity training, worked with Eleazar Llera, a deckhand.
(Therese Frare for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Official Denies Brown Was Offered Money for Trade Help

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 692 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 6


A senior Vietnamese official today denied accusations that his Government had
approved payments to Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown or anyone else for
lobbying in Washington on behalf of Vietnam.

The official, Ha Huy Thong, Deputy Director of American Affairs at the
Vietnamese Foreign Ministry, also said in a telephone interview from Hanoi that
he knew of no special relationship between the Vietnamese Prime Minister, Vo Van
Kiet, and a Vietnamese businessman who met Mr. Brown on three occasions before
and after he joined the Clinton Cabinet.

A Federal grand jury in Miami is investigating the relationship between Mr.
Brown and the businessman, Nguyen Van Hao, a former official in the South
Vietnamese Government who has told friends that he is close to Mr. Kiet.

'Never Made an Offer'

Mr. Brown has described as preposterous the accusation that he sought a $700,000
payment from the Vietnamese Government in exchange for helping to lift the
18-year-old American trade embargo against Vietnam. The accusation was made by a
former partner of Mr. Hao, Ly Thanh Binh, a Vietnamese-American businessman.
Asked about accusations that Mr. Hao planned to establish a bank account in
Singapore to funnel potentially illegal payments to Mr. Brown, Mr. Thong said
that he only knew what he had read in news reports.

"I have seen the newspapers, and I have heard this number -- this figure
$700,000 -- but I can tell you one thing: If there is money, it is not
Vietnamese Government money," he said. "We have other things to do with money.
We have things we need to build -- roads, highways."

Asked about reports that Prime Minister Kiet had encouraged the approaches to
Mr. Brown, Mr. Thong said, "Our leader has never made an offer to anyone."

Mr. Binh has acknowledged that he never met Mr. Brown and that all of his
information about the Commerce Secretary was related to him by Mr. Hao. But Mr.
Binh's credibility was bolstered last week when Mr. Brown seemed to contradict
statements that were put out earlier by his aides suggesting that the Commerce
Secretary had never met and did not know Mr. Hao.

'Not Seen Such a Letter'

Mr. Brown's lawyer, Reid H. Weingarten, concedes that Mr. Brown met with Mr. Hao
twice before and once after he was confirmed by the Senate as Commerce
Secretary. Mr. Weingarten said that Mr. Hao had sought advice on trade issues
involving Vietnam, but that his client and Mr. Hao had never discussed any
payment, and that once Mr. Brown had been nominated to the Cabinet he told the
Vietnamese businessmen that he could not help him.

Mr. Binh has said that he traveled with Mr. Hao late last year to Hanoi, where
he said Mr. Hao met with Prime Minister Kiet. The businessmen later returned
home to the United States in December, Mr. Binh has said, with a letter signed
by the Prime Minister urging Mr. Brown to continue his discussions with Mr. Hao.
By that time, Mr. Brown was a Cabinet nominee.

Mr. Thong said that he was aware that Mr. Hao "claims to have a good
relationship with the Prime Minister, that a lot of people want to say they have
a good relationship with the Prime Minister."

Asked about the assertion that Mr. Kiet had prepared a letter for Mr. Brown, Mr.
Thong said he would be surprised if it were true, since his office at the
Foreign Ministry would normally be consulted in the preparation of any message
sent to an official of the United States Government.

He left open the possibility that Mr. Kiet's office might have prepared the
letter without notifying the Foreign Ministry. "But whenever there is such a
letter, we should know about it," Mr. Thong said. "I have not seen such a
letter."

Mr. Thong said the accusations being made against Mr. Brown and the Vietnamese
Government may be an attempt by "some people" -- he was not more specific -- to
put obstacles in the way of normalizing diplomatic and trade relations between
the United States and Vietnam.

Recently the Clinton Administration has taken steps toward improving trade ties
with Vietnam, dropping longstanding opposition to lending from the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Kennedy as President (Stick to the Facts, Please)

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 31; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1154 words



President Kennedy
Profile of Power
By Richard Reeves
Illustrated. 798 pages. Simon & Schuster. $30.

Nearly 30 years have passed since the assassination of President John F.
Kennedy, and the dozens of books that have been produced in the wake of his
death have left us with wildly divergent readings of both his Presidency and his
character. While his former associates Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. and Theodore C.
Sorensen worked hard to cement the myth of Camelot, revisionist historians have
gone at that myth with sledgehammers. To Garry Wills ("The Kennedy
Imprisonment"), Kennedy was a compulsive risk taker, obsessed with image and
style. To Thomas C. Reeves ("A Question of Character"), he was a liar and a
hypocrite, who lacked "a moral center" or any "reference point that went beyond
self-aggrandizement."

In "President Kennedy: Profile of Power," the political journalist Richard
Reeves declines to give us another subjective interpretation of the man and
politician. Instead, he lays out a minutely detailed account of Kennedy's
decisions and actions as President: having interviewed dozens of witnesses and
scoured the historical record, Mr. Reeves undertakes to reconstruct Kennedy's
world from "his perspective," to show "what he knew and when he knew it and what
he actually did."

Certainly much of the material here will be familiar to the reader, and pivotal
questions about Kennedy's Presidency, including the question of whether he would
have eventually sent combat troops to Vietnam, remain unanswered. Still, Mr.
Reeves has written a fluently readable and highly absorbing book, a book that
takes us day by day, sometimes minute by minute, through the Bay of Pigs fiasco
and the Cuban missile crisis, a book that traces the roots of Kennedy's civil
rights policy and America's involvement in the Vietnam War.

After Nigel Hamilton's relentlessly gossipy biography of Kennedy, "J. F. K.:
Reckless Youth," which appeared last year, it's a relief that little space is
devoted in this volume to Kennedy's personal life (the one exception is Mr.
Reeves's assertion that the President relied heavily on drugs to cope with
Addison's disease). Yet from the interstices of the book there emerges a vivid
portrait of Kennedy as a man convinced of the powers of his own charm, a
manipulator comfortable with lies and secrets, a highly pragmatic politician,
detached, disorganized and careless.

"Kennedy was decisive," Mr. Reeves writes, "though he never made a decision
until he had to, and then invariably he chose the most moderate of available
options. His most consistent mistake in governing, as opposed to politics, was
thinking that power could be hoarded for use at the right moment -- but moments
and conditions defied reason. He had little ideology beyond anti-Communism and
faith in active, pragmatic government. And he had less emotion."

Perhaps the most consistent theme in this volume is Kennedy's pragmatism, his
willingness to subordinate whatever ideas he might have had -- about, say, the
irrationality of bigotry or the dangers of nuclear proliferation -- to the
practicalities of Congressional politics and the exigencies of re-election. In
fact, while Kennedy is frequently held up by President Clinton and others as the
idealistic founder of the New Frontier, he comes across in this book as a
politician who was acutely uncomfortable with the "vision thing." More than six
months into his administration, when he was asked what kind of world he hoped to
help create, Kennedy replied somewhat sadly, "I haven't had time to think about
that yet."

If Kennedy and his staff didn't spend a lot of time thinking about the big
picture, Mr. Reeves suggests, they did expend considerable energy on spin
control. Clearly the President had been warned repeatedly about the pitfalls of
engagement in Southeast Asia, by the Senate Majority Leader, Mike Mansfield; by
the President of France, Charles de Gaulle, and by Gen. Douglas MacArthur, among
others. And as a member of the House of Representatives, he himself had spoken
out about the perils of American involvement in Vietnam. "I am frankly of the
belief that no amount of American military assistance in Indochina can conquer
an enemy which is everywhere and at the same time nowhere," he declared in 1951.

And yet, Mr. Reeves argues, Kennedy had increasingly begun to worry that
withdrawal of American aid to South Vietnam and a Communist triumph "would
destroy him and the Democratic Party in a replay of the 'Who Lost China?' debate
that had plagued President Truman in the early 1950's."

"There are limits to the number of defeats I can defend in one 12-month period,"
Kennedy told John Kenneth Galbraith in November 1961. "I've had the Bay of Pigs,
pulling out of Laos, and I can't accept a third."

On the matter of civil rights, too, Mr. Reeves's account suggests that Kennedy
displayed more pragmatism than passion. Reluctant to alienate Southern
Democrats, he continually dragged his feet over civil rights: he sent in United
States marshals to protect the freedom riders in Alabama only after events
threatened to slip out of control, and he backed comprehensive civil rights
legislation only under pressure from his brother Robert and others. As for the
famous 1963 march on Washington, Mr. Reeves reports, Kennedy opposed it until he
realized it would happen anyway, at which point he tried to orchestrate it as an
all-American rally for his civil rights bill.

"He declined an invitation to speak," Mr. Reeves writes, "because he thought it
was impossible to craft a speech that would satisfy both the crowd at the
Memorial and a nation watching on live television."

Kennedy also refused to meet with the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Roy
Wilkins before the march "to avoid photographs that would make him look bad if
there was trouble in the streets."

Over all, what does Mr. Reeves make of the Kennedy Presidency? The eyewitness
accounts by Mr. Sorensen and Mr. Schlesinger, he notes, both viewed Kennedy's
Presidency "as a tale of personal growth, with Kennedy making early mistakes,
learning from them to gain a sure control of the power of his position, and then
to go on to later triumphs." Mr. Reeves, for his part, demurs: "The Kennedy I
found," he writes, "certainly did not know what he was doing at the beginning,
and in some ways never changed at all, particularly in a certain love for chaos,
the kind that kept other men off balance."

Such passages of analysis are found mainly in the first half of this volume, and
as the book progresses, the reader begins to miss the author's evaluative
intelligence. For the most part, however, the copious (and heavily footnoted)
facts speak for themselves. Indeed, they coalesce to form a narrative that
leaves us not only with a new understanding of Kennedy as President, but also
with a new understanding of what it means to be President.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard Reeves (Patricia Williams/Simon & Schuster)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Somalia: Time to Get Out

SECTION: Section A; Page 34; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 536 words


American casualties in Somalia have been steadily rising, political support at
home has evaporated and an emotionally wrenching hostage crisis has begun. The
mismatch between modest American means and ambitious political goals was
painfully clear. President Clinton had to do something.

And he did. But rather than make a decision either to cut American losses and
withdraw now -- the preferable course of action -- or tough it out until those
goals are achieved, the President succumbed to the tempting illusion that he
could manage a little of both. Mr. Clinton announced a six-month target date for
complete American withdrawal but ordered the number of U.S. troops more than
doubled, to 10,000.

It's painfully reminiscent of Lyndon Johnson's gradual escalation in Vietnam.
The Administration could easily find itself spilling considerably more blood,
both American and Somali, for the next six months without accomplishing much in
a cause unrelated to any direct American interest.

The better call would have been temporary reinforcements to protect American
troops from further attack while taking immediate steps to withdraw U.S. forces
from Somalia. The remaining humanitarian tasks should be left to the U.N.

Americans need feel no shame in withdrawing now. The mission to Somalia was
undertaken as a humanitarian gesture, to get food to starving people. The
American public did not sign on to armed intervention in the clan politics of a
chaotic country that poses no international threat.

The heart of the problem remains the highly personalized vendetta that has
developed between the U.N. Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and a
single Somali warlord, Mohammed Farah Aidid. The U.S. and other Security Council
powers initially agreed to target General Aidid after forces thought to be loyal
to him gunned down Pakistani peacekeepers in June. More recently, in response to
public misgivings, the major powers have urged a reversion to less
confrontational policies. But the Secretary General won't back down.

The original humanitarian mission, though it continues, has now been
overshadowed by the deadly urban warfare in Mogadishu. This combat has forced
peacekeepers and relief workers to hunker down in fortified compounds, turned
Somalis against a U.N. presence they once welcomed and multiplied U.N. and
civilian casualties.

While humanitarian aid can't be delivered without a minimum of order, the U.N.
has no business arrogating to itself the role of restructuring Somalia's chaotic
politics through outside force.

Two weeks ago it looked as if Washington were ready to use diplomatic muscle to
force an end to the U.N.'s fruitless hunt for General Aidid and its destructive
efforts to pacify south Mogadishu. But since Mr. Boutros-Ghali has resisted the
pressure, the U.S. now seems ready to settle for new political and diplomatic
efforts under Ambassador Robert Oakley without insisting that the U.N. break off
the Mogadishu showdown.

The cost of prolonging the ordeal for six months could prove high indeed -- in
American lives, in American support for peacekeeping activities and in Mr.
Clinton's capacity to focus his political energies on domestic reform.


LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Ron Brown's Evasions

SECTION: Section A; Page 34; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 501 words


For months Ron Brown has issued assurances that the nasty stories weren't true.
No, he said, he wasn't mixing his private business with his duties as Secretary
of Commerce. Now it emerges that Mr. Brown not only knew a Vietnamese
businessman who was angling for Government favor, but that he actually met the
supplicant before and after joining the Administration.

Whether Mr. Brown discussed payment for helping the businessman by working to
lift the U.S. trade embargo against Vietnam is a question put before a Federal
grand jury in Florida. The allegations have not been corroborated, and come from
a source whose motivation is not clear. But whatever their truth, Mr. Brown's
evasions have heightened their importance by casting doubt on his willingness to
help President Clinton maintain a high moral tone in government.

Mr. Brown has recklessly allowed his spokesmen to issue false statements. In
August his office said that "the Secretary categorically and unequivocally
denies he has ever had any business, financial or professional relationship with
any Vietnamese individual, organization or group." Recently a Commerce
Department spokesman, referring to the favor-seeking businessman, said that Mr.
Brown "didn't recall meeting with this man." Last week, however, his lawyer
acknowledged that the meetings had occurred.

The President, for his part, shows no sign of ethical distress. "He's told me
that he hasn't done anything wrong," Mr. Clinton said the other day. Attorney
General Janet Reno refuses to consider appointing an independent prosecutor.

Mr. Brown has succeeded both as chairman of the Democratic National Committee
and as a Washington lawyer-lobbyist. He ought to be able to avoid even the
appearance of a conflict of interest. Yet only the threat of a Senate
confirmation fight moved him to disclose his private clients and promise tighter
standards for recusing himself. And he had to be shamed into canceling an
inaugural gala bankrolled by big clients.

The publicly available evidence to support the new charges consists mainly of
statements by Ly Thanh Binh, a businessman who says that a former associate, a
onetime Vietnamese official named Nguyen Van Hao, told him of negotiations with
Mr. Brown for lobbying help in return for a $700,000 fee. Mr. Binh also cited a
letter from Mr. Brown that Mr. Hao allegedly carried to Vietnam. A Vietnamese
official has denied that his Government approved payments to Mr. Brown for
lobbying. Mr. Binh has proved accurate about important details of his
assertions.

Mr. Brown and the Administration will have to meet a higher standard of
disclosure than they have so far. The cloud cannot be dispelled by evasions and
partial explanations, by brush-off answers from the President and the Attorney
General, nor indeed by anything other than a full public accounting. A good
start would be for Mr. Brown to come forward with a detailed public explanation
of his contacts and to produce any relevant correspondence.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 985 words




International   3-8

A TWO-SIDED SOMALIA POLICY

The White House took two tracks on Somalia, leaving the door open for a
negotiated solution that could include the clan leader Gen. Mohammed Farah Aidid
but also issuing tough military warnings.  1


U.S. DISPLEASURE WITH U.N.

News analysis: After embracing the U.N. as the global peacemaker of the future,
President Clinton has broken sharply with it over Somalia, signaling American
displeasure with Secretary General Boutros-Ghali.  1

QUESTIONS ON SOMALIA ROLE

Surveys indicate that President Clinton has changed few minds on Somalia. The
demands for withdrawal are still loud and adamant, though some Americans are now
willing to give the President more time.  1

PRESIDENT DEFENDS ASPIN

President Clinton defended his Secretary of Defense, but made clear that he had
no role in Les Aspin's decision not to send reinforcements to Somalia last
month.  7

RED CROSS VISITS P.O.W.

A Red Cross official visited an American helicopter pilot held prisoner by
Somalis and found him in good condition.  6

Jonathan Howe, like his adversary, is well known in Mogadishu.  7

SOCCER AND POLITICS IN JERICHO

Thousands of Palestinians in Jericho poured out their hopes for a future state
in a way that people express nationalism around the world -- they cheered on
their soccer team.  1

RUSSIA SUSPENDS TWO PARTIES

Under President Yeltsin's state-of-emergency decrees, Russia's Justice Ministry
suspended the main Communist Party and the People's Party of Free Russia, which
had been led by the jailed Vice President, Aleksandr V. Rutskoi.  3

HAITIAN DOUBTS AND VIOLENCE RISE

As violence grows, many Haitians doubt whether democracy is possible, partly
because they lack faith in the foreign force that is supposed to be the glue
that holds Haiti's political settlement together.  4

IRAQI COOPERATION WITH U.N.

In what appears to be a move toward meeting U.N. conditions for lifting
sanctions, Iraq turned over documents listing former arms suppliers in Baghdad.
8

MEXICAN APPEAL FOR NAFTA

President Salinas of Mexico appealed to visiting Congressmen to approve the
North American Free Trade Agreement without modification or delay.  3

VIETNAM IS NETWORKING

A dinner for the First Deputy Prime Minister of Vietnam in Manhattan attracted
dozens of American senior executives, eager to do business with a former enemy.
39

Hanoi Journal: The city's old quarter faces an economic revolution.  4

National   9-11

MINNESOTA'S HEALTH LESSONS

President Clinton has been presenting Minnesota as a national model of humane,
organized and cost-effective medicine. But the state's move toward managed
competition was not entirely smooth.  1

NEW QUESTIONS ON WACO RAID

The Justice Department provided information that contradicts Attorney General
Janet Reno's explanation of why she ordered the tear-gas assault on the Branch
Davidian compound in Texas.  1

JOBLESS RATE IS UNCHANGED

The unemployment rate remained at 6.7 percent in September, with the labor
market improving only modestly by adding 156,000 jobs.  39

TAXING TO PAY FOR FREE TRADE

The Administration is planning to raise $500 million a year to help pay for the
North American Free Trade Agreement, primarily by raising fees on travelers
entering the United States, officials said.  10

IT'S SECURITY, CLINTON SAYS

President Clinton told Democratic leaders to use the theme of personal security
to rally Americans behind his proposals on everything from the economy to crime
to trade.  10

PENTAGON SUSPENDS GAY POLICY

Faced by a judicial order, the Pentagon has shelved for now its new "don't ask,
don't tell" policy on homosexuals.  9

THE VALUE OF AN AUTOGRAPH

Two charities are in a legal fight with a South Carolina county court over the
will of Shoeless Joe Jackson, which bears his very valuable autograph.  9

TRADITION ABANDONED AT HARVARD

Harvard Journal: Self-consciously, the all-male Fly Club at Harvard University
prepare to drop its 157-year-old bar to women.  9

FARMS FLOODED, FARMERS MEET

The mood was oddly buoyant when 200,000 farmers gathered for the annual Farm
Progress Show, even though many Midwestern fields are still under water.  39

Religion notes: Environmentalists and the Holocaust.  11

The Chief Justice of Rhode Island resigned under fire.  11

Photos of a child apparently being molested led to two arrests.  9

Metro Digest   25

BLEAK OUTLOOK FOR HOSPITALS

Already facing chronic money problems, New York City's hospitals said that they
would lose about $4 billion in Government revenue, or about 4 percent of their
budgets, in the first five years of President Clinton's national health plan.  1


Business Digest   39

Arts/Entertainment   13-18, 51

Stieglitz work breaks auction record for photography.  13

Film: "Tim Burton's The Nightmare Before Christmas." 13

"Aileen Wuornos -- The Selling of a Serial Killer." 16

"Wendemi." 16

Music: "Griffelkin," an opera.  13

Johnny Mathis.  14

Joshua Redman, jazz.  18

Dance: Molissa Fenley.  14

Television: "SeaQuest DSV" and "Lois and Clark." 51

Sports   31-35

Baseball: White Sox beat Blue Jays.  31

Basketball: Bulls begin life after Jordan.  31

Football: Florida State and Ward ready for Miami.  31

Obituaries   30

Arie R. Brouwer, headed the National Council of Churches.

Editorials/Op-Ed   22-23

Editorials

After China's nuclear blast.

Benazir Bhutto's long road back.

Self-discipline on Wall Street.

The case of the pedophile teacher.

Letters

Russell Baker: Make it Bill and Lyndon.

Barbara Head Millstein on Consuelo Kanaga: A pioneer of realism.

Bridge   18

Chronicle   24

Crossword   14

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Journal;
Promise of Prosperity Threatens a City's Charm

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 849 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


Nguyen Lan stands between this 1,000-year-old capital and the wrecking ball that
has destroyed so much of the architectural heritage of Southeast Asia. And he
would just as soon be standing somewhere else.

"I know that our Government leaders support preservation of the old city," said
Mr. Lan, the chief Government architect of Hanoi. "They know its beauty."

"But there are many ideas about what should happen to Hanoi," he said as he
nervously fingered the architectural designs for a 20-story building that could
change the look of the capital forever. "Some people say that it is not
necessary to preserve the old city of Hanoi because it is a symbol of poverty.
Some people question whether we would let them starve so that a few of us can
admire the beautiful old buildings."

This tranquil capital of tree-shaded streets and ocher, colonial-era villas set
among tiny lakes is under threat from an economic revolution that has the
potential of transforming Vietnam from a Communist backwater to one of the
economic tigers of Southeast Asia.

The increasingly lonely vigil to save old Hanoi is being led by a handful of
Vietnamese officials and foreign friends of the city who want to prevent its
gracious if crumbling beauty from being sacrificed in Vietnam's headlong rush to
free markets and economic development.

The preservation debate has begun in earnest with the announcement that a
Singapore-based development company is planning to erect the city's first tall
building, a 20-story tower of luxury apartments, the heart of a $41-million
residential and office complex directly across from the Hoan Kiem Lake. Many of
Hanoi's three million people consider the lake to be the center of their city.

Also bound for "redevelopment" in Hanoi is the site of the colonial-era prison
that became known to a generation of Americans as the Hanoi Hilton, because it
was there that American prisoners of war were held during the Vietnam War. Those
plans are not so far advanced, but there are reports that the prison will be
torn down and replaced with a $33-million, five-star hotel.

Where Rivers Join

Hanoi was founded in the 11th century by the Vietnamese King Ly Thai To, who
wanted to inaugurate his dynasty by creating a beautiful new capital along the
confluence of the Red River and the To Lich River. It has been preserved not
because of the work of enlightened urban planners, but because of generations of
civil war and economic stagnation in Vietnam.

During the Vietnam War, Hanoi, unlike much of the rest of North Vietnam, was
mostly spared the devastation of American bombers. Neighborhoods are little
changed in appearance from the era of the great Vietnamese kings or the French
colonialists who deposed them.

Vietnam's era of economic stagnation appears to be over, however. With the
collapse of its former patron, the Soviet Union, Vietnam has abandoned Marxist
economic theory and has embraced the free market. Foreign real estate developers
have rushed into Vietnam.

From the beginning, there was less to preserve in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly the
southern capital of Saigon, which during the Vietnam War developed a skyline of
tall, modern, mostly characterless buildings.

In Hanoi, however, there is little of modern architecture and no very tall
buildings -- the city's tallest structure is a six-story office complex that
until recently was the only building in the city with an elevator.

Foreign developers say that with land prices exploding in the capital, they are
without a cost-effective means of preserving much of the old architecture of
Hanoi.

"It's called progress," said Peter Purcell, the Australian developer who is
behind Hanoi Plaza, the complex that will include the 20-story building.

"If Hanoi is going to achieve anything like the importance it seeks as a
government and financial center, you will have to have modern buildings," he
said. "And the economics of modern buildings hold that if the land is of a
certain value, the buildings have to be a certain size. To make omelets in this
city, you will have to break some eggs."

For Hanoi Plaza, the cost of progress will include the demolition of a city
landmark, a cavernous, cream-colored two-story department store built by the
French in the late 1920's.

A Practical Matter

"We've been right through the department store and it was quite clear to us that
it was impractical to save any of it," said Mr. Purcell.

While his project has already received the approval of the Government's foreign
investment department, other agencies have not yet signed off including Mr.
Lan's office.

"On a case-by-case basis," he said, the city will probably have to approve the
construction of a number of high-rise buildings or risk the loss of the foreign
investment needed to create a prosperous city.

"All of the foreign investors want to put their money into projects right in the
center of the city, and they only want to build tall buildings," he said. "If we
reject them, then maybe the investors will go to Beijing or Seoul or Bangkok.
That is not what we want."

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In Hanoi, colonial-era buildings are threatened by an economic
revolution that is transforming Vietnam from a Communist backwater to an
economic tiger. One such building is the prison, known to a generation of
Americans as the Hanoi Hilton, where American prisoners were held in the Vietnam
War. (Reuters)

Map of Hanoi showing location of the Old Quarter.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section 1; Page 39; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 598 words



The Economy

The unemployment rate remained at 6.7 percent in September, with the labor
market improving only modestly by adding 156,000 payroll jobs. Although the
results matched expectations, some secondary numbers reflected more weakness
than had been expected. The report sent the dollar down against European
currencies and ignited a powerful rally in the bond market. [Page 39.]

Suspicion that some traders made big profits in Treasury bond futures using an
unauthorized leak of the September employment data has prompted an investigation
by the Chicago Board of Trade and the Labor Department. [51.]

The mood was oddly buoyant when 100,000 farmers gathered in Iowa for the annual
Farm Progress Show, even though many Midwestern fields are still under water
from the summer's flooding and many crops were planted late. [39.]

Companies

QVC Network is negotiating with BellSouth and at least two other companies in
search of financing to raise its $9.5 billion bid for Paramount Communications
and avoid having to turn for help to John C. Malone, one of its partners in the
offer. [39.]

Martin Marietta is said to be negotiating to buy the space division of General
Dynamics. A formal agreement could be announced as early as next week, aerospace
executives say. [41.]

Delta Air Lines is under Justice Department investigation over concern its
agreements with travel agents in Salt Lake City might harm a smaller competitor,
Morris Air. [41.]

Western Waste shares plunged 38 percent after the company announced the collapse
of a merger with Browning-Ferris. [41.]

Volkswagen is struggling to correct problems at SEAT, its Spanish subsidiary,
which had a $769 million fiscal 1993 loss. [41.]

Amdahl expects a third-quarter operating loss, its third in a row, as the
mainframe business continues to deteriorate. [41.]

Dell Computer is recalling about 17,000 discontinued notebook computers because
of a possible fire hazard. [47.]

International

A dinner for the First Deputy Prime Minister of Vietnam in Manhattan attracted
dozens of senior executives from American industry, eager to do business with a
former enemy that, sooner or later, will be freed from an 18-year-old economic
embargo. [39.]

The U.S. is planning to raise $2.1 billion to offset lost revenue caused by the
North American Free Trade Agreement primarily by raising customs and other fees
for foreign tourists. [10.]

Markets

The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond plunged to 5.92 percent as the bond
market interpreted the September employment report as hard evidence of a weak
American economy. [48.]

Stocks were mixed despite a strong performance by the bond market. The Dow
industrials gained 1.11 point, to 3,584.74. [40.]

The dollar fell against European currencies after the employment report
indicated interest rates would not be raised. [50.]

Lumber prices rose on an agreement with environmental groups that opened less
land for logging than expected. [50.]

Your Money

Stocks in small companies look promising for investors with a long view and the
stomach for sharp downturns. Lately, these issues have produced handsome
rewards. [37.]

Small investors can partake in computerized trading through computer data
services including Compuserve and Prodigy. [37.]

Term life insurance may become too costly for some people as they grow older,
and its usefulness should be reconsidered. [37.]

Most American investors interested in the public offering of Banque Nationale de
Paris must turn to mutual funds. [38.]

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Does Some Networking

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD J. LEVY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 39; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 927 words


A few feet from trays of crab cakes and fried shrimp and white wine, dozens of
senior executives from the anchors of American industry were obediently lined up
in a Plaza Hotel ballroom. They were from companies like Pfizer, Mobil and Avon,
and they were waiting to shake the hand of -- and, they hoped, to have a few
words with -- the First Deputy Prime Minister of Vietnam.

It was not a royal dinner, but sometimes it seemed on Thursday night as if the
American executives were treating the Vietnamese official, Phan Van Khai, like a
prince. They flattered him. They toasted him. They gave him several standing
ovations. They left little doubt that they were eager -- maybe too eager in the
minds of demonstrators nearby -- to do business with a former enemy.

Mr. Khai, the No. 2 official in the Vietnamese Government, was in Manhattan for
the opening of the United Nations General Assembly. Organized by the Vietnam
-American Chamber of Commerce, the dinner in the Grand Ballroom at the Plaza
marked the first time in decades that a high-ranking Vietnamese official had
addressed representatives of American companies.

The dinner seemed to bring to the surface many of the conflicting emotions
Americans hold toward Vietnam. Even as the executives ate beef tenderloin and
grilled salmon with their Vietnamese guests, several Vietnamese-American and
veterans groups were protesting outside the hotel.

Nearly 200 people from American corporations and firms paid $350 each to hear
Mr. Khai, 59, a lifelong Communist who studied socialism in Moscow and was the
former chairman of the State Planning Commission.

The executives' enthusiasm seemed prodded by the sense that sooner or later
Congress will repeal the 18-year-old American economic embargo against Vietnam.
In another step toward chipping away at those restrictions, President Clinton
last month allowed American companies to bid on projects in Vietnam financed by
international aid groups like the World Bank.

"This is a statement that American executives believe that it is time to end the
embargo," Irwin Jay Robinson, president of the Vietnam-American Chamber of
Commerce, said of the dinner as he surveyed the ranks of dark suits in the Grand
Ballroom. "It's a statement that they believe that there are very substantial
business opportunities in Vietnam."

'Business From Day 1'

Peter M. Ham, a vice president at Merrill Lynch & Company, said the broad range
of companies that had sent people to the dinner appeared to reflect the intense
interest in Vietnam as one of the last unexplored markets.

"Read the list of the companies that are sponsoring this event: law firms,
infrastructure firms, power companies, telecommunications companies," he said.
"They are really curious. I can guarantee you that each one of the companies
represented here has someone on their payroll in Saigon today. So when the
embargo is lifted, they are effectively doing business from Day 1."

Despite the cheerful expressions of camaraderie, there was also an underlying
tone of frustration and wariness to the evening.

Some executives said they were angry that European countries and Japan were
aggressively pursuing business in Vietnam, while they were forced to woo
officials like Mr. Khai from the sidelines. But they said they realized that
they had to go out of their way to avoid offending veterans' groups, who accuse
Vietnam of withholding information on Americans missing since the Vietnam War.

The issue is so sensitive that some corporations decided not to send people to
the dinner, Mr. Robinson said, adding that some veterans' groups had called for
boycotts of the companies that did. Only a few companies -- including Avon
Products Inc. and the Occidental Petroleum Corporation -- bought full tables at
the event. And some executives would not speak for attribution.

Across the street from the Plaza, about 50 Vietnamese-Americans and veterans
conducted a demonstration before the event, waving signs that read, "Freedom For
Vietnam" and "No Trade With Vietnam." During the cocktail hour, a middle-age
veteran wearing a ribboned military-style cap slipped through security and began
shouting at the executives.

"All of you have betrayed the American public!" the man said before he was
removed from the room. "I hope you're proud of yourselves! You have disgraced
this country!"

Toward a Freer Market

In his speech, Mr. Khai sounded like a committed capitalist, noting proudly that
in the last year, more than 500 American executives had visited Vietnam to study
its markets and 20 companies had obtained licenses to open offices there. He
stressed that the country was moving forward on reforming its economy -- a
process called "Doi Moi" -- and reducing state ownership.

"We do not want to see American companies being left out or lagging behind in
competing for business opportunities in Vietnam," he said, speaking through an
interpreter. "Vietnam attaches great importance to building a better
relationship with the United States."

The speech and Mr. Khai's responses to written questions appeared to strike a
chord with many executives, who said they felt more confident about pursuing
opportunities in Vietnam once the embargo is lifted.

"We've now reached the point that we did with China in the early 1970's and we
did with the Russians and Eastern Europeans," said George Suter, an area
president with Pfizer Inc., the pharmaceuticals company. "We need to bury the
hatchet and go ahead. These animosities can't go on forever. That's totally
unrealistic."

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Phan Van Khai, First Deputy Prime Minister of Vietnam, greeting
Frank Masi, a California businessman, and Irwin Jay Robinson, center, president
of the Vietnam-American Chamber of Commerce, in Manhattan. (Philip Greenberg for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
Make It Bill and Lyndon

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 736 words


Although President Clinton has always invited us to think of him as the Jack
Kennedy of the 1990's generation, the more I watch him the more he reminds me of
Lyndon Johnson. Physically he is a big man, like Johnson, with bad eating
habits, like Johnson, and is a prodigious energy burner, like Johnson.

Johnson, like Clinton, was minutely informed on the tiniest point of the
smallest piece of legislation and could talk about it until you screamed for
mercy. Like Johnson, Clinton is a product of segregation-cursed Southern
politics where a man with the slightest liberal temperament, especially on the
race issue, had to be as cunning and often as unscrupulous as a Borgia to
survive.

Like Johnson, Clinton is concerned chiefly with using his office to improve the
domestic state of the Union. Not since Johnson, in fact, has a President matched
the intensity with which Clinton has concentrated on domestic policy.

Kennedy, by contrast, was so absorbed in foreign policy that he seemed to have
no domestic policy at all until Martin Luther King and the civil rights movement
provoked his splendid, but belated, Federal interventions on behalf of racial
equality.

Memory of Kennedy evokes the Bay of Pigs, the Cuban missile crisis, "Ich bin ein
Berliner," the beginning of nuclear-weapons controls and of escalation of war in
Vietnam. It's hard to imagine Bill Clinton breathing that air, just as it was
hard after 1963 to imagine Lyndon Johnson moving at ease in it.

Well of course Johnson tried to, and it brought him to calamity in Vietnam. And
so to this day few people know him as the most progressive President since
Franklin Roosevelt on domestic affairs or as the most heroic champion of civil
liberties for all since Abraham Lincoln, while everybody knows him as the maker
of a historic disaster in Vietnam.

Partly this reflects the national ignorance of history, but Johnson helped ruin
his own reputation by clinging to the failed Vietnam policy long after he could
have cut his losses and applied himself to what he was good at; to wit, domestic
policy.

In the Somalia business, Clinton is now flirting with the same danger while
sounding alarmingly like the Johnson who was so determined to prove America's
steadfast will that he destroyed his own Presidency and left the country
poisonously divided behind him.

Like Johnson, who was never able to articulate any persuasive reason for
continuing a war that seemed destined to last forever, Clinton falls into dim
abstractions when talking about why we still have soldiers in Somalia and are
now sending more.

He speaks of stabilizing the situation before pulling out in March. Those who
remember the Johnson years may have the queasy suspicion that he is saying he
sees "light at the end of the tunnel" up there in March.

The situation to be stabilized is a tribal war. How are Pentagon arts to be
applied to stabilizing tribal warfare? President Reagan sent the Marines to
stabilize a tribal war in Lebanon, then brought the survivors home after a
tribal warrior blew up the barracks where they had been sleeping while waiting
for instructions on how to stabilize the situation.

The Clinton-Johnson parallel becomes pronounced when we reflect that both came
to the Presidency with feelings of inadequacy for managing war business.

Johnson was always aware of lacking President Eisenhower's authority at the
Pentagon. He didn't even have Kennedy's bitter distrust of the whole national
security apparatus caused by the Bay of Pigs fiasco. So, not surprisingly, he
hadn't the cheek to chart his own Vietnam policy.

Clinton faces the well-publicized hostility of a professionalized military. It
would be surprising if he didn't do pretty much what the professional
national-security bureaucracy advises, which usually runs as follows: Don't lose
face, because loss of face betokens loss of will, and loss of will tempts
enemies to go for your jugular.

As with Johnson after Kennedy had put some 17,000 soldiers into Vietnam, it was
Clinton's Presidential predecessor, Bush, who put the troops into harm's way in
Somalia. In both cases, two green, uncertain new Presidents were left with the
problem of whether and how to get them out.

Johnson was succeeded by Richard Nixon, who promised he had a secret plan for
getting them out. He hadn't. The promise helped get him elected though, and the
war lasted four more years.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE SOMALIA MISSION: Voices;
A Common Cry Across the U.S.: It's Time to Exit

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1364 words

DATELINE: CINCINNATI, Oct. 8


President Clinton's decision to send more troops to Somalia, even while setting
a deadline for a final United States pullout, did not satisfy Tony Bright.

"It just won't work," he said.

Like many Americans -- a majority, according to polls -- Mr. Bright, an
emergency health care administrator, has doubts about American involvement in
Somalia and President Clinton's handling of the situation.

He favored speedy withdrawal before the President spoke late Thursday afternoon.
And, like millions of other Americans, he still does.

'Bring the Boys Home'

"It's really very simple," Mr. Bright said on Thursday. "If I have to choose
between pictures of starving Somalian babies or dead American soldiers being
dragged through the streets of Mogadishu, well, I don't want to see any more
dead Americans. Sorry. It's time to bring the boys home."

This morning he added, "What the President proposed doesn't change a thing for
me."

Formal and informal surveys of Americans after the President spoke indicate that
he changed few minds. The demands for withdrawal are still loud and adamant,
though some people who earlier wanted an immediate pullout are now willing to
give the President time to recover American bodies and prisoners.

"From here on, we shouldn't do any more than get back our dead and our prisoners
and get out safely," said Carl Kamp, a retired Federal banking official from
Atlanta. "If that takes a few more troops and a few more weeks, then O.K. But
absolutely no escalation and don't drag it out. I don't like this."

An ABC News poll taken shortly after the President spoke on Thursday found a
majority of Americans -- 52 percent -- did not approve of Mr. Clinton's handling
of the situation. On Tuesday, an ABC News poll found 53 percent did not approve.
Both polls had a margin of sampling error of five percentage points.

The recent fighting in Somalia, which left 15 American soldiers dead and more
than 85 wounded, has crystallized American public opinion on an issue that
previously was not particularly pressing to the average citizen. And the
pictures of a dead American soldier being dragged through the streets of
Mogadishu seem to have made it all but impossible for Mr. Clinton to change many
minds.

'Get Out of There'

"That absolutely turned me off," said Carin Steckler, a Seattle secretary. "We
should get out of there."

Penny Thompson, a food service supervisor in Lexington, Ky., also was repelled
by the pictures.

"We don't need this grief," she said. "I say turn the whole thing back over to
the U.N. and let somebody else take the heat. We gave it our best and it just
didn't work. If they don't care any more over there, than we don't care any more
over here."

Polls taken after the fighting in Somalia escalated but before the President
spoke found that two of every three people surveyed favored American withdrawal,
and about half of the respondents favored withdrawal even at the risk of leaving
Somalia in more turmoil and even if another famine resulted. Interviews with
about 100 Americans around the country indicate the President has done little to
change those numbers and opinions.

In Houston, Rick Coe, a park ranger, said that the United States, for all its
good intentions, should pull out of Somalia because it had turned into "a
nightmare, a quagmire, a death trap."

"It's a no-win situation," he added. "That's indicative to get out."

In New York City, Claudia Berns, a travel consultant, reached a similar
conclusion.

"Originally we were there to restore order and feed people," she said. "At this
point, we should get out. The people there haven't backed us."

'Hard to Back Out'

Another New Yorker, Calvin Harrison 3d, a security supervisor, said he not only
opposed Mr. Clinton's proposal to stay in Somalia a while longer but had opposed
intervention in Somalia back during the Bush Administration.

"I don't think we should have been there in the first place," he said. "I don't
think the troops are doing anything. We should get out. Our soldiers are dying."

Here and there around the country, the interviews did find some support and
understanding for President Clinton's position.

"It's kind of hard to back out when they're dragging Americans down the street,"
said Barbara Bolt, a concession stand operator in Houston. "We've got to go in
there and get them, then just pull everybody back out."

Kevin Dyes, a customer service representative for a telephone company in
Cincinnati, said: "If it takes more force, we'll have to do it. Because if we
pull out, it's going to cost lives."

In Kansas City, Mo., Dave Brown, a computer engineer, said he supported the
President because the job in Somalia is not finished.

"If it takes more troops, we need to send them," he said. "We've got to take on
these ideas or nobody else will."

Still, for the most part the interviews turned up negative reaction to Mr.
Clinton's speech and proposals.

In particular, the interviews uncovered deep concern that the nature of the
United States mission in Somalia was becoming more military oriented than
humanitarian. Few respondents saw Somalia posing a significant military threat
to the United States, especially in the post-cold-war era.

"We started out giving food and now we're shooting bullets and getting shot at
in a little country that really doesn't amount to much," said Ed Steelman, a
carpenter from Bethel, Ohio. "That's flat crazy. And now the President is
talking about getting in deeper? Hard to believe."

Somewhat surprisingly, given the national agony caused by the American retreat
from Vietnam, there seems to be no overbearing concern in the nation that a
retreat from Somalia would make the United States appear weak, defeated and
indecisive.

President Clinton warned that a hasty retreat would reflect badly on the nation
and its standing in the world. But many Americans nevertheless tend to see a
pullout almost as a sign of strength and confidence and, not least of all, proof
that the United States is gaining a more sophisticated and mature view of what
its role should be in the international arena.

'We Keep Blundering'

"There are common-sense limits to our moral responsibilities to the rest of the
world," said Gene Pinder, the public relations manager at the Tennessee Aquarium
in Chattanooga. "We've had the good common sense to stay out of the Bosnia
quagmire so far and nobody's calling us the world's coward. We're the world's
only superpower now. Life is no longer us versus the Russians. We can cut it off
and leave Somalia because Somalia no longer makes good sense."

But while most Americans tend not to draw a close parallel between a retreat
from Somalia and the traumatic flight from Vietnam, the American experience with
"nation building" in Vietnam has nevertheless left many people wary that a
similar experience -- and failure -- in nation-building could occur in Somalia.

"Somalia is not a sophisticated Western society," said Pat Finley, a retired
paper company executive from Atlanta. "We keep blundering into these kinds of
places because of our natural American generosity. But sooner or later we're
going to have to face up to the cold fact that this is another of those
countries where we can't impose democracy at an acceptable cost, if at all.
They're not ready for it, can't handle it yet."

So what should the United States do?

"Get out," Mr. Finley replied. "We should never have gone there in the first
place."

The widespread American aversion to involvement in Somalia does not appear to be
grounded in a new isolationism. Rather, it seems to result from a feeling that
the nation should temper its do-good tendencies with a solid measure of
international practicality.

"Situations like Somalia are going to come up again and again and we're going to
have to learn to deal with them better," said Dick Bryant, a commercial
photographer from Chattanooga. "We need to develop a policy that says, 'Don't
get involved if it's not doable.' We have to be very tough on ourselves when we
do this."

And what of Somalia, using this approach?

"Not doable," Mr. Bryant replied.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Tony Bright, Health care administrator -- "What the President
proposed doesn't change a thing for me." Pat Finley, Retired paper company
executive -- "We keep blundering into these kinds of places because of our
natural American generosity." Penny Thompson, Food service supervisor -- "I say
turn the whole thing back over to the U.N. and let somebody else take the heat."
Kevin Dyes, Telephone service representative -- "If it takes more force, we'll
have to do it." (Photographs by Alan S. Weiner for The New York Times); Deanna
Joyce, widow of Sgt. James Casey Joyce, was escorted from Arlington National
Cemetery after the burial of her husband, killed in Somalia last week. At right
was Virginia Joyce, the sergeant's mother. (Agence France-Presse)(pg. 1)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 10, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: October 10, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1425 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  61   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 2      2   2   LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues
                the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour."

 3      5   2   SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two
                Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics
                and murder.

 4      3   7   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 5      4   5   THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                Concluding the "Griffin & Sabine" trilogy.

 6      6  26   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 7      7  30   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 8      8   9   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction
                of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and
                woman and for the woman's first lover.

 9      9   5   STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The problems,
                political and sexual, of a Florida Congressman.

 10    10  10   STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a
                train robber and killer.

 11    15  38   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                illustrated cards and letters.

 12    12  16   PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.)
                The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted
                Cherokee daughter.

 13    13   2   POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $23.) A single
                mother and her teen-age daughter go on a spree after winning
                $60 million in a lottery.

 14    14  13   THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) A Zurich
                hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers, dope smugglers
                and international terrorists.

 15*   11   5   THE DEATH AND LIFE OF SUPERMAN, by Roger Stern.
                (Spectra/Bantam, $19.95.) A novel about the comic-book hero,
                including his rebirth in the near future.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   5   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 2      2  22   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 3      3   7   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 4      6  61   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 5      4   8   MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.)
                Inspirational essays.

 6      5  13   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A
                discussion of mood-changing medications.

 7          1   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 8      7  18   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 9      9  43   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.)
                Spirituality and everyday life.

 10    10   2   MORE MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Putnam,
                $21.95.) Stories about country music stars.

 11    12   2   THE FOUNTAIN OF AGE, by Betty Friedan. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                A call for men and women to regard life after age 60 as an
                exciting adventure.

 12         1   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 13     8   4   CASE CLOSED, by Gerald Posner. (Random House, $25.) A
                reassessment of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.

 14         1   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by
                Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of
                marriage.

 15         1   BLACK HOLES AND BABY UNIVERSES, by Stephen Hawking. (Bantam,
                $21.95.) The Cambridge physicist ruminates on his life and the
                cosmos.

 16*   13  16   DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf,
                $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  11   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 2      2  21   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication and
                relationships between the sexes.

 3      3   3   THE WINNER WITHIN, by Pat Riley. (Putnam, $22.95.) The
                basketball coach's advice for achieving successful teamwork in
                sports and other endeavors.

 4      4  15   EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.)
                Counsel about diet.

Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 25, at 3,050
bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops,
department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.  ACROSS
THE BRIDGE: Stories, by Mavis Gallant. (Random House, $19.) In these 11 lucid
urban stories, most of which are set in Paris or Montreal, Mrs. Gallant's wit
and exactitude subvert the antiquity of her material.
BODY & SOUL, by Frank Conroy. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) An
old-fashioned (deliberately) novel about a poor boy who grows up to be a famous
pianist and composer, and a totally sincere love song to the 1950's, when such
things were possible.
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT IN AMERICAN HISTORY, by Lawrence M. Friedman. (Basic Books,
$30.) A law professor's impressive panoramic history of the criminal justice
system, which, he argues, hasn't controlled crime since Plymouth Rock and will
not control it now.
THE CULTURE OF DISBELIEF: How American Law and Politics Trivialize Religious
Devotion, by Stephen L. Carter. (Basic Books, $25.) A professor of law at Yale
examines what he calls a 20-year-old tendency to ban religion from public
discourse, and argues that a just balance of mutually respectful forces is
required, not a victory for church or secularism.
THE GRISLY WIFE, by Rodney Hall. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) This volume of
Rodney Hall's Australian trilogy is narrated by a female missionary who has seen
32 years of dark and bloody doings since coming to New South Wales.
LIFE WORK, by Donald Hall. (Beacon, $15.) Donald Hall, a poet and writer who has
done many things well and who now, at 65, faces a mortal illness, tells us what
he thinks matters about himself in this sort-of-autobiography.
LITTLE KINGDOMS: Three Novellas, by Steven Millhauser. (Poseidon, $21.) Three
tales from the lush otherwhere that is Mr. Millhauser's imagination, where human
complexity and folly are embodied in dwarfs and dungeons and artists willing to
sacrifice other satisfactions for art.
SO FAR FROM GOD, by Ana Castillo. (Norton, $19.95.) Magic realism in New Mexico:
a girl who levitates at the age of 3 performs other miracles as required to save
her three sisters from fates as grave as death or worse.
THE WARBURGS: The Twentieth-Century Odyssey of a Remarkable Jewish Family, by
Ron Chernow. (Random House, $30.) Mr. Chernow's vast Warburg saga follows the
fates of a rich, thoroughly secularized German Jewish family betrayed by the
nation and culture they loved.
WHILE ENGLAND SLEEPS, by David Leavitt. (Viking, $22.) England and Spain in the
1930's are the settings for a novel that indicts exploitation by sex, by class
and by using other people's wars to work out personal frustrations.
WORKERS: An Archaeology of the Industrial Age, by Sebastiao Salgado. (Aperture,
$100.) Pictures by a Brazilian photojournalist of the labors of humanity around
the world, especially where hands and backs still do the work; many are
beautiful, many appalling, many both.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 10, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A DIRECTORY OF CRUISES WORLDWIDE;
Spicier Old Stops, Exotic New Ones

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL;  EDWIN McDOWELL reports on the travel industry for
The Times.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 16; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1682 words


THE fall season is a pronounced one in the cruise industry. The flotilla that
cruises to Alaska in spring and summer has relocated to warm-weather ports,
there are longer cruises to choose from, and South America and the South Pacific
show up on more itineraries.

Many veteran travelers prefer fall and winter cruises because they provide a
respite from the cold and from the summer throngs who have helped the industry
achieve record bookings almost every year since the 1970's. Since then growth in
the number of passengers has averaged more than nine percent a year, and is
expected to grow from 4.4 million passengers in 1993 to eight million in the
year 2000.

But ships booked to 90 percent of capacity in recent years owe much to
widespread discounting. In the last year, the industry has had some success
instituting a more orderly system of graduated discounts -- the highest for
early bookings. But brochure prices are still like auto sticker prices:
essentially negotiating ploys.

Cruises have been ranging farther and farther afield, but this year's
fall-winter schedules are more wide-ranging than ever. This diversity is a
response to consumer demand -- demand that has ships calling at remote islands
like St. Helena, where Napoleon was exiled, at Yemen, on the southwest Arabian
peninsula, which only recently has tolerated tourists, and at as many as five
Vietnamese cities on a two-week voyage.

At the same time, Caribbean cruises remain highly popular, and cruise lines are
trying to spice them up with new ports of call, new land packages or new
wrinkles.  About 75 ships are Caribbean-bound this fall and winter, mostly on
7-to-12-day voyages.

Panama Canal transits, for example, have become popular in recent years, with 50
in each direction scheduled between now and April. But many of Royal Cruise
Line's 16 canal cruises include new calls at the San Blas Islands, famed for its
colorful appliqued fabrics (molas) handcrafted by Cuna Indian women, and two of
those cruises will visit New Orleans for the first time. The Regent Star's
weekly sailings from Montego Bay, stopping in Costa Rica, Cartagena and Aruba,
include a partial transit of the Canal; after going through the Gatun locks, one
of three sets of locks in the waterway, the ship turns around in Gatun Lake for
the homeward trip.

One of the more unexpected trends is the emergence of Southeast Asia as a
popular cruise destination, with 20 cruise ships sailing there this fall and
winter, compared with 13 all of last year. The 67 cruises to the region this
year is up 34 percent over 1992. The region's popularity has surprised some
cruise officials for several reasons: the high tariff, caused by trans-Pacific
air fares, the time required to sail from one distant port to another, and the
predominance of luxury ships on those routes.

The Seabourn line began sailing in Asia last winter, and this year has eight
sailings.

"We have clearly hit a hot button with these cruises," said Larry Pimentel,
Seabourn's president. "One in three travel-agent inquiries to our reservations
department is for information on our Asian itineraries."

Wind Spirit will begin a year-round Southeast Asian schedule next month,
operating out of Singapore's new $20 million cruise terminal. Windstar's Wind
Song will continue cruising French Polynesia through 1994.

And Vietnam is a growing cruise destination. Two Ocean Pearl sailings in January
call at several Vietnamese ports, while the Royal Odyssey also calls at Danang
in January. Two Seabourn cruises this fall will call at Ho Chi Minh City and
Danang.

Song of Flower will call three times at Ho Chi Minh City, once at Danang and
Haiphong, and the lecturer on its Nov. 21 cruise will be H. R. (Bob) Haldeman,
White House chief of staff under President Richard M. Nixon.

And at least 10 ships will cruise to Australia and New Zealand this season,
double the number of a year ago; Holland America's Maasdam and Royal Viking's
Sun will cruise in the region next fall.

Next month, Cunard's Crown Monarch, now permanently based in Australia, will
begin a year-round series of 10- and 11-day voyages between Sydney and Cairns,
and will offer 14-day voyages to New Zealand and the South Pacific. The Royal
Odyssey, returning to the region after a year's absence, will make a total of 12
stops in Australia and New Zealand.

This season will see an increase in "theme" cruises.  American Hawaii, recently
purchased by the New Orleans-based Delta Queen Steamboat Company, is offering
"1940's Remembered," featuring big-band music by groups like the Sammy Kaye
Orchestra, celebrities like June Allyson and Maxene Andrews, and movies from
that era.

Norwegian Cruise Line will offer its fifth annual "Big Bands at Sea" cruise, on
the Norway's seven-day voyage next month from Miami to the Caribbean and
Bahamas.  And the Costa Romantica will sail from Miami in January on a weeklong
cruise chock-a-block with country-music performers.

The Delta Queen and Mississippi Queen, forced to divert a dozen cruises to other
rivers this summer when the upper Mississippi flooded, are scheduled to resume
trips on the lower Mississippi on Nov. 5.

A growing number of cruises are built around weddings and honeymoons. Couples
can wed before departure, aboard ship, or after arriving at their destination.

American Hawaii, for example, offers a package for newlyweds that includes two
days at a hotel on Waikiki or Maui, and a four-day cruise from Maui to the Big
Island and Honolulu. It also offers a $495 package in which ministers or
justices perform wedding ceremonies aboard ship, complete with Hawaiian leis for
bride and bridegroom, a bottle of champagne, live Hawaiian music, a small
wedding cake and 24 photos in an album.

Fantasy Cruises offers discount rates for newlyweds on its Sunday departures
aboard the Britanis from Miami to the Mexican Caribbean, and on its Monday
departures on the Amerikanis from San Juan to a variety of Caribbean
destinations. Royal Caribbean Cruise Line will provide receptions, as well as
shipboard ceremonies, provided that the bride and bridegroom sail the same day
the reception is held.

The leading nautical matchmaker is Carnival, which offers civil ceremonies
aboard the Holiday, Celebration, Ecstasy and Fantasy while docked in Miami prior
to departure, and aboard the Fantasy while docked in Port Canaveral. The
packagecosts from $350 to $400.

Two months ago Carnival added shipboard and on-shore ceremonies in St. Thomas in
the United States Virgin Islands.

"Our program started last November, and we've averaged 15 to 16 ceremonies a
week," said Tim Gallagher, a Carnival spokesman.

Several ships this season have changed owners and names. One transformation
involves Carnival's former Carnivale. Renovated in 1990 and renamed the Fiesta
Marina (1,350 passengers), it is the first cruise ship targeted exclusively to a
Spanish-speaking clientele, including Latin Americans and Americans. On its
inaugural voyage later this month, it will sail from San Juan to the Caribbean,
with a Spanish-speaking crew, Latin rhythms in the ballroom,Latin specialties on
the menu, and later dining hours .

Families also have their own cruise line, or soon will, when the 1,500-passenger
American Adventure begins year-round seven-day cruises from Miami to the
Caribbean on Dec. 18. Formerly the Costa Riviera, the reconfigured American
Adventure, owned by American Family Cruises, is being marketed primarily to
families with children from 2 year olds to teens.

FOR those with the time and money, just after the New Year the QE2, Royal Viking
Sun, Sagafjord and Statendam will embark on around-the-world cruises of 98 to
108 days.

Whether it is the lure of the sea or the lure of jackpots, Americans are taking
day cruises or one- or two-night "cruises to nowhere" in record numbers.
Essentially floating casinos, such cruises accounted for almost half of
Florida's total of 3.4 million cruise-passenger embarkations last year,
according to Travel Agent magazine, and should exceed that this year.

But earlier this year, California banned gambling on cruise ships between ports
in that state, and there is a move afoot in Congress to prohibit cruises to
nowhere on foreign-flag ships. Since only Delta Queen and American Hawaii
register their ships in the United States, passage of such legislation would
probably doom the idea.

The industry is also keeping a wary eye on several other bills in the House of
Representatives, which, if they became law, would ultimately result in higher
fares -- and, opponents say, would force cruise ships to abandon United States
ports. One is legislation extending certain United States labor laws to
foreign-flag ships, including American minimum-wage laws. (Most employees of
such ships are foreign workers who depend largely on tips.) Another bill would
levy fines and in some cases bar from United States ports ships built in foreign
shipyards with government subsidies.

Prices could also rise if Caribbean destinations enact the recent
recommendations of the Caribbean Tourism Organization, which represents 31
islands: a $5 a passenger tax beginning in April, rising to $7.50 next October
and $10 in October 1995, not unlike the taxes in effect at many airports.

The Jamaican Government has already announced that its current tax will rise in
January, from $10 to $13 at Ocho Rios and to $12 at Montego Bay.

And in June, Barbados announced a $6 tax scheduled for June 1994. The tax is to
remain in effect for three years, and the money is to be earmarked for specific
port improvements.

Other islands have longstanding agreements with the cruise industry to keep
passenger taxes at current levels or for modest increases, at least for the next
several years.

And tourist authorities at several other destinations -- including French
overseas departments like Martinique and St. Maarten, which have no passenger
tax, and Guadeloupe, which imposes a $2 tax -- are thought to believe that
higher taxes may discourage tourism to their islands.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Carla and Charles Dixon marry aboard Fantasy in Miami.
(Carnival Cruise Lines); Royal Odyssey in Singapore; Asia cruises are expanding.
(Royal Cruise Line)(pg. 16); Delta Queen is expected to return to its regular
routes. (Peter Guttman)(pg. 35)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 10, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35; Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 65 words


A letter to the editor on Sept. 26 from Francis X. Dealy Jr., quoting his book
"The Power and the Money: Inside The Wall Street Journal," misspelled the name
of a correspondent cited in the book as one of the "primary club of Vietnam
correspondents." He was Charles Mohr, not Moore; he covered the Vietnam War for
Time magazine in 1962-63, and for The New York Times from 1964 to 1970.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 10, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

World Markets;
Rice Trading Rises, but Will It Last?

BYLINE: By Barnaby J. Feder

SECTION: Section 3; Page 13; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 894 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO


WITH harvest shortfalls developing in many leading rice-growing countries,
prices for the world's second-most-popular food after wheat have jumped rapidly
in recent weeks to their highest level since the late 1980's.

Just where prices are headed is hard to say because so little of the rice grown
enters into the flow of world trade.

"There are about 350 million tons grown worldwide, but only 13 million of that
is sold commercially," said Neauman D. Coleman, a longtime rice trader at the
Memphis, Tenn., office of Dean Witter. "Most of the rest is controlled by
governments and is used within a few miles of where it is grown."

With so little rice trading freely, prices for what is sold on the open market
can be volatile. The best forum in which to track such movements -- and the only
place where investors can place bets on them -- is the rice futures and options
trading pit at the Mid-America Commodity Exchange here.

The rice contract has never developed enough sustained trading volume or open
interest for The Wall Street Journal and other financial publications to list
each day more than the price for the contract nearest expiration. Thus, the only
widely distributed price information at the moment is the price of the November
futures contract, although five other contracts with expiration dates next year
are available for trading, along with options on them.

But rice's star in the trading pits is now rising along with the price, which at
one point last week reached $8.70 per hundredweight, or 100 pounds, up about 80
percent from prices last spring. A record 1,761 contracts changed hands on
Wednesday as the price came off its peak. It closed Friday at $7.74.

Traders who usually deal in other commodities at the Board of Trade and the
MidAm have become a common sight in the rice pit. In fact, the space that had
been roomy enough for the handful of traders who make up the entire local market
in more stable times had lately proved so tight that, on Thursday, the Board of
Trade and MidAm moved rice trading to a new pit.

The Board of Trade also plans to start providing rice price quotes this
Wednesday, giving potential traders who do not subscribe to price information
from the MidAm a window on the market.

The move to a new pit and the planned wider price dissemination reflect the high
hopes exchange officials have that the surge in interest will last longer than
the one they experienced six years ago, when a drought in Thailand, the world's
largest rice exporter, sent prices soaring to an all-time high of $13.68 per
hundredweight on Jan. 26, 1988.

"We may really have something here," said Charles Rondoni, the chairman of the
MidAm Advisory Board. "Rice may eventually trade more than wheat."

The main factor behind such optimism is the belief that the current price surge
is unusual because it is driven by Japan's announcement that it intends to
import rice for the first time since 1984, when it turned to Korea to make up a
shortfall.

Japan has committed to importing 200,000 tons. But based on reports that Japan
is facing a 2 million-ton drop in its domestic harvest, from last year's 10.6
million tons, industry analysts expect the actual imports to be more than 1
million tons.

That high a level of imports should open the door for California to export rice
to Japan for the first time since the early 1970's. More important, exchange
officials say, is that despite Japan's assertions that the imports would be a
temporary measure, they may give trade negotiators a lever with which to gain
deeper access to the Japanese market. If negotiations lead to such a fundamental
shift in Japan's policy, rice would become a more tradable commodity.

For all the attention being paid to Japan, rice traders say the current price
bullishness relies just as heavily on several more transient factors.

The total harvest and the quality of this year's rice crop in the United States
is down. And weather problems in several key Asian countries -- including
Thailand, the Philippines, Vietnam, China and Taiwan -- in recent weeks have led
to a lowering of projected output worldwide.

Mr. Coleman at Dean Witter said the ratio of rice stocks to consumer and
industrial use could drop to its lowest point since 1975.

"It would be tighter than what we had when we hit our price peak in the 1980's,"
Mr. Coleman said.

Such market-tightening forces could easily be reversed next year, plunging
today's limited rice trading market back into obscurity. Longtime floor traders
like Ed Taylor, who traded the original rice futures contract created in New
Orleans in 1981 and moved here when the MidAm took over the contract in 1986,
are skeptical that rice is ready to become a bigger trading commodity.

"This doesn't look a lot different from 1987 to me," he said.

Still, there is no doubt that investors who may not have paid attention to rice
in the past have had their interest piqued by the recent price explosion.

During a slow period early last week, when the futures contract had risen to its
allowed limit for the day, one longtime trader here, S. Scott Minton, recounted
a recent visit to his dentist: "He tells me: 'You look a little nervous. It's
O.K. Everyone who sits in this chair is nervous.' I tell him: 'That's not what
I'm nervous about. I trade rice.' And he says, 'Ah, it's going up!' "

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 10, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD: HARM'S WAY;
U. S. Pays Dearly For an Education In Somalia

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1472 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


HOW did an operation that began with American soldiers feeding starving Somalis
wind up with an American soldier's corpse being dragged through the streets of
Mogadishu by Somalis starving only for revenge?

The answer is a tangled web of good intentions gone awry, political
miscalculations and military blunders. Together they add up to a chilling object
lesson for American engagement abroad in the post-cold war world.

But the Somalia story is not over. President Clinton made that clear in his
address to the nation last week when, in response to mounting American
casualties in the Somali capital and growing domestic opposition to the American
involvement there, he announced a doubling of United States ground forces to
protect American troops and a March 31 deadline for their withdrawal.

There is a lot riding on how that deadline is met. If a measure of normalcy can
yet be restored and Somalia becomes an example of a reasonably successful
humanitarian relief operation, there may be hope for Bosnia or Haiti or other
failed states desperately in need of outside help as they limp and moan toward
the 21st century.

But if Somalia becomes the Beirut or Vietnam of the 1990's, it could have a
far-reaching impact. Taken on its own, this little country on the Horn of Africa
is irrelevant to vital American interests. Life in America will not be affected
whether Somalia wallows in anarchy or emerges from the ashes. But there are
other Somalias. Each on its own also represents no threat to vital American
interests. But what happens if they are all ignored -- Somalia, Bosnia, Georgia,
Nagorno-Karabakh and Haiti -- and who knows how many others to come? One answer
is that the United States could wake up 10 years from now and discover that the
world has diplomatic cancer -- a mass of failed states metastasizing in a cycle
of violence and underdevelopment and slowly sapping the strength of the
international system.

Needed: Order From Chaos

That is what makes learning the lessons of Somalia so urgent. Perhaps the most
important is that there is rarely such a thing as simple humanitarian
intervention, where the United States goes into a country solely to feed the
hungry and pass out chewing gum. Humanitarian crises, save for natural
disasters, almost always have political roots and can be addressed in a lasting
way only if the political problems are addressed. Somalia was short of food not
because of bad rains, but because of bad reigns -- a succession of venal
warlords whose infighting after the 1991 overthrow of the dictator Mohammed Siad
Barre disrupted food distribution.

In the long run, it will be impossible for the Somalia operation to succeed
without a working government. Virtually all humanitarian interventions require
nation-building. The Reagan Administration learned this rule the hard way in
Lebanon, the Bush Administration ignored it when it sent American troops to
Somalia last December and the Clinton Administration, which inherited the
operation, has been only slowly catching on. In such cases, humanitarian
intervention has to be accompanied by a division of diplomats with blueprints
for political reconstruction.

If it is true that humanitarian intervention and nation-building go
hand-in-hand, the question becomes: does the United States have the will, the
wallet and the wiles to make it work?

Just Another Faction

The question of wiles arises because when the United States enters a country
with no stable political center, it immediately becomes a faction; politics
won't stop because people are hungry. American troops in Somalia saw themselves
as the Red Cross, but local political leaders effectively viewed them as the
Clinton clan, or, as the Lebanese used to call the Marine peacekeepers in Beirut
in 1982, "the international militia."

The Clinton clan had three choices in Somalia: to ally itself with another clan
and help it take power, to try to take over the country itself, or to try to
broker a power-sharing deal. Unfortunately, the Americans stumbled among all
three options, sometimes aligning themselves against the warlord Mohammed Farah
Aidid, sometimes brokering deals and sometimes leaving Somalis the impression
that the United States would try to run the country.

Thinking like a clan leader does not come naturally to the American statesman.
To play this role requires a degree of guile and willingness to absorb pain that
Americans were initially unprepared for in Somalia. The key is learning how to
bend, how to wink and nod, how to pressure people indirectly and how to play
factions off against one another. In his dealings with General Aidid, Adm.
Jonathan Howe, the man overseeing the American operation in Mogadishu, has been
noticeably lacking in these instincts. There is something almost farcical about
the notion of the United Nations issuing an arrest warrant for General Aidid in
Mogadishu: habeas corpus in Dante's Inferno, Miranda rights in no man's land.

President Clinton has finally decided that the American clan will play a
brokering role in Somalia. He has dispatched the envoy Robert Oakley back to the
country this weekend with authorization to wheel and deal.

"We have no interest in denying anybody access to playing a role in Somalia's
political future," Mr. Clinton said on Friday, signaling his willingness to
include General Aidid in a power-sharing accord provided he returns an American
captive and plays ball politically.

There is an old rabbinical saying: "Where there is truth there is no peace and
where there is peace there is no truth." It conveys the notion that gray
compromises are what make life possible, and that is particularly true when
nation-building in a place like Mogadishu.

As for the ability of American forces to absorb pain, the death of one soldier
on a mercy mission to Somalia is one too many. But a soldier's job is to fight.
Some Americans seem to have forgotten in recent years that you join the Army not
just to get a G.I. loan. There is something slightly hysterical about members of
Congress rushing to call the troops home the minute a few are killed.

On the other hand, the Bush and Clinton Administrations helped to produce that
frenzy by not leveling with the American people from the start that humanitarian
intervention and nation-building are high-risk endeavors. Americans were told
that their soldiers were being sent to work in a soup kitchen and they were
understandably shocked to find them in house-to-house combat.

Had all the risks, pain and costs of humanitarian intervention been laid out by
President Bush to the American people from the start, President Clinton might
now have more time to see it through to reasonable success. As it happens, he
has been forced by Congress to impose a six-month time limit to give the process
"a fighting chance." But since the Americans have already bought a departure
ticket, Somalia's warlords are likely to lie low and wait the Americans out.
Meanwhile, would-be Somali reformers will hardly be emboldened by the likelihood
that when the Americans leave, accounts will be settled in time-honored Somali
ways. This six-month interregnum seems more like a decent interval to cover a
retreat than a serious initiative; you don't do nation-building with a
stopwatch.

In fairness to Mr. Clinton, he is only doing what the country wants. But this is
a moment of truth for him too. From the start, Mr. Clinton has understood that
America does not have the economic resources to remain engaged abroad as it was
during the cold war. But Mr. Clinton wanted to maintain an active, pro-democracy
agenda abroad, up to the traditional American leadership role. He hoped that
through the United Nations the United States could lead and that many others
would pay.

But there is no free lunch in diplomacy. As the United Nations naturally took on
a nation-building role, the Clinton Administration paid little heed even as it
voted for each resolution. Things were quiet; Somalia seemed the sort of
low-maintenance, high-political-reward operation that the Clinton team had in
mind. But that equation was exploded by last Sunday's street fighting in
Mogadishu, exposing the 33-country United Nations peacekeeping unit in Somalia
as a Tower of Babel, and driving home to Americans the real, weighty role they
would have to play if Somalia is to succeed.

"I don't think we will give up trying to use the U.N. to leverage our
involvement to do things that are worth doing, but not worth doing alone," said
an Administration official. "But I think we will be far more skeptical about the
ability of the United Nations to operate without vigorous involvement of the
United States. Ultimately the U.N. is us. You can't hand off to an entity that
is a bunch of bureaucrats who have never done this before."


LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A Somali brandishes wreckage from the fighting last week
between U.S. soldiers and followers of Gen. Mohammed Farah Aidid. (Agence
France-Presse) (pg. 1); Bob Dole, Senate minority leader, and Thomas Foley,
Speaker of the House, after meeting with President Clinton on Somalia.
(Associated Press) (pg. 3)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 10, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Conversations: Phoebe Eng;
Publisher Sees Asian-American Identity as a Work in Progress

BYLINE: By FELICIA R. LEE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1200 words


PHOEBE ENG, the publisher of A. Magazine and a Chinese-American, recalls an
experience common in some way to almost every hyphenated American. During high
school, she considered it a great compliment to be told by her Jewish friends
that she fit in so well they thought of her as Phoebe Engstein, not really
Chinese at all. Today, she considers that part of the invisibility blues
plaguing people of color.

"There is a great dishonesty in pretending that race does not not matter," Ms.
Eng said. "I really do believe that if you do not acknowledge color or
background in social dynamics, be it individual or group-related, you're not
acknowledging what's really going on."

Ms. Eng, who earned a law degree at New York University, was once a mergers and
acquisitions lawyer at Coudert Brothers, an international law firm. She took a
big pay cut to become a publisher because she wanted to be part of something
that reflected her quest for identity.

"You don't discover new oceans unless you have the courage to leave the shore,"
she said.

The "shore" for Ms. Eng, 32, was a comfortable upbringing on Long Island with
her father, an architect, and her mother, a nursing supervisor. Her father's
family came from Hong Kong, her mother's from Taiwan. Her paternal grandfather
came to the United States at the turn of the century and opened a laundry, at
the time one of the few business opportunities available to Chinese.

Ms. Eng's decision to go to law school, she said, reflects second-generation
immigrant pressure to earn a recognizable badge of approval. At N.Y.U. she
joined other minority students to press school officials for greater racial
sensitivity on campus and more diversity in both the ideas being taught and the
people teaching them.

"You need to speak a language reserved for people who have power," said Ms. Eng.
She has used the knowledge and credentials of her legal training to battle the
stereotype of the super-feminine, subservient Asian woman. "I know that when
they see me, as an Asian-American woman, they question whether I can say
anything of worth, whether I should get the coffee," she said coolly.

Ms. Eng's consumer-oriented quarterly, which made its debut in August, is
striving for a national audience of Asian-Americans between the ages of 18 and
40. Many of them are like Ms. Eng -- second-generation Asians who have done
well. Yet they have not seen themselves reflected much in the press.

Life Magazine for Asians

In looking at fashion and at news, in talking about everything from eye-widening
surgery to the dearth of Asian-American political activity, A. Magazine seeks to
hold up a mirror to its readers, Ms. Eng said.

There are 40,000 of these readers, split evenly by gender. They tend to be
well-educated and well-off; their median income is $57,000. Ms. Eng
characterizes the magazine, whose cover price is $3.50, as a Life magazine for
Asians. Its tone, however, tends to be more acerbic, with a definite point of
view.

An article on Asian-Americans in politics, for example, was titled "Crashing the
Parties -- Why Asian-Americans Need to Shock the Political System." It said that
as a group Asians have been left out because they tend not to vote their numbers
or organize cogently across lines of ethnicity. Ms. Eng believes that many are
timid about politics because they fled repressive governments.

The concept of an Asian-American perspective had to wait for a large enough
group of second-generation Asians to be born here, Ms. Eng said. Before, she
said, people were too busy clinging to their identities as Chinese or Japanese
or Korean and were isolated in enclaves where few spoke English.

"The first generation is fragmented by culture and language," Ms. Eng said.
"What we see as the most cohesive group is the second generation -- people
educated here, whose perspective is shaped by the mass media, people who have
been brought up in an American culture but have a sensibility that is uniquely
Asian-American."

Popular culture has began to reflect the melding of the two cultures, in films
like "The Joy Luck Club," based on Amy Tan's novel about a group of Chinese
mothers and daughters. The women are Asian, certainly, but they are also
American when it comes to choices about men, careers and independence. They are
no different than young Italian-Americans or Irish-Americans -- proud of the
music and food of their culture but owing their essence to both sides of the
hyphen.

But the difference for Asians -- as for blacks and dark-skinned Hispanics -- is
that they can never totally assimilate. They look different.

Certainly, Japanese-Americans, Chinese-Americans and Korean-Americans all have
distinctive languages and cultures, Ms. Eng said, but only through a pan-Asian
identity do they have media and political clout. Thus Asians turn to their
advantage the fact that so many Americans still cannot distinguish among them,
Ms. Eng said.

'Multi-Culti' Is In

Until the 1980's, second-generation Asians -- most born in America in the 1960's
and 1970's -- saw themselves as outsiders, she said. Now they are reaching
critical mass in terms of sheer numbers, political clout and consumer muscle.
They also live in a nation where the image of a "real American" less often is
white.

"Now all of a sudden multi-culti is the language -- it's the trend," Ms. Eng
said. "And it's almost as if you don't have something to separate you as a
distinguishing characteristic, like your racial background, then you're almost
left out in the cold in the '90's."

There are currently seven million Asian-Americans, double their 1980 population.
Primarily they hail from China, the Philippines, Japan, India, South Korea and
Vietnam. While there is less discrimination than before, it still exists, Ms.
Eng said, in the form of the "glass ceiling" that allows Asians to rise only so
high in the American workplace.

For Ms. Eng, one especially thorny issue is the perception among whites that
Asian-Americans are a "model minority" to be embraced and played off other
groups. She said too many of her people buy this perception, even as they battle
bias and stereotypes.

"It is a dangerous concept," she said. "To say one group is a model minority is
to say that some are not model.

"Asians are, as the Jewish population was, being pitted against other minority
groups. You see that, case in point, during the Los Angeles uprising. How the
issue turned into a major sub-issue of Koreans armed with machine guns versus
pillaging blacks in the inner city was the sensationalism that mass media is
made of.

"There is tension in the communities, but it is exacerbated by the way the media
cover it," she said, adding that in response to the problem her magazine plans
to sponsor a forum on black-Asian relationships.

"I personally have found an increasing number of passing comments made to me by
African-Americans as I walk down the street," she said.

"It's the same old thing, the China doll thing," she said. "The perception is
that I've got a cordless phone in my bag and I've got all the trappings of
someone who is very wealthy. That's very distressing. It wasn't there before Los
Angeles."


NAME: PHOEBE ENG

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Phoebe Eng in her Manhattan apartment. (Steve Hart for The New
York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 10, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Oct. 3-9: Victims Don't Forget;
A Vietnam-Era Fugitive Goes to Prison

BYLINE: By MICHAEL COOPER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 238 words


A generation ago, as a young radical, Katherine Ann Power took part in a bank
robbery that led to the murder of a Boston police officer, Walter Schroeder.
Last week, having emerged from an adulthood in hiding, she was sentenced -- to 8
to 12 years in prison for armed robbery and manslaughter, with a chance for
release in a little over five years.

Ms. Power apologized to the court for playing a part in taking a human life.

But the most memorable words of the day came from the daughter of her victim,
the oldest of a family of nine children.

"I told each of my brothers and sisters that my father had died," said Clare
Schroeder, who was 17 at the time of the killing and later followed her father
into police work. "Each time I had to do that I cried all over again."

Sergeant Schroeder spoke angrily of the attention given to Ms. Power's account
of her years in hiding. "I will never comprehend, as long as I live, how anyone
can equate the struggle and pain thrust upon my family by my father's murder
with the difficulty of the life Katherine Power chose to live as a fugitive,"
she said. And she rejected Ms. Power's suggestion that the crime should be
understood in the context of the young radicals' feelings about the Vietnam War.
"Murdering a policeman in Boston to bring peace to Southeast Asia was utterly
senseless then, and it is just as senseless now," Sgt. Schroeder said.   MICHAEL
COOPER

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Katherine Ann Power. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 10, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Mysteries Circle Vietnamese At Center of Brown Inquiry

BYLINE: By JASON DePARLE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1320 words

DATELINE: CORAL SPRINGS, Fla., Oct. 8


He rose at an early age to the top of the South Vietnamese Government, but he
refused to flee as Saigon fell. The conquering Communists did not send him to
the prison camps where they banished other South Vietnamese officials. Instead
they gave him a comfortable Government post.

For the last few years, he has been living with his family in a four-bedroom,
waterfront house on a cul-de-sac in Coral Springs. His daughter says he has had
no job. His former business partner says that he has been trying to bribe the
Commerce Secretary, Ronald H. Brown, to help lift the trade embargo against
Vietnam.

A number of mysteries now surround Nguyen Van Hao, 54, who has emerged at the
center of a Federal investigation that seems to have spilled from a James Bond
novel. He holds the answer to the question being asked by investigators in
Washington and Miami: Did he and the Vietnamese Government bribe Mr. Brown?

Mr. Brown has dismissed the accusations as ludicrous, and there is no evidence
that he received any money or broke any law. But after first cultivating the
impression that he did not know Mr. Hao, Mr. Brown, through his lawyer, has
acknowledged meeting with him on three occasions.

Saigon, Haiti and Florida

Mr. Hao (pronounced like "how") was called before a Federal grand jury in Miami.
He has made no public comments and has disappeared from his home. His wife,
speaking from the aisles of the family-owned convenience store, will say only
that he is an "honest man."

Mr. Hao's biography winds through Saigon, Haiti and Florida and discloses a
remarkable talent for making connections. His resume lists a doctorate in
economics from the University of Geneva. He married into a prominent South
Vietnamese family and rose through the Government at lightning speed, earning a
reputation for intelligence, sophistication and charm.

As a deputy prime minister during the fall of Saigon, he was, at age 36,
essentially the country's third-ranking official. "He made a very good
impression on all of us," said Thomas Polgar, a former Saigon station chief for
the Central Intelligence Agency.

His smooth transition after the Communist takeover led some of his former
colleagues, then in prison, to suspect that he had been an agent for the
Communists. Mr. Hao has angrily denied it, and some accounts of the war's end
portray him as a brave, even heroic, patriot, who risked his life for his
homeland.

Lore of Gold Theft

As the city fell, Mr. Hao went on television, urged colleagues not to flee, and
pledged to stay on with his family. He spent about seven years as a economic
adviser to Communist officials. He has written that he told them to "allow
private enterprise," and left for Paris with the Government's permission when
they ignored that advice.

In 1983 the State Department denied Mr. Hao a visa under a law aimed at "current
or former Communists, anarchists or subversives." But the Government reversed
itself the next year and issued Mr. Hao an immigrant visa. His daughter, Gina
Nguyen, said he was now applying for citizenship.

Among the lore that surrounds Mr. Hao is his involvement in thwarting a plan by
American and South Vietnamese officials to fly out the nation's gold reserves.
His precise actions are disputed. But he may have enhanced his standing with the
new Communist Government by taking credit for preserving the 16 tons of gold.

Mr. Hao left Vietnam for Paris in 1982 accompanied by his two daughters. His
wife, Nguyet Thi Cao, had already moved to Houston, with their two sons. She
appears in history books on her own as a well-known widow. Her first husband, Ba
Cut, was a South Vietnamese militia leader captured and decapitated during a
1950's revolt.

Gone for a Month

After being reunited in Houston, the Hao family moved to Port-au-Prince, Haiti,
where Mr. Hao has said he worked as an adviser to the Fund for Industrial
Development, a branch of the Haitian Government that channels loans to expanding
businesses. Ms. Nguyen, Mr. Hao's daughter, said the family moved to Coral
Springs in 1987 because her father had heard good things about the schools.

Since then, she said, he has stayed at home while her mother has run a
convenience store in North Lauderdale, Fla. She said he had been gone for about
a month and she did not know where he was. "We don't communicate often," said
Ms. Nguyen, who is 18 years old. "He's a strict man and I am afraid of him."

The family seems to be comfortable but not wealthy. Mr. Hao and his wife paid
$208,000 for a house now assessed at $170,000, which has been for sale for about
a year. Alcohol licensing records show they have invested $135,000 in the
convenience store, with loans of $115,000.

Last summer, Mr. Hao began sending investors an amateurish plan to do business
in Vietnam, describing himself, among other things, as having attended a program
at a business school he misspelled as "Hardvard." But he was able to win an
introduction to Mr. Brown, then one of the capital's top lawyer-lobbyists.

Mr. Brown's lawyer, Reid Weingarten, has said the meeting was arranged by a
mutual friend, Marc Ashton, a Pompano Beach, Fla., businessman who has worked in
Haiti. Mr. Weingarten said the men discussed potential business dealings in
Vietnam but made no commitments. Shortly thereafter, Mr. Hao was on a plane to
Hanoi, where he appears to have had access to top Vietnamese officials,
including the prime minister, Vo Van Kiet, who he said gave him a letter for Mr.
Brown.

Conflicting Versions

What happened next is in sharp dispute. Mr. Weingarten has said that Mr. Brown
glanced at the letter but told Mr. Hao at a December meeting that he could not
work with him, since he had been nominated to be Commerce Secretary.

A conflicting version comes from Ly Thanh Binh, a businessman from Tamarac,
Fla., who was acting as Mr. Hao's junior partner in the plan to seek investment
in Vietnam.

He has told investigators that Mr. Hao returned from the December meeting
reporting that Mr. Brown had asked for a $700,000 payment. Mr. Binh said Mr. Hao
then went back to Vietnam and arranged for the Government to put the money in a
Singapore bank.

Saying his sole motive is ethics, Mr. Binh has been trying to publicize this
story since February, when he first notified news organizations. He was
interviewed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and passed a lie-detector
test, the bureau has said.

But he acknowledges that he has never met Mr. Brown and has no document
suggesting that the Commerce Secretary sought or received money. His version of
Mr. Brown's actions comes solely from Mr. Hao, who could have concocted a story
to exploit his partners or Vietnamese officials.

The latest twist is the appearance of three letters sent anonymously to The
Spotlight, which was the first English-language publication to print Mr. Binh's
accusations. The Spotlight is distributed by the Liberty Lobby, a Washington
group that has argued that the Holocaust did not occur.

The letters, purportedly from Mr. Hao, are written in Vietnamese and addressed
to colleagues in Vietnam. They do not clearly confirm nor refute the accusation
of bribery, though they seem to imply the F.B.I. is trying to coerce a false
confession.

In a July 27 letter apparently to a Vietnamese official in Saigon, the author
says, "I accept the sacrifice for the truth and to save the reputation of the 2
governments." The letters refer to a host of commercial and Government dealings
with the Vietnamese and asks the authorities to "preserve my capital."

The letters are signed Nguyen Van Hao, on stationery that says "NVH Associates,"
with telephone numbers that Mr. Hao has used in Saigon and Washington. Mr. Binh
has said the handwriting is Mr. Hao's.

The Spotlight sent the letters to the F.B.I. Mr. Hao's lawyer, James McGuirk,
did not return telephone calls seeking to confirm their authenticity.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Nguyen Van Hao, who has been called before a Federal grand jury
in Miami, has disappeared and has made no public comments.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 10, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Tailhook Gathering Is a Far Cry From the Last One

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1128 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, Oct. 9


Beauty queens preparing for the Mrs. America pageant and naval aviators
attending the Tailhook convention at the Town and Country Hotel here milled
around the same swimming pool this weekend, ringed by news photographers eager
to capture the least indiscretion.

But this was a far different gathering from the notorious 1991 Tailhook event, a
four-day bacchanal in Las Vegas, Nev., that ended careers, ruined reputations
and led the Navy to withdraw its support from the 1,400-member aviators'
association.

Instead of young, hot-blooded fliers, who were discouraged from attending this
year's convention by the Navy brass, the Tailhook members here this time around
were mostly retirees with wobbly dentures, trifocals and their days of
skirt-chasing far behind them.

Sure, they did their share of drinking and swearing, like conventioneers the
world over. But mostly they spent the weekend complaining about how their
organization had been unfairly stigmatized, waxing nostalgic about the good old
days when boys were still allowed to be boys and debating whether to change
their group's name.

Someone to Blame

The consensus among the 800 members at this convention is that politicians
currying favor with women voters and journalists seeking a sensational story had
exaggerated the goings-on at the Las Vegas Hilton two years ago.

"I've read all the findings," said James D. (Jig Dog) Ramage, a 77-year-old
retired admiral, referring to the lurid Pentagon report made public in April,
which describes activities like "butt biting," "ball walking" and the infamous
gantlet of groping arms.

"The behavior was juvenile, but it certainly wasn't criminal," he said.
"Obviously there was activity we weren't very proud of. But there was no one
raped."

Mr. Ramage is the sort of man who greets his old buddies by asking, "Did you
bring your lovely with you?" He opens doors for ladies and takes his hat off in
elevators. Several years back, he said, he stopped visiting the hospitality
suites at the Tailhook convention, scene of much of the trouble in 1991, because
the music had gotten too loud for his codger's taste.

"It's a boom box world now," agreed Walter M. (Wally) Schirra, a retired captain
and former astronaut who was here as the keynote speaker at the Tailhook banquet
tonight.

Mr. Ramage and Mr. Schirra just chuckled when they were told that one of the
Mrs. America contestants at the Town and Country, 27-year-old Jacqueline Mallery
Solomon of Miami, had asked hotel management if security was adequate to protect
the beauty queens from the aviators. Mrs. Solomon recently made her acting
debut, playing a bar hostess in a soon-to-be-released movie.

"I think she'll be safe," Mr. Ramage said, turning to his friend for
confirmation.

"At least from us," Mr. Schirra said.

Nostalgia about the Navy of their day, and countless awkward jokes about sexual
harassment, were plentiful here, along with much pained discussion about the
future of Tailhook. "We face the risk of becoming another elderly drinking and
chowder society," said W. D. Knutson, a retired captain and the group's
president.

Talk of a Budget Crisis

At the membership meeting on Friday the talk was of budget deficits caused by
the Navy's withdrawal of support and the loss of corporate sponsorship and of
pending lawsuits, 12 in all, filed by women who claim the association was
negligent in not protecting them at the 1991 convention.

And at today's symposium the talk was of changing the group's name, which has
become synonymous with sexual misconduct. No decision was made but the debate
was spirited, with some arguing that it was prudent to shed the synonym for
scandal and others arguing that men with the right stuff should not bow to
adversity.

The association's primary mission at the moment, many of its members and
officers said, is to restore relations with the Navy, which until the scandal
gave fliers free transportation and time off for the convention and sent its
highest ranking officers to lead panel discussions and make speeches.

Many of the old-timers lamented the Navy's decision to disassociate itself from
the group and said they were grateful that so many reporters had turned out here
so they could trumpet Tailhook's accomplishments.

Some Tailhook members who have not regularly attended the convention came this
year to support the organization in a time of trouble. Among them was Bill
Hauser, a 71-year-old retired vice admiral who was deputy chief of naval
operations for air warfare in the mid-1970's and Mr. Ramage's commander on the
Constellation in the Gulf of Tonkin during the Vietnam war.

Mr. Hauser cited the association's crucial role in helping the Navy keep fliers
in the post-Vietnam years, when many were "dispirited because the war was over"
and considering rich offers from the airlines. At the Navy's urging, Tailhook
organized the so-called flag panels at that time so senior officers could field
questions from ensigns -- like "Is there a chance for me to change airplanes?"
or "What's the next exciting new weapons system?" -- and thus encourage them to
stay.

While the Navy did not forbid anyone to attend this convention on their own time
and out of uniform, there seemed to be no flag officers and only a handful of
active-duty aviators, mostly from nearby Miramar Air Station.

A Female Aviator's View

But at least one active-duty flier paid her own plane fare to get here, from
Whidbey Island, near Seattle. She was Elizabeth Toedt, a 36-year-old lieutenant
commander, who wore an "I Support Hook" sweatshirt and was escorted from one
interview to another by the association's new public relations consultant.

Lieutenant Toedt said she was there because Tailhook "took a big hit" and was
being blamed for the behavior of individual aviators, many of whom were not even
members. "If I thought this was anything but an up front, professional
organization, I wouldn't be a member," she said.

Another woman here this weekend grieving the small turnout was Carol L.
Fairchild, a T-shirt vendor who followed an aviator from the Naval Academy in
Maryland to Pensacola, Fla., was jilted and stayed in that Navy town to start a
business.

Now she plies her wares at events like the Tailhook convention. Two years ago,
in Las Vegas, Ms. Fairchild said she had a $5,000 profit. This year, she will
barely break even, even though the rent on her booth was $600 rather than the
$1,800 the association had charged when times were good.

One of the shirts she was selling summed up the Tailhook Association's worry. It
featured drawings of a timber wolf, a mountain gorilla, a black leopard, a bald
eagle, an African elephant and an American aviator. It read, "Endangered
Species."

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The 1993 Tailhook convention looks far different from the
notorious 1991 gathering of young aviators. Mostly, retirees came to the Town
and Country Hotel in San Diego this year. Capt. Gerald Johns, a retired flier,
posed with Doris Martineaux, Mrs. America 1992, who was attending a pageant.
(Liliana Nieto del Rio for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 10, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
In 'My Heart,' Memories of Vietnam

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 13CN; Page 20; Column 4; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 657 words


"YOU never get over it," says one of six women, among the thousands who
returned, unacknowledged, from serving in Vietnam. In the second act of "A Piece
of My Heart," at Stamford Theater Works, four nurses, one intelligence officer
and one singer begin to deal with the emotional wreckage, the physical and
psychological fallout of a war without honor, without victory, without closure.

A final tableau of the actresses appearing before a representation of the "
Vietnam Women's Memorial Project" startles the audience. The devastating effect
is built into Shirley Lauro's theater collage. If the intention is to reflect
upon an ignominious episode in history, the political statement inherent in Ms.
Lauro's piece, a theater's mission is accomplished.

But if Ms. Lauro had ordered and orchestrated her material more cohesively, "A
Piece of My Heart" would have emerged as an evening of true theater, instead of
a warmed-over narrative-documentary patchwork that pulls obvious punches, from
dwelling on graphic, horrifying accounts of the missing and the maimed to
forcing a simile ("like a John Wayne movie"). Ms. Lauro gathered her stories
from a book of 26 oral histories by Keith Walker, an attribution oddly omitted
in the theater program.

With varying motivations, not excluding one like "meet a doctor, get yourself
married and settle down," the six women join up, and during most of the first
act register the shock of being utterly ill-prepared for the realities on the
front lines: the parade of patients; the bandages, catheters and I.V.'s; the
relentless bleeding, the burning and the bullets. Not to mention the barbs of
male soldiers, the bungling of the American military bureaucracy and the brutal
attacks of Vietnamese women P.O.W.'s.

Within an accommodating many-tiered wooden setting by Jerry Rojo, Susie Fuller's
assaultive direction magnifies the manipulations in Ms. Lauro's script and all
too often borders on sheer silliness. Elizabeth Flax as a gung-ho officer is the
most unremittingly stentorian of the six actresses. It is difficult for Ms.
Fuller to get her young performers beyond the recitation stage so that one has
the uncomfortable feeling of bearing witness to acting school exercises.

Julie DePaul as the born-again Christian from Erie, Pa., Elaina Davis as an
"antiwar hippie" turned lobbyist and Susan Floyd, who falls apart in an
encounter group, have forceful moments.

Kelleigh McKenzie is the country rock singer who has been swindled out of the
money she has been promised and who can't get a job. Robin Poley as a graduate
in education appears the least comfortable member of the group, perhaps because
she is handed the most self-righteous lines.

One actor, Daniel Pardo, is the all-purpose male, symbolically sedentary in Act
I, relegated to so many random roles in Act II as to be pointless.

The second act homecoming scenes are fitfully involving, yet, strangely, even
more discursively written, for the six actresses take on even more roles here.
The women now have to piece their lives together. They combat alcoholism,
medical denials (of the effects of Agent Orange), self-recrimination, and attend
post-trauma support groups.

For all the disorderliness of Ms. Lauro's work, it is clear that the subject
matter won't go away. The audience at a performance on a recent Saturday night
was stunned into silent immovability for minutes after the first act and stood
up and cheered at the end. It was no synthetic standing ovation. Why a
director's mandate then cut short the curtain call, the sort of rare communal
acknowledgement that defines theater, in order for the actresses to reprise a
sophomoric out-of-sync dance routine was simply beyond comprehension. It is what
actors and actresses work for. Why take their moment away?

"A Piece of My Heart," Sacred Heart Academy, 200 Strawberry Hill Avenue,
Stamford. 359-4414. Performances continue through next Sunday.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Julie DePaul, left, with Elaina Davis, center, and Susan Floyd
in "A Piece of My Heart." (Jayson Byrd)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 10, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Little Big People

BYLINE: By Lucinda Franks;  Lucinda Franks, a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist,
is the author of the novel "Wild Apples."

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3385 words


ONE DAY LAST MAY, MY SON'S thirdgrade classroom was left in the care of a
substitute teacher. For reasons still undetermined, a small riot broke out, with
children fighting, shrieking and shoving chairs. Nine-year-olds going berserk in
springtime is not unprecedented, but consider what happened next: The new
principal lectured them with a sternness they were unaccustomed to. Then she
made them write letters of apology and then they fell apart all over again.
Those who claimed they had not participated in the brawl came down at dismissal
time tearful and incensed at the burden of collective guilt imposed upon them.
"Isn't it illegal for her to punish those of us who did nothing?" one boy asked
his mother. "Should we sue her?" asked another. When told they should show more
respect for authority, one girl said, "Why should we respect her when she showed
no respect for us?"

In the office of a child therapist recently, a 10-year-old girl leaned back and
gazed at her mother with half-lidded contempt. The child was there because her
divorced parents couldn't do anything with her. Her father was bitter because he
had brought her along to buy his girlfriend an engagement gift and she had
sulked the whole time. Her mother complained that she refused to make friends
with the mother's boyfriend. "How do you expect me to have a relationship with
him," the girl said with the ennui of a 40-year-old, "when he's always in your
bedroom?"

The therapist shook her head when she recounted the visit: "Sometimes I think
I'm too old-fashioned to practice in today's world. Half the time the children
act like adults and the adults behave like children."

FOR DECADES NOW, CHILDREN HAVE been growing up faster and faster, each new
generation emerging more precocious than the last. But today's crop of
under-12's, particularly in middle- and upper-middle-income families and
particularly in urban America, seems to have reinvented -- or even bypassed --
childhood as we knew it. They are proud, independent and strong-willed; they are
worldly-wise and morally serious. They are a generation that has been raised to
challenge and doubt authority, to take little at face value -- in short, to
enter the world of maturity long before they are mature.

This was no accident. The parents of many of these children -- those of us who
began our families later in life -- came of age in the Vietnam War years. Our
ideas of child rearing were like our ideas about everything else: radically
different from our parents, who thought a child was just a child, even when the
child got old enough to march against wars and otherwise protest the way the
elder generation ran the world. Those of us who were veterans of the 60's and
70's swore that we would treat our children with respect. We vowed that we would
fold our own offspring into our daily lives, treating them like "little people,"
empowering them with the rights, the importance and the truth telling we had
been denied. We wanted to create the children we always yearned to be. And now,
many years later, we are confronted with the results. Did it turn out the way we
meant it to? Will our independent children thank us for making them the center
of the universe, or have we robbed them of a childhood they can never regain?

The explosion in communications -- with television and movies thrusting
sophisticated material on grade-schoolers -- as well as increasing competition
for college placement has intensified childhood burnout. The kid of yesterday,
who wandered in meadows of fantasy, whose tears were reserved for skinned knees
and broken toys, has given way to the kid who is strapped to the competitive
fast track before he is out of diapers. The urban, affluent child is crammed
with gymnastics and tennis and French lessons and then is crowded with even more
activities by working parents who try to make the most of the time they have
with their children. The child who could once be seen playing cops and robbers
in the park is no longer even in the park but at home simulating the same thing
on his Nintendo screen. He is a computer whiz, a little philosopher, a tiny
lawyer, bursting with opinions on the President, on the best museums, the best
vacation spots and the college he thinks he will attend.

For childish comfort, he is taken into the capricious arms of television: the
great cuddly dinosaur Barney leads him in singing "we're a happy family" and
then the child switches the channel to see that the man who taught him tennis is
a pedophile who has put a bullet through his brain. Language more appropriate to
teen-agers can be heard in elementary-school halls. One mother of a 7-year-old
confided that a boy had told her daughter, "You're so yucky you must have sex
with Nazis."

Economic hardship has long stolen childhood from the poor. The severity and the
causes of their problems, which have only intensified, are far different from
those of affluent children. Yet for the first time, these more privileged
children are thrust unshielded into the middle of family crises that would
paralyze an adult: a parent is dying of AIDS or the child is a mediator in
violent dramas of drug addiction or divorce.

Even in stable families, small children with two working parents learn to shift
for themselves, cooking and caring for siblings and picking up the attitudes of
their elders. Our generation -- reared in an era in which sex was not discussed,
conflict was suppressed and emotional distance was maintained -- opened the
gates for our children. But each day, the bleak river of honesty that runs
through their lives grows dangerously higher.

"I was determined that there were going to be no more scary secrets, no more J.
Edgar Hoover, when I got to be a parent; everything was going to be up front,"
says Marcia Roesch, a school admissions coordinator. "I talked and talked, but I
wasn't listening and I wasn't keeping a sense of balance and appropriateness
with my children. I hear parents all the time asking their kids 'Is that O.K.?'
as though they need their kids to approve every decision."

Says Candace Stern, a New Jersey mother of an 8-year-old: "I used to express my
insecurities and everything else to my daughter. One day, we were watching a
takeoff of Little Red Riding Hood on Sesame Street and I thought it was
hilarious. Then I looked at Caitlin and she was terrified. It was then that I
realized that I didn't really know what was in her mind and that what she heard,
what she held onto, was much different than what I, an adult, retained."

CONTRARY TO OUR assumptions, we have found that children are much more than
little people. They are the possessors of rather eccentric states of mind that
some experts fear are being altered by the early use of computers and other
technology.

"There is a period of childhood, until about age 9, when children should exist
in a dreamlike state," says Kay J. Hoffman, an educator at a progressive school
in Rockland County in New York. "Instead, they are being hardened too early,
jarred into an awake adult consciousness that is preventing the natural
development of their imaginations. The trend to intellectualize early education
is a dangerous one. I see more children with high anxiety levels and learning
problems caused by the enormous pressure that is being put on them to think and
speak like adults before they are ready."

Highly verbal children will use words, without really understanding them, as
coin of the adult realm. "They use them for protection, to push away their own
experience as children," says one doctor who asked not to be identified to
protect his patients. "One 4-year-old that I tested kept running out of the room
saying he had to go get his 'concentration.' He couldn't just be a child and
say, 'I don't want to do this test!.' He had to parrot an adult concept that he
hardly understood because he was afraid to disappoint me."

I think sometimes we cannot know how profound that fear runs in our children,
especially since we have burdened them with such a sense of their own
importance. At times, their officiousness seems to be bluff; they simply cannot
afford to be wrong. In making them feel so trusted and believed, we have not
only bridged the generation gap, we might have overlapped it. As we hover over
their development as though we were tending orchids in a greenhouse, are we not
also guilty of a kind of neglect? In integrating them into our daily lives, have
we taken away their freedom to do childish things? Parents or nannies of old
stayed at home and babbled and played games; we take them to department stores,
to work, to lunch, to movies and plays. Parents push for intimacy so much that
one child was overheard telling her mother, "If you say I can have my feelings
one more time, I'm going to throw up."

Says Miriam Siffert, a grandmother in Manhattan: "We sent our children to the
most progressive schools, but they knew their place. They knew their time. We
didn't take them to dinner parties or on trips to Europe. But I see my
grandchildren taking over the house, taking over adult conversation."

Peggy Rosenblatt, a mother of two, concurs: "There is so much familiarity and so
little distance. We tell them where we are going, what we are doing. We ask
their opinion as though they were our best buddies, and then we are surprised
when we tell a 10-year-old to do something he doesn't want to do and he says,
'You can't make me.' "

So uncomfortable are we with being in authority that we have made a crusade of
elevating our children at the expense of ourselves. Consider the way we portray
ourselves in children's movies: no Mary Poppins or Clark Kent these days;
instead, enter Hook, so realistically evil that he breaks the bounds of old-time
fantasy, or an all-too-believable Mom and Dad who keep leaving their son home
alone.

"Sometimes it seems like there is no bottom line anymore," says Sara Adler, a
grade-school teacher for 20 years. "I have some kids who yell 'child abuse' if
you discipline them. They know tag lines, but they don't know the lines they
cannot and should not cross. The parents think, 'What are the teachers doing!'
And the teachers wonder what is going on inside of the homes."

We have abrogated the moral authority our parents wore as easily as gloves. In
Westchester County in New York, for instance, where kids in their early teens
come into the city to party until the early hours of the morning, some parents
are afraid to give their children curfews for fear they will move out and live
with a friend.

Even children themselves think that things sometimes go too far. "Trust me, I
know some kids who are guilty of parent abuse," Jonathan Stein, 10, says. "They
feel like they own their parents and that they could just take all their
parents' money out of their bank account and run away if they wanted."

Michelle Denburg, a high-school senior, adds: "Some of my teachers were afraid
to be authority figures. They couldn't control their class and partly it was the
fault of the parents because they would say negative stuff about a teacher and
then expect their kids to respect those teachers."

IN SPITE OF THE CONFUSION THESE children experience, few would disagree that
they are, in many ways, a splendid generation. My son, Joshua, 9, and his
friends are amazing in their generosity, sensitivity, ability to stretch across
an intellectual canyon and meet adults on their own terms. They have highly
developed senses of justice and fairness, rejecting stereotypes and embracing
oddities in their peers, whether a hair style or a disability. They are
disdainful of smoking and drug use, can sniff out hypocrisy and have social
consciences that are poignant. They are so worried about the few trees on their
block that last year they formed an earth club to keep them free of litter. At
times, the child in our children pokes endearingly through the veneer of
sophistication. "Mom, please don't buy Ivory soap anymore" was his most recent
environmental request. "Why?" I asked. "Because they shoot elephants to get the
ivory, don't they?" he replied.

Paul Shechtman, a New York lawyer, reports that when he argued with his
daughter, 6, about going to school with a rip in the knee of her jeans, she
asked him for one good reason why she shouldn't wear them. "Because my father
never would have let me," he said, exasperated. "Just because your father made a
mistake," she replied, "why should you?"

"At that moment," Shechtman said, "I knew that I had succeeded as a parent. Now,
of course, I do have to live with my success."

Helene Stein, mother of three children 14 and under, including Jonathan, says
she gets "a kind of wicked pleasure when I compare my children's childhood with
my own." She and her sister had to be bathed, with hair brushed and bathrobes
on, before they came to the table. "My parents were the ones who spoke," she
says. "We listened. With my kids, I drop everything if they seem to want to
talk."

SINCE THE END OF the Victorian era, when children emerged as entities that could
be heard as well as occasionally seen, childhood has been considered
increasingly precious. Members of my generation, however, gave new definition to
the cult of child worship. When I was pregnant, one friend teased me for turning
my apartment upside down and buying a king-size bed (big enough for three):
"You'd think you were preparing for the arrival of Caesar." After Josh was born,
I filled notebooks recording his every wiggle. And my husband insisted on
carrying him in a sling on his hip virtually everywhere, including to cocktail
parties, where, to everyone's horror, he let him sip beer. Not being able to
recall one of my pictures ever gracing my mother's refrigerator door, I later
hung his drawings of little people manning complicated machines up and down the
hallway. One day, when 4, he smiled indulgently and said, "Mom, you'd think our
house was the Metropolitan Museum of Joshua!"

Some parents applaud both the acceleration and involvement of today's children
in the real world. A librarian expressed disbelief when a third-grader asked for
books on the Holocaust. "We read those books together," his mother, Carol Saper,
explains, "and we talk about them. I think it has made my son a more sensitive,
caring person."

Nearly all parents, however, feel their best efforts are continually subverted
by television. Much of the time, exhausted, overextended parents are caught
unawares. "I'm a working mother and I move mountains to organize everything just
right -- we even manage to eat dinner together, but there's always some crack
for the kids to fall through," says Susan Mascitelli, a hospital administrator
who has a son, 9, and a daughter, 3. "The kids leave the table early and my
husband and I finally have 10 minutes of peace and then suddenly I hear the kids
howling with laughter at "Married With Children," about a couple that hates each
other and a child who acts like a hooker. The fact that they even understand
this disgusting program stuns me."

Last year, one school on the Upper West Side of Manhattan held parent meetings
to discuss a fourth grade whose girls were so sexually precocious that they were
hotly pursuing certain boys and refusing to speak to others. "The last straw was
when one child invited kids to his home for a dating party when his parents were
out," says Ann Beaton, who has children aged 10, 7 and 1. "The kids' parents
just delivered them with no questions asked. The girls wore halter tops and tiny
bicycle shorts. It's hard to know whether they just wanted to look like Julia
Roberts in "Pretty Woman" or whether they knew what they were up to."

Some parents complain that the culture has sexualized children long before they
desired it. One third-grader, asked to list questions she had during a sex
education course, replied, "Why do we have to know about stuff like this?"

Dr. Richard A. Gardner, a child psychiatrist and author who has recently been
outspoken in his defense of adults he thinks have been falsely accused of sex
abuse, believes that although these crimes do exist, the country is undergoing a
wave of sex abuse hysteria: "When I was a child, I had a book about having a fun
day with Uncle Ralph. Now, Uncle Ralph is depicted as the kind of guy who, as
soon as Mom goes into the kitchen, has his hand in your pants." Gardner says
that data show the proliferation of early childhood sex abuse prevention
programs are creating confusion and anxiety in youngsters and he predicts those
programs will also result in sexual inhibition, mistrust and even long-term
sexual dysfunction.

Schools and parents alike have begun taking steps to address these problems.
Stephen M. Clement, the headmaster of a boys school in Manhattan, for instance,
imposes strict order on the older boys who set standards of behavior for the
younger ones: "One of our boys walked in bleeding -- he had been mugged for his
baseball cap. A school must try to provide a safe haven and some better models."

At Kay Hoffman's school in Rockland, teachers make unilateral decisions for
young children so that they will have a good inventory of adult choices on which
to base their own decisions later on. "We try to slow children down," Hoffman
says. "We don't barrage them all at once. Learning evolves out of their own
experience." The school also advises parents to ban television and not to talk
about current events. "As soon as I did that, my child began to relax and act
like a little girl again," says Candace Stern, whose daughter attends the
school. "Her uncle was in Desert Storm and we didn't even tell her he had gone
to Jidda until after it was all over. When we finally told her that he had been
in a war, she asked, 'What side was he on?' "

Some worry about the repercussions of this generation's having lost its fleeting
chance to be a child. "A person who does not have the opportunity to move
through the stages of childhood at his own pace ends up with something missing,"
Jill Comins, a family therapist, says. "As an adult, he will search endlessly
for it. He will experience powerful and regressive tugs backward."

Others, however, predict success. "I've been watching these kids grow up, grade
by grade," says Gardner P. Dunnan, headmaster of a coeducational school on the
Upper East Side. "They have had so much openness, so many opportunities, such a
great arena to learn and grow, by the time they are adults they will be
wonderful individuals and citizens."

Perhaps our children are simply rebelling against their parents much earlier
than we did. And perhaps that means that they won't have to do it later. Perhaps
our children will grow up to be the kind of people who wouldn't dream of
inventing the motto "Never Trust Anybody Over 30."

"I feel they are in transition," says Sara Lebar, who lives in Greenwich
Village. "We changed the rules and we have to expect them to react. I think that
the next stage will be that our kids will be our friends, in a way we never were
to our parents. Allison may not give me the respect I gave my mother, but I
never aspired to be like my parents. And already Allison wants to be an
environmentalist just like me."

FOR THOSE OF US who love our wonderful strong-willed children just the way they
are -- or almost just the way they are -- there is a move afoot to readjust
certain things ever so slightly. One day not long ago, having asked my own son
several times to straighten out his room -- which could not be penetrated
because of a string that crisscrossed from wall to wall in some obscure
scientific experiment -- and having received no reply to this apparently trivial
request, my voice became significantly louder. He finally looked up. "I'm not
comfortable with cleaning out my room right now," he said.

"Get comfortable," I replied.

"Why?" he gazed at me.

"Because," I said, startled, as out of my mouth tumbled words that could have
been taken out of a balloon in a comic strip of the 60's, "you are a child and I
am the mother. You do not have the right to tell me what to do. On the other
hand, I have the right to tell you what to do as long as you live under my
roof."

First he gave me a withering look. Then he thought about it for a minute. And
then he said "O.K." and headed for his room.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of kids (PHOTO ILLUSTRATION BY CHIP SIMONS FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

White House Memo;
President Strives Mightily to Shift From Troubles Abroad to Goals at Home

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 867 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 10


There was an October game plan at the White House, and it did not involve
Somalia.

President Clinton wanted to focus on health care, push a little harder for the
North American Free Trade Agreement and step up his campaign for crime and gun
control legislation.

It was a pretty plan. But last week it was nearly obliterated by events abroad,
with turmoil in Russia and Somalia taking the spotlight from issues closer to
home.

Nonetheless, domestic and economic issues are growing more and more pressing.
Congress faces a vote on the North American Free Trade Agreement by the end of
the year. The White House had promised to produce a legislative framework for
its health care proposals within the next few weeks, a possibility that shrinks
with each passing day. And the economy is still teetering on the edge of
recovery, making job creation a priority.

Stanley Greenberg, the White House pollster, subscribes to the belief that the
President must deal with foreign policy because it is unavoidable rather than
because it will do anything to help his popularity.

"There's not a lot of evidence that this President or the previous President
benefits from foreign policy events, even if they're glorious or splendid," Mr.
Greenberg said in an interview. "President Bush saw his job performance ratings
slide without hesitation, right through all those foreign policy successes."

Hard-to-Swallow Fact of Life

Mr. Clinton, who has seen his own favorable poll ratings increase with every
domestic policy triumph, must now face an unpalatable fact of life. Messy
foreign policy crises are more than mere distractions for a President who would
prefer to concentrate on domestic concerns. They have become a constant feature
of the post-cold-war world that he is now helping to govern.

When the President would rather have been forging ahead on other issues, he
found himself instead devoting significant time to tracking the instability in
Russia and plotting a course that he hoped would lead the United States out of
Somalia.

The grand domestic plan fell apart last Sunday, just before he left for a trip
to California where he planned to talk about health care. Returning from church,
Mr. Clinton met with his national security advisers about the raid on a Somali
general in which at least 15 American soldiers were killed and the fighting in
Moscow between President Boris N. Yeltsin and Parliament.

The advisers stayed behind to plot strategy, and the President left town with
the intent of talking about domestic matters. But it did not work out that way.

At a televised forum that night, the first question from the hosts was about
Russia. Before he began his speech to the A.F.L.-C.I.O. the next day, he issued
a statement about Somalia and Russia, expanding on the same remarks less than an
hour later at the end of a speech about Federal efforts to help Califonrnia.

On Tuesday, he cut short an appearance before California retirees to hurry back
to Washington for more meetings.

By week's end, the President had delivered a concise television address on
Somalia that his aides hoped would prove he had grappled with the subject while
erasing the specters of Vietnam and Middle East hostage-taking that had begun to
cloud what had originally been sold as a solely humanitarian enterprise. That
effort may have been futile. A poll commissioned by Time magazine and CNN found
that a majority did not approve of the continued American presence in Somalia.

A Touch of Wistfulness

Mr. Clinton has straddled such conflicts before by arguing that foreign and
domestic policy are interrelated, and he sounded that note almost wistfully last
week in a speech before the Democratic National Committee.  "It's an absolutely
fascinating time to be President and a great honor actually to be President in
this difficult time, to try to construct the framework for the post-cold-war
world," he said. "I spend an enormous amount of time on that, but I usually talk
about what we're doing in this country, because I believe you cannot be strong
abroad unless you are strong at home."

The President returned to domestic matters in his weekly radio address on
Saturday. Mr. Clinton focused on crime, sidestepping the events in Somalia that
had dominated his private and public agenda all week long.

In the Republican broadcast response, Representative David A. Levy of Long
Island chastised the President.

"While the crime issue he discussed is very important, it is not the issue of
today," Mr. Levy said. "Americans are talking about other subjects this
weekend."

But in striving to shift the public discussion back to more politically
advantageous subjects, Mr. Clinton is adhering to his own instincts as well as
to the theories of his closest political advisers.

Indulging himself in at least a measure of wishful thinking, Mr. Greenberg said
Mr. Clinton would be able to keep domestic policy in focus because that was what
most Americans were demanding.

"I don't think we're into a period of foreign policy," he said. "A lot will
depend on what happens in Somalia. If it looks like it's under control, people
will quickly shift their attention to domestic concerns."

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

In Campaign for the Health Care Plan, Hillary Clinton Is the Top Candidate

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1103 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 10


Catchy slogans, far-fetched television commercials, fund-raising appeals in the
mail. The election-style battle over health care legislation already has many
trappings of the modern campaign.

Much of it, from the slogan "Health Care That's Always There" to the
pretentiously titled "War Room" at the White House where the battle is being
directed, was predictable enough. But what sets this one apart from most
propaganda efforts for legislation from the civil rights bills of the 60's to
the tax cuts of the 80's is that this campaign looks as if it has a candidate --
Hillary Rodham Clinton.

All this year she has been in charge of developing the Administration's plan,
although even a few weeks ago it was not clear how big a role she would take in
selling it. Her appearances before dazzled Congressional committees answered
that question. But that was only the most visible of her efforts.

Students, and their elders, stayed as long as she would Friday night waiting to
shake her hand or offer praise after she used a Brown University stage for a
television program on health care.

Earlier, a crowd waited in suburban Warwick, R.I., to catch a glimpse of her
limousine as she left a nursing home. The occasion was a textbook campaign photo
opportunity with the First Lady, elderly residents and cute kids playing with
paste. Nobody pointed out that the event was held to sell a health care plan
that does not, after all, propose to pay for nursing home care.

Trusting Expectation

Coming a week after her five hit appearances on Capitol Hill, perhaps these
displays of popular attention might be put down to mere celebrity.

But in fact, Mrs. Clinton's connection to the public seems much stronger than
that.

For much of the summer, when Mrs. Clinton was out of the public eye, nurses and
doctors in Philadelphia repeatedly told a Washingtonian who was visiting her
mother in hospitals there to "Tell Hillary" this or "Tell Hillary" that about
the health care system. That is the sort of trusting expectation only a rare
candidate gets from the public, something that is often lost after the election
as unpleasant new issues arise. Lyndon B. Johnson's Great Society was overcome
by Vietnam. George Bush's New World Order lost out to the recession.

Another advantage she has over traditional candidates is that their ties to the
voters can be broken by attacks from the opposition. But the foes of the
Administration's health care plan seem to have decided that they cannot safely
attack a First Lady, and some even want to share the attention that follows her.


Improbable Drama

So the critics attack the plan in detail and in general, with careful argument
and with florid oratory, like the recent suggestion by Representative Newt
Gingrich of Georgia that the plan "means if you are 55 and you need kidney
dialysis, you die."

The Health Insurance Association of America has a television commercial that
reduces one of the most complicated issues the country has even confronted into
30 seconds of improbable drama, a glimpse of a couple at their kitchen table
reminiscing about the wonderful health insurance policy they used to have.

But against Mrs. Clinton's earnestness, sometimes all of this sounds about as
compelling as Jimmy Carter explaining why Ronald Reagan's economic proposals did
not add up.

The First Lady can alternate, as she did Friday at Brown, between an appeal for
the nation to unite to "rebuild not only our health care system but our sense of
caring and community that will ultimately make this country what it ought to be
for all of us" and generalized attacks on the "people who make their money out
of the current status quo."

These unnamed villains, she said at Brown, profit when the current system harms
the sort of ordinary people who appeared on television with her. There was the
Coles family of Groton, Conn., whose baby's heart treatment had hit the $1
million limit on their health insurance. And there were the Hanrahans of
Cranston, R.I., who could not get insurance or day care for the husband, who is
afflicted by Alzheimer's disease.

Congress Likes Her, Too

Of course, Mrs. Clinton is leading a very special sort of campaign in which
Congress will cast the votes on a yet-to-be-scheduled Election Day. Appeals to
the public are important, but so are appeals to the lawmakers themselves. And no
Washington figure who is not appearing at fund-raising events is in so much
demand for visits in the home districts as she is.

The appeals don't come just from loyal backers. It is a measure of her dominance
of the issue that many who disagree with the Administration's prescription for
change want to appear with the First Lady.

Four Republican Senators, for instance, are trying to persuade her to join them
for a hearing later this month. Led by Bob Dole, the minority leader, and his
fellow Kansan, Nancy Landon Kassebaum, these Senators oppose the plan's basic
scheme of requiring employers to pay health insurance premiums for workers.

Opponents Join In

On Friday two Rhode Island Republicans who do not support the Clinton plan came
along when the First Lady toured the Providence area. Representative Ronald K.
Machtley, who favors a plan with neither universal coverage nor cost controls,
turned up both at the nursing home and later for the television show.

Senator John H. Chafee, who backs a plan that would require individuals to get
insurance but not make employers help pay for it, introduced her in glowing
terms. He called her "a battler for a cause," adding: "Her cause is reform of
health care in the United States of America."

Later she used the Republicans almost as props on the television program,
carried on several New England stations as if it was news. She sympathized with
the Coleses, the Hanrahans and others, telling them their problems would be used
if the Administration plan was enacted.

Neither Mrs. Clinton, the two Republicans nor two Democrats who joined them,
Senator Claiborne Pell and Representative John F. Reed, discussed whether the
Administration bill was the best way to solve those problems or whether some
other plan like the ones the Republicans sponsored might do better.

At the end of the program they got their reward -- equal billing with the Coles
and Hanrahan families. Mrs. Clinton announced that the program had proved two
things: "One, that there are real people with real problems that can be solved
with a careful and thoughtful approach to health care reform, and that we do
have political leadership in the Congress that is making the hard decisions."


LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The appearances by Hillary Rodham Clinton before dazzled
Congressional committees were only the most visible of her efforts to sell the
health plan. Mrs. Clinton greeted guests last Friday after a televised health
care forum at Brown University in Providence, R.I. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Reporter's Notebook;
Books Are a Big Deal But Writers May Not Be

BYLINE: By SARAH LYALL

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1390 words

DATELINE: FRANKFURT, Oct. 9


It was Thursday at the Frankfurt Book Fair, the international publishing world's
weeklong frenzy of deals, near deals and partying that ends on Monday, and
Sandra Dijkstra, an American agent, was doing what she always does at Frankfurt:
trying to sell foreign rights to the books she represents.

Never mind that she was stuffed into a riotously noisy room with dozens of
editors, agents and publishers doing essentially the same thing, or that she had
just 30 minutes to pitch her list to a pair of French publishers, or that she
would be spending the next five days in the same room, repeating herself.
Foreign-rights deals are so important to the book business -- as a way to defray
the costs of huge advances and to earn more money for the publishers, agents and
authors -- that the role of Ms. Dijkstra and others like her is critical to the
workings of the fair, which this year drew 6,102 exhibitors from 95 countries.

She launched cheerily into her presentation, describing each book in a rush of
allusions vaguely reminiscent of the movie proposals in Robert Altman's film
"The Player," in which every potential film was a hybrid of previous ones, and
each one could be a hit, as long as it starred Julia Roberts.

Ms. Dijkstra proclaimed "When Heaven and Earth Changed Places," by Le Ly
Hayslip, "The Diary of Anne Frank of the Vietnam War." She said that
"Outsmarting the Female Fat Cell," by Debra Waterhouse, was "the book that takes
Deborah Tannen into the realm of dieting."

"But the book we should really talk about is 'The History of the Breast,' by
Marilyn Yalom," said Ms. Dijkstra, "which sees the breast as a symbol of human
power."

For the French publishers -- Antoine Audouard, the suave managing director of
Robert Laffont/Fixot, and his colleague Valerie-Anne Giscard d'Estaing, who
happens to be the daughter of the former French President -- was, would any of
these books sell in France? It's hard to make such cultural and market judgments
so quickly. So while the two were polite and convivial and expressed enthusiasm
about "The History of the Breast," among other things, they hardly seized the
opportunity to make a flurry of deals on the spot. For one thing, it seems, the
French are known for having rather idiosyncratic tastes in literature. "The
culture is different in France," Mr. Audouard explained carefully.

Where were the authors while all this was going on? Not many were at the book
fair, certainly, although A. S. Byatt and Michael Ondaatje were spotted eating
dinner in restaurants; Donna Tartt was seen in a hotel lobby; and James Baker
apparently showed up at the convention center at one point. But writers can
sometimes be a nuisance, as one publisher (who demanded anonymity as the price
of an anecdote) found when an author stopped by unexpectedly, demanding to know
why there were no copies of his book displayed in a booth. What could they do?
"We had to quickly Fedex some copies out," the publisher said.

On the Night Shift

By late Thursday, one fairgoer was so tired, she said, that all she wanted to do
was sit in her hotel and watch the Armed Services Network on television. But the
day was just warming up for the large group of publishers, editors, writers and
agents who invariably spend their nights in Frankfurt hanging out in the lobby
of the Frankfurterhoff for after-hours gossip.

It was an odd scene. Among the crowd at the hotel, said to be Hitler's favorite,
was the ubiquitous Dr. Ruth Westheimer, who said, "I always come to the fair
because I thrive on these ideas that I float around"; Donna Tartt, who was
meeting with the German publishers of her novel, "The Secret History," and
Jean-Claude Fasquelle, president of the Editions Grasset & Fasquelle, a
publisher in Paris.

"You can't make deals if you don't talk to people," said Mr. Fasquelle, by way
of explaining why he had stayed up until 1:30 A.M. and intended to stay up
later. "I work in a very personal way."

And Inge Schoenthal Feltrinelli, the ebullient president of the Giangiacomo
Feltrinelli Company in Milan, spoke a bit sadly about the changing focus of the
fair. "People don't care about books anymore: they only care about rights and
money," she said. But then she brightened up.

"It's about ideas, investing in ideas," she said. "There's an alchemy, a
chemistry here, a kind of sexuality of ideas. This is a very sexy fair."

Doing Meetings, Not Lunch

For the Americans, Frankfurt is a grueling haze of 30-minute meetings with
little time for deep thought or even much food. "That's a joke, trying to eat
during the fair," said Carol Lazare, director of subsidiary rights for
Doubleday. Kevin Lang, the foreign-rights manager, was still recovering from
five meetings in a row, including one with John Grisham's Polish publisher and
another with a Bulgarian agent who had managed to sell a book by Jack Valenti,
the president of the Motion Picture Association of America, in Bulgaria, the
only country to buy it. At the Random House booth, the increasingly weary Wanda
Chappell, who sells foreign rights for the adult-trade division, ate her lunch,
a banana.

One of Random House's, and Ms. Chappell's, primary goals at the fair is to sell
foreign rights to Gen. Colin Powell's forthcoming autobiography, for which the
imprint is paying the former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff a staggering
sum of about $6.5 million. It is unclear what foreigners think of General
Powell, who doesn't seem to have the worldwide recognition of the best-selling
Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, but whose cause was undoubtedly helped by a recent
U.S. News & World Report cover article floating him as a possible Presidential
candidate. A clearly pleased, impossibly relieved Random House was distributing
copies of the article.

"It really positions him as a future world leader," Ms. Chappell said, adding
that he was knighted in England recently. She said she was beginning to field
offers but that nothing was final yet. "Our goal here is to set up deals that
will follow a writer," she said.

A Big Actor, a Supermodel

For people with frivolous taste, the fair was woefully short of celebrity
appearances, although the actor Mr. T did show up in a skintight outfit and a
necklace made of a knife, fork and spoon to promote his new line of comic books.
("My character doesn't carry a weapon," he yelled, as people from the Simon &
Schuster booth across the aisle attempted to ignore him. "I don't want any
violence. I'll beat a guy with my fists and stuff, but there'll be no killing."

In another booth, the British model Naomi Campbell caused a stir when she spent
several hours meeting foreign publishers interested in acquiring the rights to
her novel in progress, "Swan." (The novel, about supermodels, is to be published
in Great Britain by Heinemann.) Dressed in a brown pin-striped pant suit and a
floppy denim cap that disappointed some star-struck publishers who expected more
glamorous head wear, Ms. Campbell met with more than 30 people before jetting
off to Paris.

Heinemann closed at least one deal, with Sander Knol, a young editor at the
Dutch publisher De Boekerij, who forked over £10,000, or about $15,400 -- an
astonishing sum in the tiny Netherlands -- for the book. He said he had been
looking forward to the meeting. "I thought she was attractive, but it's always
different to see someone in person, of course," Mr. Knol said.

On the Fringe

Far away from all this was Abd Al-Bashelh, the fair's sole Jordanian publisher,
who was sitting in a tiny booth reading quietly by himself. He said through a
translator that the book was about mysticism and miracles and that his goal in
Frankfurt was to show that "we know something about books." It was unclear
whether Mr. Bashelh, who was staying with friends to cut back on costs, had sold
any of his books, which he said dealt mostly with aspects of Koranic law.

At a fair where publishers from smaller countries are mostly shunted off to
little out-of-the-way booths, it was easy for the hyper-busy Americans to snub
people they hadn't heard of before.

"None of the American publishers we contacted had responded," Karim Smail of
Ceres Publishers in Tunis, which publishes art and archeology books, said rather
crossly. "Most of them probably don't know where Tunisia is."

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Vision of a Vietnam as Yet Unscarred

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 634 words


"The Scent of the Green Papaya" is Tran Anh Hung's tranquilly beautiful film
about a lost Vietnam, a peaceful, orderly place not yet touched by wartime. The
film begins in Saigon in 1951, in a household safely insulated from the first
rumblings of trouble. The family in question has more personal problems, since
these people are still mourning the death of a young daughter several years
earlier, and since the husband (Tran Ngoc Trung) has a history of disappearing
for long periods with his family's money. The wife (Truong Thi Loc) endures
these desertions with the stoicism the film generally ascribes to Vietnamese
women.

Into this family comes Mui (Lu Man San), a lovely 10-year-old servant girl and a
contemporary of the daughter who died. The camera watches Mui contemplatively as
she learns her new duties and does her hard-working best to keep her masters
happy. Mui is someone who smiles knowingly at the sight of ants lifting heavy
burdens, and who communes effortlessly with the natural forces all around her.
The film works hypnotically as it gazes upon the leaves, birds, frogs and
insects that are welcome parts of Mui's world.

Despite Mui's status as a servant, she manages to enjoy a life of more constancy
and quiet joy than do those around her. The film chronicles the series of small
changes that rearrange the life of the family, all the while sustaining the
rhythm of womanly work that shapes Mui's existence. Mr. Hung's view of placid,
spiritually elevated Vietnamese womanhood poses its problems, since Mui is so
often seen scrubbing floors or shining shoes. Fortunately, this misplaced
romanticism is well outweighed by the film's haunting visual loveliness.

"The Scent of the Green Papaya" takes its title from a childhood memory of the
director's. Mr. Hung, who was born in Vietnam and grew up mostly in France, has
said that "the smell of green papaya is for me a childhood memory of maternal
gestures." The papaya also provides a useful metaphor, since in its green state
it is apparently considered a vegetable, and it is thought to blossom into a
fruit later on. Mui herself follows a similar evolution as the film unfolds.

During the latter part of the film, Mui is seen as a quiet, graceful 20-year-old
(Tran Nu Yen-Khe) who needs a new position once her original employers' lives
have changed. She winds up as a devoted servant to the handsome musician she has
gazed at admiringly since her girlhood. This musician, seen at his Steinway
playing Gershwin-like melodies and engaged to a thoroughly liberated Vietnamese
glamour girl, is part of a world Mui has barely seen before. But she does her
wordless, gracious best to accommodate him. The film's idea of what might
ultimately liberate Mui is every bit as nostalgic as its other memories.

"The Scent of the Green Papaya" marks a luxuriant, visually seductive debut for
Mr. Hung, whose film is often so wordlessly evocative that it barely needs
dialogue. Reaching into the past for its precisely drawn memories, it casts a
rich, delicate spell.

"The Scent of the Green Papaya" will be shown tonight at 6:15 and tomorrow at
9:15 P.M. as part of the New York Film Festival.

The Scent of the Green Papaya
Directed by Tran Anh Hung; screenplay (Vietnamese, with English subtitles) by
Mr. Hung and Patricia Petit; photographed by Benoit Delhomme; edited by Nicole
Dedieu and Jean-Pierre Roques; music by Ton-That Tiet; production designer,
Alain Negre; produced by Christophe Rossignon; released by First Look Pictures.
At Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, as part of the 31st New York Film Festival.
Running time: 100 minutes. This film has no rating.

Mui, 20 years old . . . Tran Nu Yen-Khe
Mui, 10 years old . . . Lu Man San
The Mother . . . Truong Thi Loc
Khuyen . . . Vuong Hoa Hoi

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE TALK OF HOLLYWOOD;
Freud Might Frown At Psychiatrists' Role In the World of Films

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1160 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Oct. 10


Rich, vulnerable, neurotic and insecure, the movie crowd has been infatuated
with psychiatry since the 1920's. Even more significant, psychiatrists have not
only cheerfully ministered to the needs of the Hollywood community, but have
become part of the fabric of the town, attending parties with patients,
gossiping with and about them, dating them, marrying them. They've offered
impromptu advice to patients on scripts, and have even written screenplays with
them.

"It's really a subject that's been untapped," said Stephen Farber, a co-author
with Marc Green of a new book, "Hollywood on the Couch: A Candid Look at the
Overheated Love Affair Between Psychiatrists and Movie Makers." The book, to be
published in November by Morrow, is the first to explore in detail the sometimes
serious and frequently bizarre relationships between Hollywood psychiatrists and
their patients.

"Researching this book was constantly eye-opening," said Mr. Farber. "Some of
these psychiatrists we interviewed would actually talk about their patients.
That was a surprise. It was kind of shocking to see people who seemed more
concerned about hobnobbing with their rich and famous patients than in helping
these people."

Of course not all Hollywood psychiatrists and psychologists cross the line and
immerse themselves in their patients' careers and personal lives. Not all are
entranced by the money and glamour. In fact, Mr. Farber said, "Some of the
younger psychiatrists seem a little less infatuated with Hollywood, less caught
up in their own power."

Yet the line often seems blurred.

Elaine May married her therapist; the screenwriter and director Robert Towne
often asked his psychiatrist to read his scripts and offer advice; Marilyn
Monroe was friendly with her psychiatrist's children and became almost part of
his family. And Chris Mankiewicz, the son of the writer and director Joseph
Mankiewicz, told the authors that his family often chatted about the gossip they
heard from their psychiatrist, Dr. Lawrence Kubie.

Analysis and Scripts

The book opens with the details of a lavish party in 1988 given for one of
Hollywood's most prominent psychoanalysts, Dr. Milton Wexler, who shared a
screenwriting credit on "The Man Who Loved Women" and "That's Life!" with his
patient Blake Edwards, who directed the films. Dr. Wexler also accepted
donations for his foundation, which performed research on hereditary diseases,
from such patients as Jennifer Jones, Carol Burnett and the architect Frank
Gehry. At the party was a photo exhibit of Dr. Wexler and his famous friends,
including a snapshot of the writer Lillian Hellman sitting in the analyst's lap.

The book's interviews with Robert Walker Jr. and several psychiatrists
substantiate accounts in a number of other books about Hollywood, implying that
Mr. Walker's father, the actor Robert Walker, died accidentally because of a
medical mistake by his psychiatrist.

Dr. Frederick Hacker, a Viennese emigre who was one of the premier
psychoanalysts in Bevery Hills in the 1950's, failed to determine the level of
barbiturates in Walker's bloodstream when he gave the actor, who was apparently
drunk at the time, a dose of a powerful sedative, sodium amytal. Walker, who was
32, died shortly thereafter. His devastated son, who was 11 years old at the
time, was then sent to Hacker for treatment.

Not all the cases are so bleak. Mr. Farber and Mr. Green recount, with some
humor, incidents involving the husband-wife team of Mildred Newman and Bernard
Berkowitz, trendy therapists to the stars in the 1970's who often socialized
with their famous patients.

Shared Disappointment

The writer James Kirkwood told the authors about a therapy session with Ms.
Newman in which he was upset because he had not been invited to a party given by
the columnist Liz Smith. To his surprise, he was told by Ms. Newman that she had
not been invited either.

"How do you feel about it?" he asked.

"Not so bad now that I know you weren't invited," the therapist replied.

The notion for the book came after Mr. Farber and Mr. Green researched
"Hollywood Dynasties," which was published in 1984. In the process, they found
that the children of some of the famous families of Hollywood -- the Goldwyns,
the Selznicks, the Schulbergs, the Mankiewiczes, the Fondas -- had been
routinely shipped off to psychiatrists.

"People in these families spent a lot of time in therapy," said Mr. Farber. "It
was a regular part of the growing-up experience; almost faddish. There was
something unique in the Hollywood experience that was not shared by other
wealthy families in the country."

For the psychiatrists, many of them from Europe, the climate, the money, the
life style and the allure of treating stars was intoxicating. "They found an
army of people, some of them famous and glamorous people, who were enthralled by
the whole experience," Mr. Farber said. "A lot of people in Hollywood find it
difficult to confide in or trust anyone. They think everyone's out to back-stab
them. They needed somebody to trust with their intimate secrets.

"That's the sad thing," he said. "A lot of psychiatrists betrayed that trust
because of their own hunger for the limelight and the perks of being a
psychiatrist in this town."

Looking Back at the 70's

Richard Linklater (Class of 1980) recalls being dazed and confused during most
of his high school years in Texas. Sex was safe. Drugs didn't seem so dangerous.
The music was post-Vietnam, Alice Cooper, Edgar Winter and KISS. No one had ever
heard of rap.

"I don't remember big, huge issues or problems in high school," said Mr.
Linklater, the 31-year-old director of "Dazed and Confused," a movie about the
last day of high school before summer vacation in 1976. "It was much more subtle
and interior. Most people say nothing really happens in high school. But you
look under it all, and everything is happening."

Mr. Linklater's first film, "Slacker," an art house and festival favorite,
revolved around people in their 20's. The newest film deals with a diverse group
of students with concerns about nothing more significant than traditional
hazing, parties, cars, the future, and the demands by the football coach for
players not to indulge in drugs or alcohol. One of the characters wants to
become a lawyer and join the American Civil Liberties Union, except he can't
stand the people he's supposed to defend.

Mr. Linklater, who lives in Austin, Tex., said in an interview: "Usually there's
too much plot and drama in teen movies. That's not the way I feel it. I remember
high school as a pressure cooker; you felt trapped, but it was so innocent. I
wanted to depict all this teen-age energy, the pace of being a teen-ager. I
wanted to show the sexual thing like I remembered it. It's always hovering
around. It's always there. A lot of talk and not a lot of action."

He laughed. "Unfortunately, that's the way I remember it," he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard Linklater, the director of "Dazed and Confused." (Brian
Drake) (pg. C15)

Drawing (pg. C11)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 12, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

I.M.F. Help For Vietnam

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 11; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 161 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Oct. 11


The International Monetary Fund offered today to help Vietnam in debt
rescheduling negotiations with Western government creditors and Russia.

The offer came from the I.M.F.'s managing director, Michel Camdessus, in talks
with Foreign Minister Nguyen Manh Cam of Vietnam on the fund's structural
adjustment agreement with the country, which was signed last week.

Vietnam has hard currency debts of about $4.5 billion, nearly all of it official
debt, Western bankers and diplomats said.

Mr. Camdessus told Mr. Cam that the I.M.F. would be alongside Vietnam in
negotiations with the so-called Paris Club of official creditors, expected to
meet next month, and at a meeting with aid donors scheduled on Nov. 9 and Nov.
10, also in Paris.

Debt rescheduling was a consequence of Vietnam's restored relationship with the
I.M.F. after repayment last month of its arrears to the fund with the help of
foreign banks and governments led by France and Japan.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 13, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Policing a Global Village

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1111 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 12


A clearer demonstration of the global village that modern communications have
created, and the land-mines that await American Presidents as a result, would be
difficult to imagine.

After more than a dozen American soldiers were killed in street-fighting in
Somalia 10 days ago, President Clinton argued that it would be dangerous for the
United States to pull out its troops at once, because doing so would only
encourage "aggressors, thugs and terrorists" all over the world.

Still, he yielded some ground, setting a deadline for full withdrawal by March
31. On American television last weekend, a number of leading Senators went
further, suggesting that an earlier withdrawal would be better and warning
against sending American units to Bosnia and Herzegovina or Haiti.

U.S. Landing in Haiti Fails

As if on cue, a small gang of toughs, protected by the police, took to the
streets of Port-au-Prince, threatening to create "another Somalia" to prevent
American troops and other advisers from landing to help in a transition to
democratic government that the demonstrators evidently do not want. Some of
their leaders said they had been encouraged by what they saw on television.

Mr. Clinton promptly ordered a suspension of the American military effort in
Haiti, a country whose entire armed forces consists of 7,000 members, of whom
1,500 are policemen. With the whole United Nations plan for stabilizing Haiti
seemingly undermined, economic sanctions are to be tried again.

"So we have a group of 40 or 50 people -- O.K., maybe a hundred or two --
causing the United States and the United Nations to stop dead in their tracks,"
said a rueful American policy maker. "Somalia, Bosnia and Haiti don't have much
in common, except their problems are complicated, what happens in one affects
another and the country has no stomach for any of them."

'Virtual Collapse' of Leadership

Senator Richard Lugar of Indiana, a Republican known both for his expertise in
foreign affairs and for his judiciousness, spoke today of what he termed "the
virtual collapse of Presidential leadership in these matters."

"The roof has fallen in," Senator Lugar said in a telephone interview.  "There
is no significant Congressional support for the President's policy in any of the
three countries, and it's his own fault. A few people have stood beside him, but
not because they agree with him. They are doing it solely out of loyalty to the
Constitution and the role of the Commander-in-Chief."

That is so, he declared, because of failure by Mr. Clinton to discuss with
Congress either the change of goals in Somalia from feeding the hungry to
nation-building and pursuing Gen. Mohammed Farah Aidid, the elusive factional
leader, or the plan for trying to restore democracy to Haiti.

Legislative 'Safety Net'

"A President needs to coopt the leadership of Congress in any foreign-policy
venture, however small, and the sooner the better," Mr. Lugar said.  "That gives
him a safety net if things go wrong, as they usually do, either temporarily or
definitively."

Mr. Clinton's advisers depict themselves as pioneers, groping their way toward
new principles in a post-Cold War world. It is uncharted ground, and they admit
that they are having trouble. No one has had to do this, they say, since the
1950's, and containment was not a policy born overnight.

"Every one of these situations involves a lot of imponderables," a senior State
Department official said. "It's not easy to define our national interests, to
decide when to intervene, to see all the consequences of intervention, to know
when to declare victory and end the intervention. And there's no upside.  You
win, and nobody in the general public cares much, you lose American lives and
the country demands that you pull your horns in."

The President's top foreign-policy advisers, most of them formed in the Vietnam
years, are unwilling to sharply limit the exertion of American power and
influence, even in an era of scarce financial resources and even when they know
their boss wants to spend most of his energy on domestic affairs.

Speech on Somalia

But as Mr. Lugar remarked, Mr. Clinton has not done the spade-work on Capitol
Hill; for that matter, he has not done it with the public at large. His speech
last week about Somalia was well enough received, though some thought it lacked
the zest and conviction of his address to a joint session of Congress on health
care.

After it, however, polls showed that as many as 60 percent of American citizens
still thought the United States should get out of Somalia, and in the Senate,
there was still strong sentiment to do so before year's end.

There are obviously limitations on what sorts of foreign policies any President
can sell, especially when American soldiers are dying and when the national
interest is difficult to define.  Lyndon B. Johnson discovered that in Vietnam,
and his experience made his successors tread extremely carefully.

Mr. Clinton, on the other hand, has involved himself, or allowed himself to
become involved, in a number of nettlesome problems at once. What is more, all
of them have underlying political dimensions, too seldom fully explained, that
make achieving what may seem like simple goals very difficult indeed.

Underlying Political Factors

The problem in Somalia, for instance, was not really hunger; that was merely a
symptom of the country's lack of anything approaching an effective government,
and that, in turn, was merely a symptom of the hatred of one clan for another.

The real problem in Haiti is the reluctance of the military and the police to
relinquish the power that they have enjoyed since the days of the Duvalier
dictatorship, as they would have to do if the country is to gain a semblance of
stability so its people will stop fleeing in small boats.

Helmut Sonnenfeldt, a foreign affairs scholar at the Brookings Institution who
has served in several Administrations, said the danger in what has happened now
in Haiti was two-fold.

First, and most obviously, Mr. Sonnenfeldt said, it may send a signal to others
elsewhere that "you don't have to do much to take a bite out of the superpower"
-- precisely the point that Mr. Clinton made about Somalia. Beyond that, he
said, "there is the possibility of a grave miscalculation" -- the chance that
someone, somewhere, may watch the United States struggling to define new
policies and try something that Washington cannot tolerate.

President Saddam Hussein of Iraq seems to have made just such a miscalculation
on the basis of ambiguous American diplomacy, and the result was the war in the
Persian Gulf.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 13, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Journal;
Barbed Wire, Watchtowers and the Ruined Years

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 861 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Oct. 8


Without a map, it is not easy to find the detention camp where Nguyen Thanh
Nhan, 21, has grown from a teen-ager into stateless adulthood.

In the shadow of Horse Saddle mountain, a narrow concrete road cuts through the
scrub to the front gate of Whitehead Detention Center here.

It is one of three camps where Miss Nguyen, her two older brothers and more than
35,000 other Vietnamese boat people are living in a world of barbed wire,
watchtowers, gang rule and rats.

Four years after she left Vietnam at the height of an exodus that totaled 1.2
million refugees, Miss Nguyen works as an interpreter in the camp school.

Not in the World's Focus

"I would like to go back," she said. "But I didn't make a decision. It is up to
my brother to decide."

That decision is not likely to come soon or easily. Her brother, a former
Vietnamese Army soldier, escaped from an army prison camp. Going home for him
may mean prison or worse.

"The world's focus is not on this problem any more," said Lorna Workman, the
local director of the European Community's program to help Vietnamese boat
people return home. "It remains to be seen whether anyone can get rid of this
problem once and for all or whether governments can convince the Vietnamese to
take back 20,000 people who don't want to go back."

The Vietnamese exodus all but ended last year as Western nations tightened their
policies for granting asylum. Twelve Vietnamese reached Hong Kong that year and
39 this year, compared with more than 20,000 in 1991.

Over the past two years, Hong Kong has reduced its Vietnamese camp population
from more than 64,000 to about 37,000. The vast majority of those who have
returned have done so voluntarily. But under a forced repatriation program, 14
flights carrying 760 unwilling Vietnamese have also gone back. This summer, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees agreed to begin putting more
economic pressure on the camp population to return, announcing that repatriation
grants of $360 per person would be cut to $240 for those who refuse to volunteer
to return by Nov. 1.

Adult education and vocational classes were canceled in the camps, and the
opportunities for Vietnamese to earn money helping to administer the camps was
cut back.

"There is no future for the people in the camps," says Brian J. Bresnihan,
refugee coordinator for the Hong Kong government. Only by returning to Vietnam
is there hope for them to pick up their lives, he said.

Tensions remain high in the camps as time whittles down the population to the
hard core of Vietnamese who feel they cannot go back. In July, an attempt by
guards to enter Whitehead and seize a number of internees designated for forced
return set off a riot.

Internally spawned violence is often worse. In February 1992, northern
Vietnamese fought southerners in the Sek Kong camp. It ended when one group set
fire to a Quonset hut and blocked the door. Twenty-four burned to death and 100
others were injured.

Life is miserable in the corrugated sheds where families are allotted little
space. Summer temperatures are almost unbearable under the tin roofs. The
atmosphere of the camps is dangerous and destructive, human rights workers say.

90 Births Each Month

"Hong Kong continues to have a duty not to put these people in a situation of
danger, disease and violence," said Dinah Pokempner, staff counsel for the human
rights group Asia Watch, which has criticized Hong Kong's treatment of
Vietnamese boat people.

"They should provide safe, reasonable accommodation for them pending a decision
on their ultimate resolution," she said.

Mr. Bresnihan defended Whitehead's accommodations, but deplored the situation he
manages.

"The first thing that hits you are the numbers of children," he said. This year,
about 90 babies a month have been born into detention, more than 1,000 by the
end of the year.

Western governments have made it clear they have accepted their share of
refugees. Vietnam's economy is beginning to take off and the Clinton
Administration is probably no more than a year away from re-establishing full
diplomatic relations with the former enemy.

But it remains difficult to say whether all of the Vietnamese here will get
safely home.

Returning to Hanoi

Nguyen Thi Xuyen, 49, has made the decision to return to Hanoi with her three
children, the youngest of whom is 8-year-old Vu Manh Toan. He remembers nothing
but life in the camp.

Sitting on a sheet of plywood at Whitehead, she recounted her troubles, which
began when an American B-52 dropped a bomb on her house on Dec. 2, 1972.

Now she has heard the Americans are coming back to Vietnam. And with the more
than $1,000 she can collect in repatriation funds for her family of four, she
feels she can regain what she has lost through four years of detention.

"During the war we suffered a lot, but we don't blame the Americans," she said
through an interpreter. "After all, war is war. A lot of people get killed and
families are split. But we are happy the Americans are coming back because we
are hoping they will create a miracle and we hope that is something to look
forward to."


LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Whitehead Detention Center on Horse Saddle mountain in Hong
Kong holds more than 35,000 Vietnamese boat people. Tighter regulations reduced
arrivals from 20,000 in 1991 to 39 this year, although about 90 babies a month
are born. Families live in corrugated sheds. (Pat Tyler for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 14, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Investigators Question Commerce Secretary

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 198 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 13


Investigators met on Monday with Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown to ask him
questions about allegations by a Vietnamese businessman who said Mr. Brown had
been offered $700,000 to work toward removing the nation's trade embargo with
Vietnam.

The meeting, involving an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and a
lawyer for the Justice Department, was reported by The Washington Post today and
confirmed by a person involved in the case. That person said the Justice
Department was still weeks away from determining whether to seek charges against
Mr. Brown.

Mr. Brown's lawyer, Reid H. Weingarten, was quoted in The Post as having said
that the meeting was a result of Mr. Brown's offer to cooperate fully with the
investigation. "The Secretary fully and truthfully answered every question posed
to him," The Post quoted Mr. Weingarten as saying. Mr. Weingarten did not
respond to a request for comment left on his telephone answering machine
tonight.

The businessman who made the allegations, Ly Thanh Binh, has said Mr. Brown
sought a bribe from the Vietnamese Government in return for his help in lifting
the trade embargo. Mr. Brown has denied the accusations.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Backing Clinton, Senate Rejects Bid to Speed Somalia Pullout

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 15


The Senate early this morning rejected efforts to accelerate the withdrawal of
American troops from Somalia faster than President Clinton's timetable, but only
after an impassioned debate during which Republicans and Democrats offered harsh
critiques of the Administration's policy.

For five hours, one Senator after another rehashed the bitter lessons of Vietnam
and Lebanon, suggesting the White House needed a dramatic reminder lest it fall
into old traps. Several Senators launched into rhetorical checklists of the
mistakes they said the Administration has made in allowing the United Nations to
put American forces in harm's way. They accused the White House of drifting from
one soundbite to another while 29 American soldiers died and 170 were wounded.

"Can we justify more funerals of young Americans based on a policy we cannot
define?" asked Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, an ardent Republican proponent of a
rapid withdrawal. "Aren't we staying in Somalia six more months merely to save
face?"

Senator Bill Bradley, a New Jersey Democrat who is normally a strong supporter
of Mr. Clinton, faulted the Administration for a "failure of formulation of
policy -- a series of ad-hoc decisions."

'Unnecessary Deaths'

Senator Hank Brown, a Colorado Republican who served in the Navy during the
Vietnam War, criticized the Administration for failing to provide armored
personnel carriers and tanks for American troops that were requested by officers
in the field. "That failure has led to unnecessary deaths of American soldiers,"
he concluded.

Despite the broad criticism of Clinton Administration policies, the Senate voted
61-38 to reject efforts to immediately withdraw American forces. Then it passed
a second resolution by a vote of 76 to 23 that essentially endorsed the
President's policy while setting a March 31 withdrawal deadline.

Two days of back-door deal-making between Senate leaders and senior White House
officials assured a Senate vote to endorse the limited mission Mr. Clinton
outlined under Congressional pressure last week, including a March 31 departure
date for the troops and a phaseout of combat operations in favor of political
reconciliation with clan militias in southern Mogadishu.

Seeking to avert a Congressionally mandated withdrawal from Somalia, White House
officials negotiated an agreement with Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia
on Thursday that assured the cutoff of funding on March 31. The vote early this
morning was the first time that the Senate moved to cut off funding of a
military operation since 1973, when Congress voted to halt combat activities in
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos.

Senator Byrd, the powerful Democratic chairman of the Appropriations Committee,
had proposed a cutoff of funding for the mission by Feb. 1. Mr. Byrd dropped his
deadline today after the Administration agreed to limit its goals in Somalia to
protecting American forces and securing supply lines for relief supplies.

Seeking Political Settlement

The deal was the latest episode in a month-long effort by some of the most
powerful members of Congress to force the Administration to phase out combat
operations in favor of seeking a political settlement with Somali clan leaders
that would enable American forces to withdraw.

The debate Thursday night and into this morning underscored how the old
ideological trenches that divided the Senate on foreign policy during the cold
war have twisted in unrecognizable ways. Senator John McCain, an Arizona
Republican who favored tough policies in Central America and other cold war
hotspots, proposed an alternative resolution requiring a "prompt and orderly"
withdrawal from Somalia.

Mr. McCain's amendment attracted the support of several conservative Republicans
and a few liberal Democrats like Mr. Bradley and Senator Barbara Boxer, Democrat
of California, but was doomed to defeat because of the opposition of the
Senate's Republican and Democratic leaders, Bob Dole of Kansas and George J.
Mitchell of Maine, and other influential members.

"The longer we stay the more difficult it will be to leave," Mr. McCain said.
"The loss of American lives is not only tragic, it is needless."

On the other side of the debate, resisting a precipitous withdrawal, were such
traditional doves as Senator Paul Simon, Democrat of Illinois, who praised the
operation for saving the lives of hundreds of thousands of lives.

Mr. Byrd said his compromise resolution "put the stamp of the Senate on our
policy in Somalia, to limit our mission there, and to establish a clear
termination of our involvement in the short run."

The House is expected to follow the Senate's example in passing a similar
resolution, which is attached to the defense appropriations bill.

In making his compromise, Mr. Byrd insisted that the Administration trim the
four goals stated in a report to Congress this week to two, including protecting
American forces already deployed and securing roads and lines of communication
to facilitate feeding the hungry.

At Mr. Byrd's insistence, the Administration backed off two other explicitly
stated policies: maintaining pressure on militia forces that have cut off relief
supplies and attacked American forces, and helping the Somalis to reach
agreements among themselves to resolve their political problems.


LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Portland Journal;
Fugitives Find Haven In the Land Of Mellow

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 744 words

DATELINE: ORTLAND, Ore., Oct. 14


In "The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test," Tom Wolfe's dizzying, psychedelic snapshot
of the 1960's, the epic party ends at a small farm in Oregon.

"In the Spring," reads Mr. Wolfe's final passage, "various pranksters began
finding their way to Oregon. Kesey was writing again, working on a novel. The
bus was there, parked behind the space heater house."

It is no accident that the merry pranksters and their guru, Ken Kesey, who
returned to his home here after serving time for a marijuana arrest, sought
refuge in the lush damp state that Easterners cannot pronounce and Californians
flock to when urban living grows too harsh.

"Oregon has always had a reputation for mellowness," said Tom Bates, an Oregon
native and the author of "Rads," which documents the 1970 bombing of the Army
Math Research Center at the University of Wisconsin. "There is a tolerance for
the unconventional here -- a degree of trust."

The emergence last month of Katherine Ann Power, an anti-Vietnam war protester
who was wanted for two decades for a Boston bank robbery that left a police
officer dead, seems to have clinched Oregon's reputation as a fugitive's
promised land.

Over the years, the 33d state, which decriminalized marijuana and introduced the
nation's first bottle-recycling bill in the early 70's, has been a destination
for political rascals and more recently far-right extremists and skin heads
trying to elude the law and reinvent themselves.

Silas (Trim) Bissell, heir to the Bissell Vacuum Cleaner fortune and wanted by
the F.B.I. for bombing an R.O.T.C. building at the University of Washington in
Seattle, hid out in Eugene for 17 years until he was caught in 1987. After one
and a half years in prison, Mr. Bissell, who changed his name to Terry Jackson,
returned to Eugene and today is a physical therapist and teacher.

David Fine, a campus radical at the University of Wisconsin and one of four men
who helped plant the homemade bomb that killed a 33-year-old physicist in the
research center, was living in California when he was apprehended by the F.B.I.
in 1976. After spending three years in prison, Mr. Fine moved to Eugene, earning
a law degree at the University of Oregon. Denied admission to the Oregon Bar, he
works as a paralegal in a Portland law firm.

Katherine Power ran from the F.B.I. for 23 years, changing her name to Alice
Metzinger and veiling her past in an unassuming Willamette Valley town. Ms.
Power, according to friends, found in Oregon a safe house populated by
progressives. They respected her privacy and never delved too deeply into her
past.

"There's a kind of grass-roots anarchism in Oregon," said Stew Albert, one of
the original yippies and unindicted co-conspirator in the Chicago Seven trial.
"It's this you do your thing, I'll do my thing and neither of us will ask
attitude.

But the flow of campus radicals into Oregon was far from arbitrary.

Mr. Bates said that after the Army Math bombing in 1970, "a lot of people
drifted west," because there were communes already established in Eugene,
McMinnville and outside of Portland. These small cities, close to forests and
farms, were less heavily policed than other popular hippy enclaves, like San
Francisco, and Mr. Bates said the political escapees "found refuge in these
rural, low-key, back to the land," sanctuaries.

Jack Scott, a sports writer and political activist who clandestinely drove Patty
Hearst from Berkeley, Calif., to a farm outside Scranton, Pa., in 1975, decided
the best place to hide from both the Symbionese Liberation Army and the F.B.I.
was a town where invisibility is rampant -- New York City.

But Mr. Scott said he understands why other fugitives might prefer to go
underground in Oregon. "If you got tired of running, you could go to Oregon,
mellow out and lead a life that's not so bad," said Mr. Scott, who now lives in
Eugene. "You cannot be outwardly political, but you can act out your politics by
how you treat your friends, how you raise your kids, what little jobs you take."

And this was precisely the sort of politics that Katherine Power, as Alice
Metzinger, practiced in Corvalis, where she worked, and Lebanon, where she
lived. Friends say Ms. Power's husband did not want her to turn herself in
because he so relished the life they had created.

"Alice loved Oregon," said Marilyn Schwader, who worked with Ms. Power in a
bustling Corvalis cafe. "Here was a place where she could just be."

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A.P. to Open Hanoi Bureau; Expelled From Saigon in '75

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 151 words


The Associated Press is scheduled to reopen a bureau in Vietnam this month, more
than 18 years after the news agency was expelled when the Communists defeated
the Government in Saigon.

"While we have been able to make occasional news trips into Vietnam, they are no
substitute for a full-time bureau, which we are pleased to reopen so that we can
cover this important country's economics, politics and everyday life," Louis D.
Boccardi, president and chief executive of The A.P. said yesterday in announcing
the agency's return, making it first American news organization to re-establish
a full-time bureau in Vietnam since 1975.

George Esper, The A.P.'s last bureau chief in Vietnam and now a regional
reporter based in Boston, is to return temporarily. Huynh Cong "Nick" Ut, a
photographer now based in Los Angeles, is also returning temporarily, after the
bureau is formally opened on Oct 22.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 16, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Tailhook Affair Brings Censure Of 3 Admirals

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1126 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 15


The Pentagon today censured three admirals and took milder administrative action
against 30 other senior officers, including Adm. Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of
Naval Operations, holding them responsible for the atmosphere of debauchery at
the Tailhook Association convention.

In announcing his judgment on the performance of 35 admirals and Marine generals
-- all present at the convention -- Navy Secretary John H. Dalton described a
failure of leadership. Because of that, he said, he reserved the severest
actions for the three naval officers most closely involved in planning and
running the convention of Navy aviators in 1991 at a hotel in Las Vegas, Nev.,
during which scores of women were sexually assaulted.

The 30 other officers, including Admiral Kelso, were given what the Pentagon
called letters of caution, which do not go in their files. Secretary Dalton had
originally wanted Admiral Kelso dismissed as the ultimate demonstration of
command responsibility, but he was overruled earlier this month by Defense
Secretary Les Aspin. Officials said Mr. Aspin believed that dismissing Admiral
Kelso would have held him to a higher standard of accountibility than the other
officers.

The punishments issued today ranged from the effective end of a few military
careers, to milder forms of reprimand that Pentagon officials said officers
could overcome.

One of the three who received letters of censure, Vice Adm. Richard Dunleavy,
has retired, and today's action means that he will remain at the two-star level,
one-star lower than the highest rank he served. Secretary Dalton said the
demotion could represent a loss of retirement pay of more than $100,000 over the
years, which he described as no minor sanction.

Rear Adm. Riley Mixson and Rear Adm. Wilson Flagg, who served as Admiral
Dunleavy's deputies in organizing the Tailhook convention, also received letters
of censure -- letters that Pentagon officials said would tarnish their
reputations and block promotions, effectively ending their careers.

"I expect they will be retiring very shortly," a senior Pentagon official said.

Punitive Effect

Even though the administrative actions against the other 29 admirals and 1
Marine general are not supposed to be punitive, Navy officials said they might
have a similar effect, making some officers unlikely to win promotions or
desirable postings.

"Some of them could recover from this while others may not," a senior Pentagon
official said. "If they perform well, it will have served as a kind of wake-up
call from their boss."

Today's action comes as the Navy has struggled to put the Tailhook affair behind
it. The scandal has already led to the resignation of a Navy Secretary, H.
Lawrence Garrett 3d, and forced the retirement of two admirals who led the
initial investigation.

One of the main obstacles to the Navy's efforts to end the episode has been the
difficulty of Defense Department prosecutors to turn the accusations of abuse
into actual criminal charges.

Since a Pentagon report in April accused 140 fliers of indecent exposure,
assault and lying under oath during a subsequent investigation, only about 40
lower-ranking officers have been fined or disciplined. The Navy dismissed 60
cases immediately for lack of evidence and no one has yet faced a court-martial
following several successful legal challenges.

Charges Dismissed

Last month the Navy dismissed charges against the first officer to go to trial
and this week it dismissed charges against another. Courts-martial against two
other Navy fliers charged with conduct unbecoming an officer have been
postponed.

The best-known case, involving an assault on Lieut. Paula Coughlin, appears to
be falling apart. The man charged in the case, Capt. Gregory J. Bonam, a
29-year-old Marine aviator, denies he ever saw her, and he has strong evidence
to support his claim that she is confusing him with someone else.

As a result, the Pentagon has focused on punishing senior officers who are not
charged with any personal involvement but rather a broad concept of being
negligent or tolerant of the Tailhook offenses. Admiral Kelso and other senior
officers have been criticized for failing to stop the rowdy behavior although
they were near the mayhem.

"I strongly believe in the principle of accountability and responsibility,"
Secretary Dalton said in a statement. "It is the foundation of leadership in the
naval service."

Turmoil Among Officers

The Secretary's recommendation created considerable turmoil among senior
Pentagon officials and in the White House, which wanted to find a way of
punishing offenders without disgracing a distinguished Naval officer. Since
entering office, President Clinton has sought to repair lines of communication
with a military establishment that distrusts his views on homosexuals in the
armed forces and his own draft record in the Vietnam War.

In overruling Mr. Dalton earlier this month on his recommendation to dismiss
Admiral Kelso, Mr. Aspin ordered the Navy Secretary and Admiral Kelso to work
together to review the recommendations for disciplining the 35 senior officers
who attended the Tailhook convention. This had an odd result of involving
Admiral Kelso in the deliberations over who should be disciplined -- and how
they should be -- even though he was a subject of the inquiry.

Most of the Blame

Mr. Dalton said Admiral Dunleavy had for several years been the officer
designated to coordinate official Navy support for the Tailhook convention, an
annual get-together of active and retired navy fliers. "More than any other
individual, Admiral Dunleavy was responsible for the failures at Tailhook,"
Secretary Dalton said.

The other two admirals given letters of censure, he said, played important roles
in organizing the convention.

"Admiral Dunleavy and these two other officers had an obligation to make
themselves aware of the behavior of their juniors in general and persons within
their administrative chains of command in particular," Mr. Dalton said.

"There were ample signals that trouble could arise -- precedents of unacceptable
conduct at prior Tailhook conventions, visible use of alcohol to excess,
resistance and hostility toward women entering what many aviators considered to
be a male-only professional domain and widespread attendance at the event for
the sole purpose of having a good time."

Secretary Dalton said his review of the conduct of the 35 senior officers
present at the Tailhook convention resulted in clearing Rear Adm. William Newman
and Major Gen. Clyde Vermilyea of any responsibility for the offenses. "These
officers were present only for an afternoon professional symposium and departed
immediately thereafter," he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 16, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Recent Peace Prize Winners

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 402 words



 1969 International Labor Organization, for efforts to improve working
conditions.

1970 Norman E. Borlaug, United States, for leadership in food prodution.

1971 Willy Brandt, Chancellor of West Germany, for efforts on peace in Europe.

1972 No prize.

1973 Henry A. Kissinger, United States, and Le Duc Tho, North Vietnam, for
efforts on ending the Vietnam War. (Mr. Tho refused to accept the prize on the
ground that there was no peace in Vietnam).

1974 Eisaku Sato, Prime Minister of Japan, for efforts on reconciliation in the
Pacific, and Sean MacBride, Ireland, president of the International Peace Bureau
in Geneva, for efforts on human rights.

1975 Andrei D. Sakharov, Soviet Union, for efforts toward peace.

1976 Betty Williams and Mairead Corrigan, for resistance against sectarian
violence in Northern Ireland.

1977 Amnesty International, for monitoring human rights.

1978 Anwar el-Sadat, President of Egypt, and Menachem Begin, Prime Minister of
Israel, for their accords on peace in the Middle East.

1979 Mother Teresa, India, for helping to turn world attention to the poor.

1980 Adolfo Perez Esquivel, Argentina, for exposing human rights abuses by the
Government.

1981 Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

1982 Alva Myrdal, Sweden, and Alfonso Garcia Robles, Mexico, for promoting
disarmament.

1983 Lech Walesa, Poland, for gaining the right of workers to organize.

1984 Desmond Tutu, South Africa, for efforts against apartheid.

1985 International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, led by Yevgeny
I. Chazov, Soviet Union, Bernard Lown, United States.

1986 Elie Wiesel, United States, for efforts on peace and on human rights.

1987 Oscar Arias Sanchez, President of Costa Rica, for promoting peace in
Central America.

1988 United Nations Peacekeeping Forces.

1989 The Dalai Lama, Tibet, for calling attention to the plight of Tibetans.

1990 Mikhail S. Gorbachev, President of the Soviet Union, for promoting peace
and helping to end the cold war.

1991 Aung San Suu Kyi, Myanmar (formerly Burma) for her campaign on democracy.

1992 Rigoberta Menchu, Guatemala, for being an advocate of Indians and for
efforts on human rights.

1993 Nelson Mandela, South Africa, President the African National Congress, and
F. W. de Klerk President of South Africa, for their efforts in negotiating an
end to apartheid.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 16, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
CONTINENTAL AIR STUDIES TIES WITH VIETNAM CARRIER

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 41; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 81 words


Continental Airlines said yesterday that it was exploring several investment,
marketing and operational relationships with Vietnam Airlines once the United
States relaxes its trade embargo with Vietnam. A delegation of Vietnam Airlines
executives completed a visit yesterday to various Continental facilities in the
United States. Vietnam Airlines, which has its headquarters at Gia Lam Airport
in Hanoi, serves 11 cities in Vietnam and operates to 15 international
destinations.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FLAG-WAVERING

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8; Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 139 words


Packer talks about patriotism as if we all should be able to selectively decide
what we'll choose to do, and when, to be patriotic. He states that the Peace
Corps, in the 1960's, "was a way for young men to avoid going to Vietnam, but it
also made them feel as though they'd endured Vietnams of their own."

When the Peace Corps began, in 1961, rules were established to prevent it from
being used as a place to evade the draft. But that all changed sometime in
1965-66. Peace Corps volunteers were allowed to re-enlist for the remaining
years of the draft, protected from service in the military for four, even six
years.

In my mind, the Peace Corps has been tarnished ever since. It simply became
another loophole for the advantaged young men of the 1960's to avoid military
service.

WALTER J. HAAN
Middletown, Conn.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WEDDINGS;
Suong-Dao Nguyen, Richard Pham

SECTION: Section 9; Page 13; Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 164 words


Suong-Dao Nguyen, a lawyer, was married yesterday to Richard Thang Kim Pham, the
product director for Johnson & Johnson in Tokyo. The Rev. Ephraim Vu Khiem Cung
officiated at St. Ignatius of Loyola Roman Catholic Church in Chestnut Hill,
Mass.

Mrs. Pham graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received a law degree
from the University of California at Los Angeles. She was until recently an
associate in Folger & Levin, a law firm in Los Angeles. She is a daughter of
Suong-Ha Truong of Chestnut Hill and the late Thang Cao Nguyen. Her father owned
O.P.V. Pharmaceuticals, a former manufacturer and distributor in Saigon, now Ho
Chi Minh City, Vietnam. Her mother is an investment consultant in Chestnut Hill.

Mr. Pham graduated from Wesleyan University and received an M.B.A. from the
University of Chicago. He is the son of Mr. and Mrs. Ngoc Kim Pham of McLean,
Va. His father, now retired, was South Vietnam's Minister of the Economy from
1968 to 1973.


LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD: Roll Over, Ho Chi Minh;
Vietnam Moves From Clenched Fists to Greased Palms

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 953 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


FOR an increasingly corrupt city, Hanoi retains an innocent charm. A request to
meet with a government functionary in virtually any other capital in Southeast
Asia -- from Bangkok to Jakarta to Phnom Penh -- commonly produces a fellow who,
on a pittance of a government salary, somehow manages to drive a Mercedes and to
vacation in the south of France.

In the streets of the Vietnamese capital, there are almost no fancy cars. And
when Government officials agree to be interviewed they often as not arrive for
the meeting out of breath, having pedaled a rickety bicycle across town.

But no one here expects this to go on much longer. The legacy of Ho Chi Minh,
who created in Vietnam a pride in Marxist asceticism, appears to be crumbling as
this nation heads down a path that could conceivably take it the way of
Brezhnev's Soviet Union and Ceausescu's Romania. Officials who still claim to
hold dear the idea of Communist sacrifice are in fact bowing down before mammon.

Petty corruption is not new anywhere in Vietnam. The Vietnamese will tell you
that there have always been Communist Party officials willing to do favors --
fix a street, find a job, help a neighbor's child into college -- for a small
bribe.

The threat now is big-money corruption. It has been a problem for years in the
South, in part because there is so much more money, in part because of the
culture of corruption left by a succession of South Vietnamese Governments. But
it is still relatively new in the North, home to Vietnam's most senior leaders,
and it is now spreading so quickly that many in the Hanoi Government admit
candidly that corruption could undermine their revolutionary credentials and
pose a danger to the Government's survival. They acknowledge that the Government
has opened corruption investigations on thousands of officials annually and
that, since the early 1980's, nearly 20,000 state employees have been jailed or
disciplined for corruption.

The Government -- which retains a firm hold on power despite the collapse of its
ideological and financial patron, the Soviet Union -- insists that it is trying
to crack down on graft. Hanoi has declared 1993 to be "Anti-Corruption and
Anti-Smuggling Year" and in January corruption was made a crime punishable by
execution.

The army newspaper Quan Doi Nhan Dan has joined in sounding the alarm, recently
warning that several Government officials had already ruined their reputations
"by falling into the trap of privileges, bureaucracy, bribery, waste,
self-satisfaction and thinking little of the masses."

Diplomats and scholars who frequently visit Vietnam agree that the Government
has retained a degree of public support because of the perception, rare in the
Communist world, that while the ideological heirs of Ho Chi Minh may be
misguided as policymakers, they by and large are not thieves.

If that perception is changing, it could prove to be a much bigger threat to the
Government than the communications explosion that each day is bringing the
Vietnamese more and more information about how people live in the rest of the
world.

"The Vietnamese people have always accepted sacrifice, terrible sacrifice, so
long as their leaders sacrificed with them," said an Asian diplomat in Hanoi.
"When that equation changes, anything can happen."

One early victim of the anti-corruption campaign is likely to be the former
Energy Minister, Vu Ngoc Hai, who is awaiting trial for graft involving one of
the nation's largest public works projects, a $200 million, 900-mile electrical
power line that is heavy with symbolism because it is being built along the Ho
Chi Minh Trail, the wartime supply route.

Government investigators say that companies run by the Energy Ministry submitted
falsified invoices to the Government for 4,000 tons of steel for the project but
delivered only 2,000 tons. At least $300,000 is said to be missing.

Rising corruption is in a sense a sign of the growing economic might of Vietnam,
a nation that with its diligent, well-educated labor force and vast natural
resources is being touted as Asia's next economic tiger. There is suddenly in
Vietnam enough opportunity to make it worth the while of Vietnamese businessmen
and foreign investors to throw dirty money in the path of decision-makers. The
senior customs officer in Ho Chi Minh City, which is still called Saigon by most
of its inhabitants, was sentenced a few weeks ago to life in prison for taking
bribes to allow Hong Kong businessmen to smuggle gold through the airport.

In a twist, there is now the accusation that dirty money is also being thrown in
the path of influential foreigners who could help Vietnam. Commerce Secretary
Ron Brown is under scrutiny by a Federal grand jury in Miami over accusations
that he may have sought a bribe in exchange for his help in ending the American
trade embargo on Vietnam. Mr. Brown has described the accusations as absurd.

Do Duc Dinh, an economist with Hanoi's Institute on World Economies, said the
corruption problem is now so serious that, by warping the Government's
decision-making process, it could undermine the free-market reforms that are
promising to bring Vietnam billions of dollars in foreign investment.

"Everywhere there are examples of corruption," he said. "You want to have a
phone installed? If you put your name on the official list, you'll have to wait
for several months. But if you want the phone now, you can have it if you pay
$400" -- a huge bribe in a country where per capita income is only about $200 a
year.

"Before in Vietnam, you could get something done by knowing the right person,"
he said. "Now, you can't just know the right person -- you also have to be
willing to pay."


LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cycle-rickshaws, bicycles and motorbikes are the main means of
transportation on Hanoi's crowded streets. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Deluge of Foreign Assistance Fails To Revive Egypt's Stricken Economy

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1963 words

DATELINE: CAIRO


For nearly two decades, Egypt has been the beneficiary of one of the world's
most ambitious assistance program, a multibillion-dollar rescue mission
involving the United States' largest overseas aid operation since Vietnam,
wealthy Arab neighbors, European creditors and international bankers. All are
committed to securing Cairo's political stability.

By any measure, these huge infusions of cash -- more than $35 billion in United
States economic and military aid alone since 1975 -- have done much to reshape
the Egyptian landscape. The money has provided better roads and telephones,
cleaner water and wider access to consumer goods. Birth rates have declined, and
life expectancy has risen.

But over the same period, Egypt's creaking economy, with its wheezing state-run
industries and bloated public sector, has remained virtually intact, forcing
economists, bankers and Egyptian Government officials to acknowledge a painful
truth. For all the billions pumped into Egypt, including a tripling in overseas
assistance the last three years as a reward for Egypt's role in the Persian Gulf
war, there has been little real improvement in the daily lives and fortunes of
most of the country's 56 million people.

Expectations vs. Reality

For Egyptian officials and overseas policymakers who have invested in Egypt's
stability, the gap between expectations and reality continues to cloud the
Egyptian Government's future, despite progress over the last two years in
beginning to reform Egypt's moribund economy.

While President Hosni Mubarak appears to be firmly in control -- he won
overwhelming endorsement to a third six-year term this month, albeit as the only
candidate on the ballot -- the poverty, joblessness and lack of opportunity that
is endemic here provides fuel for the Islamic militants determined overthrow the
Government.

"The biggest challenge we will face over the next two or three years is in
getting the economy moving in such a way that ordinary people will feel it, and
be convinced things are getting better," said Yousef Boutros-Ghali, the
American-educated Minister of State for the economy and nephew of Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, the Secretary General of the United Nations. "There is no point
in pretending otherwise."

All across this teeming, swollen city of more than 10 million, people measure
their lives against their hopes, and come up wanting. On the campus of Cairo
University, students like 18-year-old Mahmoud el-Kourdy complain that while they
are pursuing studies for a degrees, they know their best hope for a job after
graduation is to work as a hotel tour guide.

"I speak some English, so I think I have a chance," he said. "Otherwise, I don't
know what I will do."

Rising Cost of Living

In the slums of Imbaba, across the Nile from Cairo, a tea shop owner named
al-Saify Khodayra said he was hard-pressed to afford the rising costs of
electricity, gasoline and sugar, as a result of cutbacks in Government
subsidies. "The electrical bill for my shop and my home is now 200 pounds a
month," or about $60, he said. "But my income is less than 500 pounds."

Nearly 20 years after Anwar el-Sadat, then the President, said he wanted to open
Egypt to Western investors, Egypt has only just begun to implement the sort of
basic changes that international bankers say are necessary to restructure
Egypt's hugely inefficient, centrally planned economy, attract serious private
investment and create the jobs that are key to any hope of real stability.

Under pressure from the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the
United States, Egypt has made notable progress over the last two years.
Bolstered by a huge infusion of aid after the Persian Gulf war -- including a
decision by the United States and Arab governments to write off some $13 billion
worth of military debt -- Egypt agreed in 1991 to carry out a first round of
economic reforms.

In return, some $3 billion in non-military debt owned the Paris Club of creditor
nations was forgiven, the first of some $10 billion in promised loan write-offs
tied to guarantees of an economic overhaul.

Egypt's Fiscal Changes

As a result, Egypt has now cut its budget deficit from about 20 percent of gross
domestic product to below 3 percent, brought inflation below 10 percent,
stabilized its currency exchange rate, reduced expensive consumer subsides and
removed controls on interest rates, helping bolster cash reserves to an
estimated $11 billion.

This summer, the Egyptian Government agreed to a second phase of economic
reforms, promising another $3 billion in debt forgiveness in return for
promoting private business, liberalizing trade, and overhauling and privatizing
state-owned companies.

Egyptian officials say the country's course toward a free-market economy is
"irreversible." But this summer's agreement was delayed while Egyptian officials
and international bankers wrestled over the pace of economic change, despite
warnings it must move quickly to generate some of the 500,000 new jobs a year
that the World Bank say are necessary to sustain real growth in the face of a
population growing at 2.5 percent a year.

In the meantime, Egypt is vulnerable to domestic unrest. Half of the country is
still illiterate; one in every three Egyptian workers lives off an average
income of less than $25 a month, and housing remains woefully inadequate. More
importantly, there are simply not enough jobs to absorb the 400,000 to 500,000
people who enter the work force each year.

Disappointing Example

If Nasser's 1950's utopian vision of land reform, central planning and
nationalization once provided the principal model of economic change for
developing nations trying to shuck the remnants of colonial rule, Cairo's nearly
two decades of dependence on Western economic assistance stands as an example of
quite another sort. It shows the limits of even enormous, long-term financial
intervention to achieve fundamental change within developing economies burdened
by scarce resources, bloated public sectors and years of mismanagement.

The difficulty in achieving real and sustained economic change in Egypt raises
questions for Washington and its Western allies, as they embark on aid and
assistance programs intended to revive the moribund economies in the former
republics of the Soviet Union, as well as the formerly Communist nations of
Eastern Europe.

But in some ways, Egypt has posed difficulties that do not exist in the old
Soviet bloc, where the move toward market economies has come abruptly, on the
heels of political rebellion. Compared to those in Eastern Europe, Asia or Latin
America, the transformation here has been drawn out.

In a recent analysis of the Egyptian economy, Rodney Wilson, a professor at
Durham University in Britain, argued, "Egyptian state-sector managers are even
more resistant to change than their counterparts in Eastern Europe, and they are
highly skeptical about the gains which restructuring or privatization will
bring."

Fears of Social Problems

Part of the problem is political.  Haunted by memories of widespread rioting
that followed the Government's abrupt decision in 1977 to abolish many consumer
subsidies, officials of the Mubarak Government are resisting changes that may
pose any threat of further social dislocation.

While 17 nations have set up a $613 million fund to help alleviate the impact of
privatization, the World Bank has estimated that the sale or liquidation of
state-owned companies could more than double unemployment.

Last year, according to the United States Embassy, unemployment here was
estimated at about 9 percent, although the number is probably closer to 20
percent because of Egypt's vast shadow subsistence economy of workers, peddlers,
vendors and others who never show up in official data.

Partly because Egypt has been slow or reluctant to enforce the kinds of
fundamental economic changes already under way in Eastern Europe, few people
believe Cairo is prepared to be weaned from its outside cash lifeline,
especially considering the continuing threat posed by Muslim militants and the
instability in the Middle East.

"If the tubes were disconnected, the patient could die," Mr. Boutros-Ghali said.
"We still need to know that we have the financial support, because it is, as
much as anything else, a reflection of political support, too."

Remarkable Amount of Aid

In Washington, some members of Congress have already questioned whether the
Clinton Administration can afford to continue pouring billions of dollars in
Egypt and Israel.

The amount of money funneled into Egypt has been remarkable. According to the
United Nations, Cairo last year received more than 10 percent of the $45 billion
in overseas assistance distributed among more than 150 nations.

Since 1975, American economic assistance to Cairo has totaled approximately $19
billion, most of it in the form of grants for local development, waste water
projects, food aid and energy development. In addition, the United States has
given Egypt $16 billion in military assistance since 1979, of which $7 billion
consisted of loans that were written off in return for Egypt's help during the
Persian Gulf war.

Persian Gulf nations also wrote off $6.2 billion worth of debt in 1991 and began
to provide $2.3 billion in economic assistance. Over all, according to data from
the United States Embassy, the gross official development assistance to Egypt
jumped from $1.6 billion in 1989 to $5.4 billion in 1990 and nearly $5 billion
in 1991..

Need for Private Investment

But international bankers say the key to real growth in Egypt is increased
private investment and the development of a substantial private sector.
According to Mr. Wilson, foreign investment in Egypt since 1974 has totaled just
$2.3 billion.

While manufacturing accounts for 16 percent of Egypt's gross domestic product,
exports remain weak, and Cairo continues to carry a large trade deficit,
aggravated by its continuing need to import some 42 percent of its annual food
requirements.

Mohammed Farid Khamis, chairman of Oriental Weavers Group, an Egyptian rug and
carpet manufacturer, is one of Egypt's most successful businessmen and a
proponent of more Government measures to encourage private investment. His
company's sales have grown to $200 million in 1992 from $1.5 million in 1979,
with much of that growth coming from overseas.

"We employ 300 people in our factory," said Mr. Khamis, whose plant in the Tenth
of Ramadan industrial city outside Cairo uses computer-assisted design and
manufacturing processes.  "If the public sector was running this company, there
would probably be 3,000 employees here."

Dependence on Tourism

Until now, economists say, Egypt has remained far too dependent on its service
industries, which in turn means its annual revenue stream can vary widely, from
year to year. Receipts from tourism, for example, one of Egypt's principal
sources of hard currency earnings, have more than tripled over the last decade,
according to the United States Embassy.

But this year, the tourist industry virtually collapsed as a result of fears
among travelers about Islamic militants' violence in Egypt.

In addition to foreign aid receipts, tourism is one of the pillars that have
anchored the economy since the mid-1970's. The others are Suez Canal revenues,
oil exports and remittances from Egyptians working mostly in neighboring Arab
countries.

According to current estimates, about 2.5 million Egyptians -- one in every
seven people of working age -- leave Egypt to seek their fortune. Last year,
according to the United States Embassy, they sent back a record $5.5 billion,
taking advantage of high returns on Egyptian bank accounts.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mohammed Farid Khamis, chairman of Egypt's Oriental Weavers
Group, a rug and carpet manufacturer, said he favored more Government measures
to encourage private investment. His company's sales rose to $200 million in
1992 from $1.5 million in 1979, much of that coming from overseas. (Norbert
Schiller for The New York Times)

Graph: "Aid to Egypt" shows amount of foreign aid to Egpyt from '80 to '91
(Sources: U.S. Embassey, Cairo; Egpytian Central Bank; OECD Development
Assistance Committee)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BACKTALK;
Silent Salute, Ringing Impact

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE

SECTION: Section 8; Page 1; Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 2024 words


From that hard year of war, riot and murder, 1968, the most enduring image may
be a silent, nonviolent gesture. Twenty-five years ago yesterday, on the victory
stand at the Mexico City Olympics, Tommie Smith and John Carlos raised their
black-gloved fists in what was then known as the black power salute.

A salute! You would have thought they had napalmed a child or burned a cross or
shot a police officer. Without a hearing, Smith and Carlos were suspended from
the United States team, thrown out of the Olympic Village and forced to leave
Mexico.

It was the severe official reaction that elevated a mild demonstration into a
defining moment of sports history. It clarified the relationship between athlete
and patron. It ended the myth of the modern Olympics as an expression of
individualism. It solidified the growing resentment of black athletes who felt
they were being treated as gladiators.

And it led to the perfect payback in 1992 at the Barcelona Olympics when the
predominantly black Dream Team, mostly toddlers in 1968, staged their own
silent, nonviolent victory stand protest by obscuring the logos of a sponsor to
whom they had not pledged allegiance.

You can trace the sudden upward curve of high salaries, agents, holdouts,
strikes, to that moment in Mexico City. The current self-image of athletes as
entertainers; the insistence on personal playing time over sacrificing for the
team, and the loyalty to shoe companies over loyalty to school, club or country,
are all elements of an athletic me-first sensibility that was allowed to flower
in a climate of political repression. The commercialism of a Michael Jordan is
easier to control than the political awareness of a Tommie Smith.

"Today's heroes are making millions," said John Smith, a former world
record-holder in the 440 and a member of the 1972 United States Olympic track
team. "Tommie and John were making million-dollar statements."

And Tommie Smith salutes on, along with such members of that team as Lee Evans,
Ralph Boston, Willie Davenport and Willye White, who have continued to find ways
to keep a 25-year-old personal Olympic flame lighted. An obscure member of that
team, the decathlete Tom Waddell, gained the strength to come out as a gay man
and help explode the stereotype of male homosexuals as timid and unathletic by
founding the Gay Olympics. The lawyers made him change the name, but next summer
in New York the Gay Games will be held in the spirit of a silent, nonviolent,
world-shaking gesture.

Smith and Carlos's salute was no whimsical, spontaneous gesture. It emerged from
a decade of organizing among athletes, particularly black college runners and
football players, who had been carefully isolated from their more political
fellow students. In the early Sixties, the comedian and civil rights activist
Dick Gregory, a former scholarship track athlete at Southern Illinois, had
attempted to organize an Olympic boycott as protest against racial
discrimination. Such radicalized former athletes as Jack Scott, Phil Shinnick
and Bruce Kidd became the teacher-coaches of the so-called Athletic Revolution.
Harry Edwards, already a controversial sociology instructor at San Jose State,
advanced the cause with his Olympic Project for Human Rights.

Vice President Spiro Agnew and Governor Ronald Reagan of California, among other
establishment voices, fulminated against the "revolutionaries" as dangerous
enemies of the state; apparently both sides saw sports as critical to winning
the hearts and minds of the nation. Tests of will between coach and athlete,
usually involving hair and skin, became ideological struggles that sometimes
involved entire campuses.  Mustaches and beards grown as symbols of freedom were
interpreted as attacks on authority. When black football players dated white
cheerleaders or complained about "stacking" -- the custom of assigning skill
positions, such as quarterback or center, to whites, and "natural athlete"
positions, such as running back or cornerback to blacks -- they were threatened
with the loss of their scholarships.

The catalytic event occurred in the spring of 1967 when Muhammad Ali refused, on
religious grounds, to be drafted. He was immediately stripped
(unconstitutionally as it turned out) of his heavyweight title. He was supported
by the most important black athletes of his time -- Bill Russell, Jim Brown and
Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, then Lew Alcindor of U.C.L.A., who refused to join the 1968
Olympic team.

The severe response to Ali was a warning to all athletes, as was Mexico City's
pre-Olympic clean-up campaign -- militant students were machine-gunned -- and
the death-threats against Harry Edwards. His pet dogs were killed and mutilated.

The warnings worked. The boycott never came close; most athletes had too much
future riding on the Games, not to mention ego, peer and family pressure, and
under-the-table payments, especially from the emerging athletic shoe companies.
Without Edwards in Mexico City, there was no muscular center to the protest. It
fell to an odd couple, the serious, committed Smith and the jokey, flighty
Carlos, to stun the world.

On location that day, I remember being disappointed. Is this all there is? The
Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy were recently dead, the
demonstrations around the Democratic Convention had turned Chicago bloody and TV
had brought Vietnam into the living room. Two handsome college students who had
just finished first and third in the 200-meter dash raising their arms and
bowing their heads did not seem exactly like wild in the streets.

But the bad guys thought so. Make no mistake, there are villains in this story.
Avery Brundage, the personally and professionally corrupted president of the
International Olympic Committee, and the American officials, especially Douglas
F. Roby, the United States Olympic Committee president, continued the century's
pattern of cynically subverting the idealism of the Games to nationalism and
commercialism.

Quickly, through its house journalists, the U.S.O.C. spread the rumors that two
black track stars had been paid $7,500 each to wear a certain brand of shoe; one
was even seen depositing money in a Mexico City bank. This was learned, the
rumor went, when a white athlete found a $500 bill in his shoe and reported it
to his coach. None of this was documented (later investigations came up empty)
but it stalled and diverted reporters for a critical day or so, and kept the
American squad too fragmented and misinformed to react. The track team, perhaps
the best ever assembled, made some sympathy protests, but they were too weak and
too late to have impact.
 Even now, members of that team become passionate recalling the moment and the
official reaction. It became a defining experience in their lives because they
could never again regard sports, power, and individual responsibility with the
trust of athletes who are encouraged to see themselves as the sheltered children
of a loving paternalism.

But in striking back with such ferocity, the Empire won the battle but not the
war; athletes would never again be so frontally political, but they would also
never again be so innocent and complacent.



THEN AND NOW: A SYMBOL FOR ALL TIME

Some athletes and activists, listed with their role in the 1968 Games, look back
at those days of lost innocence.

TOMMIE SMITH
Gold medalist in 200 meters, now professor and coach, Santa Monica C.C.:

"A lot of people knew then something was needed but didn't want to put up the
collateral. But a group of black athletes were willing to do something at the
pinnacle of their careers because they knew something was wrong. There are those
who are willing to say now that what we did needed doing. But where were they
then? Those were the times of the beginning. Now is the time of the ending of
the beginning because people know what happened.

"Of course, there was Jackie Robinson and Satchel Paige. And Jesse Owens had his
contributions. We were another generation, a generation of movers. Nothing was
going to change unless someone made a step to do so. We could have done it
before Mexico City, but I had to make it to Mexico City, and I had to medal. It
was a silent gesture heard 'round the world."

JOHN CARLOS
Bronze medalist, 200, track coach, Palm Springs (Calif.) High School:

"This is a personal, private anniversary, so no interviews. Thanks, but no
thanks. My health is fine, but my pocket ain't too cool."

BILL TOOMEY
Gold, decathlon, works at Natural Alternatives International, San Diego:

"John Carlos was a unique character, a colorful guy. Tommie Smith was a very
serious, highly intellectual guy. They were two different people joined in a
moment who made a statement to the world. It was a modest gesture that became
one of the most dramatic -- almost religious -- symbols, saying we just want to
remind you that all is not well."

MEL PENDER
Member U.S. gold medal 4 x 100 relay team, now director of community relations
for Atlanta Hawks:

"There has never been an Olympic team like ours and yet we are the only one that
didn't go to the White House. That still sticks with me. The salute holds a lot
of significance to the guys that were there. Being black, struggling with what
we were going through, and they were trying to make a statement that still
hasn't been heard."

LARRY JAMES
Silver, 400, athletic director at Richard Stockton College, Pomona, N.J.:

"We haven't ever had a reunion.  Maybe we need a healing or mending. It would be
beneficial in terms of at least getting on with our lives. Perhaps 25 years is
not enough."

WILLIE DAVENPORT
Gold, high hurdles, U.S. Army National Guard:

"I don't think it's any different than 25 years ago. Are we better off than
before? My answer is no. We've made progress, but very little."

LEE EVANS
Gold, 400, who coached for 12 years in Africa, now coach of the Qatar national
track team:

"It educated me; 1967 and '68 were the best thing that has ever happened to me.
Growing up, I was in a cocoon. I'm here now out of that idea. I decided to work
in Africa, to help Africans. This is my contribution. The movement became my
career. I'm still living it."

PETER NORMAN
Silver, 200, motivational speaker in Australia:

"There was a lot of turmoil in the world then. Look around now, most of it is
still here. Most of the things people were fighting for, somebody around the
world is fighting for now.  There have been changes, but things haven't changed
enough to say, 'Hey, this is a better place to be.' "

HARRY EDWARDS
Founder of the Olympic Project for Human Rights, professor University of
California at Berkeley:

"In 1968, the prevailing wisdom was that sports were the best thing that ever
happened to black people in this country. The question was not how do we correct
the problems in sports; the question was how do we make the rest of society like
sport. We were protesting that. As a consequence of 1968, a generation made a
break with their fathers."

DICK FOSBURY
Gold, high jump, engineer in Idaho:

"Its lasting effect is that it was such a powerful image that it will never go
away. That has both positive and negative connotations. The positives are that
it helped to continue to raise the consciousness of black people, of suppressed
people around the world. It said, regardless of the color of your skin you can
succeed, you can become a champion. The negatives are that it created a fear in
the mind of people in the Establishment."

RALPH BOSTON
Bronze, long jump, part-owner of television station in Knoxville, Tenn.:

"It was a symbol of resistence, of disenchantment, and developed a lot of pride.
Today, you'll see in sports someone with a substance-abuse problem. They clean
up and become a hero. For a person who made a statement, the same thing doesn't
happen.  The perception is: you guys are no good. The message is: don't make
waves. John and Tommie's lives have not taken the same turn as others who won
medals. They will be remembered in books, in songs, in stories, in rhymes. But
only that way."

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Twenty-five years have passed since Tommie Smith and John
Carlos staged their protest at the Mexico City Olympics. (United Press
International)(pg. 1); The protest by Tommie Smith and John Carlos at the 1968
Olympics was no whimsical, spontaneous gesture. It emerged from a decade of
organizing among athletes. Nor was it the only protest at Mexico City. Upper
left, the winners of the men's 1,600-meter relay give the power salute on the
medal podium. Lower left, Long jump gold medalist Bob Beamon stood on the podium
with black socks exposed to protest the expulsion of Smith and Carlos. Above
right, A demonstrator at the 1968 Olympic Trials in Los Angeles. Below, John
Carlos with sociologist Harry Edwards at his right, arriving in Washington for a
news conference following the Mexico City games. (Associated Press)(pg. 11)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
America's Sleeping Sickness

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 711 words


Last spring in Texas Hillary Rodham Clinton gave a courageous speech about
America's greatest crisis.

We suffer "from a sleeping sickness of the soul," she told her audience, the
feeling "that we lack at some core level meaning in our individual lives, and
meaning collectively, that sense that our lives are part of some greater effort,
that we are connected to one another." The central thesis of her speech came
near its conclusion: "Let us be willing to remold society by redefining what it
means to be a human being."

Mrs. Clinton's remarks were ridiculed, mainly by journalists. But over all her
speech sank like a stone in a swamp, largely unremarked and unremembered,
inspiring no national debate or plan of action. Yet in it she spoke of a crisis
far greater than any described by her husband in his call for universal health
care.

There is a yawning hole in the psyche of America and Americans where our sense
of common purpose, of community and connection, of hope and a spiritual
satisfaction should be. It was easy to mock Mrs. Clinton's existential gropings.
But though she had no easy label, no glib diagnosis, in those gropings she spoke
the truth about a vacuum at the heart of the American character.

In his exceptionally intelligent and provocative new book, "The Culture of
Disbelief," Stephen L. Carter says that that vacuum has been filled for many of
us over the years by religious faith. Yet today, ironically, religion is that
thing most consistently trivialized and shoved aside in the public arena,
treated like an embarrassing tic or even a character failing, particularly when
religious people seek to couple their beliefs with a vision of America.

"We err when we presume that religious motives are likely to be illiberal, and
we compound the error when we insist that the devout should keep their religious
ideas -- whether good or bad -- to themselves," writes Mr. Carter.

A professor at Yale Law School, Mr. Carter notes that separation of church and
state "originated in an effort to protect religion from the state, not the state
from religion." He reminds us of how much public good has come out of a sense of
spiritual mission, from the civil rights vocation of Martin Luther King to the
antiwar activities of many clergy during the Vietnam years.

"What was wrong with the 1992 Republican convention was not the effort to link
the name of God to secular political ends," Professor Carter writes. "What was
wrong was the choice of secular ends to which the name of God was linked."

Or, as Amitai Etzioni argues in his new book, "The Spirit of Community": "Just
as we should not give up on patriotism because some politicians wrap themselves
with the flag when it suits their narrow purposes, so we should not give up on
morality because some abuse it to skewer their fellow community members."

Professor Etzioni is one of the founders of Communitarianism, a movement which
argues that Americans have learned to expect rights and eschew responsibilities
yet yearn for a sense of order and community that strikes a balance between the
two. This emphasis on "we" over "me" has been seen by civil libertarians as
retro majoritarianism, a threat to the rights of the individual.

But Professor Etzioni's driving impulse -- that we have done away with old
forms, connections, rules, traditions, but have put nothing much in their place
-- cannot be denied. He writes: "Moral transitions often work this way:
destruction comes quickly. A vacuum prevails. Reconstruction is slow. This is
where we are now: it is time to reconstruct."

We liberals must acknowledge this: that while the rights of the individual are
precious, at some deep level individualism alone does not suffice. And the
ability of the radical right to seize and exploit the terrain of the soul has
been helped immeasurably by the failure of so many of the rest of us to even
acknowledge the soul's existence.

Mrs. Clinton made a good beginning in April. And the discussion must continue,
of what morality and community mean, of what we will build to replace the old
outmoded forms, of how we will fill the vacuum. How uncomfortable it will make
some of us to talk about such things. And how impossible it has become to avoid
doing so.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: October 17, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 50; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1436 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  62   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 2      2   3   LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues
                the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour."

 3          1   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                and a poem.

 4      3   3   SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two
                Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics
                and murder.

 5      4   8   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 6      5   6   THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) A
                sequel to "Griffin & Sabine."

 7      6  27   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 8      7  31   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 9      9   6   STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The problems,
                political and sexual, of a Florida Congressman.

 10    13   3   POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $23.) A single
                mother and her teen-age daughter go on a spree after winning
                $60 million in a lottery.

 11     8  10   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction
                of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and
                woman and for the woman's first lover.

 12    10  11   STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a
                train robber and killer.

 13    11  39   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                illustrated cards and letters.

 14    12  17   PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.)
                The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted
                Cherokee daughter.

 15         1   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &
                Giroux, $21.) A woman's effort to solve the mystery of a
                child's death takes her from Copenhagen to Greenland.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   6   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 2      2  23   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 3      3   8   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior by a novelist and anthropologist.

 4      7   2   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 5      4  62   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 6      6  14   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A
                psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their
                effects on a person's self.

 7      5   9   MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays
                suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected
                ways and places.

 8      8  19   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 9     11   3   THE FOUNTAIN OF AGE, by Betty Friedan. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                A call for men and women to regard life after age 60 as an
                exciting adventure.

 10*   14   2   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by
                Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of
                marriage.

 11    10   3   MORE MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Putnam,
                $21.95.) Stories about country music stars from the host of the
                "Nashville Now" television show.

 12     9  44   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A
                psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.

 13    13   5   CASE CLOSED, by Gerald Posner. (Random House, $25.) A
                reassessment of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.

 14    12   2   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 15         1   OLD FRIENDS, by Tracy Kidder. (Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.)
                Life in a Massachusetts nursing home.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2  22   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication and
                relationships between the sexes.

 2      1  12   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 3          1   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.

 4      4  16   EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.)
                Counsel about diet.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 2, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.

ACROSS THE BRIDGE: Stories, by Mavis Gallant. (Random House, $19.) In these 11
lucid urban stories, most of which are set in Paris or Montreal, Mrs. Gallant's
wit and exactitude subvert the antiquity of her material.

THE CULTURE OF DISBELIEF: How American Law and Politics Trivialize Religious
Devotion, by Stephen L. Carter. (Basic Books, $25.) A professor of law at Yale
examines what he calls a 20-year-old tendency to ban religion from public
discourse, and argues that a just balance of mutually respectful forces should
be restored.

THE DEBATE ON THE CONSTITUTION: Federalist and Antifederalist Speeches,
Articles, and Letters During the Struggle Over Ratification, edited by Bernard
Bailyn. (Library of America, 2 vols., $70.) Proof that our founding document
came by debate, not divine revelation; we owe much to its opponents, who were no
fools.

THE ENDANGERED AMERICAN DREAM: How to Stop the United States From Becoming a
Third World Country and How to Win the Geo-Economic Struggle for Industrial
Supremacy, by Edward N. Luttwak. (Simon & Schuster, $24.) A plea, or more
accurately a demand, for an economic diplomacy red in tooth and claw.

THE GIRL WHO TROD ON A LOAF, by Kathryn Davis. (Knopf, $23.) A heated, dramatic
novel narrated by Francie, an underachieving composer who finds redemption by
completing an inherited unfinished opera.

THE HOLDER OF THE WORLD, by Bharati Mukherjee. (Knopf, $22.) A woman of today
celebrates the life of a woman who lived three centuries ago and across two
cultures in this brilliantly conceived and executed novel.

LIFE WORK, by Donald Hall. (Beacon, $15.) Donald Hall, a poet and writer who has
done many things well and who now, at 65, faces a mortal illness, tells us what
he thinks matters about himself in this sort-of-autobiography.

THE PEACEABLE KINGDOM: Stories, by Francine Prose. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$20.) Eleven stories, smartly observed and deftly written, present the weird
jungle of modern life through the eyes of a wry and mordant writer.

TRAVELS WITH LIZBETH, by Lars Eighner. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A writer who
until very recently made homelessness his full-time job has found a strikingly
unconventional voice and form to deal with life as the literate don't normally
live it.

THE WARBURGS: The Twentieth-Century Odyssey of a Remarkable Jewish Family, by
Ron Chernow. (Random House, $30.) Mr. Chernow's vast Warburg saga follows the
fates of a rich, thoroughly secularized German Jewish family betrayed by the
nation and culture they loved.

WORKERS: An Archaeology of the Industrial Age, by Sebastiao Salgado. (Aperture,
$100.) Pictures by a Brazilian photojournalist of the labors of humanity around
the world, especially where hands and backs still do the work; many are
beautiful, many appalling, many both.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

First, Perfect Fear; Then, Universal Love

BYLINE: By Maxine Kumin;  Maxine Kumin's most recent books are "Looking for
Luck," a volume of poems, and "In Deep: Country Essays."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 983 words



STORIES FROM MY LIFE WITH THE OTHER ANIMALS
By James McConkey.
171 pp. Boston:
David R. Godine.
$19.95.

IN "Court of Memory," an earlier memoir, James McConkey recaptured a poignant
moment that took place during his sabbatical leave from Cornell University. His
son Cris was juggling a late-shift job at a local factory with his hoped-for,
true vocation: developing a herd of goats on the family farm.

One bitter winter night Mr. McConkey helped Cris resuscitate a newborn kid:
"Still wet from the fluid in the sac, her body was nearly frozen. We filled the
kitchen sink with warm water. . . . I massaged the kid's chest while swishing
her body back and forth in the water, and the beat came back into my palm as if
it were the pulsing of my own blood. . . . In a few moments the legs jerked and
the kid's eyes opened. My face must have been the first object she saw. The
possibility that imprinting might work two ways has not been generally
acknowledged."

It seems to me that this wry understatement about imprinting might serve as a
metaphor for what takes place in "Stories From My Life With the Other Animals,"
the final volume of Mr. McConkey's trilogy ("Crossroads," the first volume of
Mr. McConkey's memoirs, was published in 1968, "Court of Memory" in 1983). The
period that his three volumes span roughly coincides with the cold war. The
events of that epoch are deeply imprinted upon his sensibility and have led him,
as he says in the foreword to this book, "to consider the possible meanings and
the value of [my] life against the threat of mass extinction."

Conversely, the imprint he has left on others -- colleagues, students, family
members -- cannot be wholly validated by this author's modest account of his
life and times. But it is readily inferred from the context.

Readers who lived through the volatile events of the 1960's and 70's either as
active participants or as concerned bystanders will surely identify with Mr.
McConkey. For them, the beat will come back under their palms as if it were
their own blood pulsing. Younger generations may find his illuminations of a
rural, al beit academic, life with family and animals rather more ordinary than
disquieting.

They will not have suffered through, as Mr. McConkey did, the suicides of
colleagues who succumbed in the 60's to an awareness of the specter of nuclear
genocide, or the triad of assassinations that still casts a dark cloud over that
era. The civil rights struggle, the war in Vietnam, Watergate, events that
presaged a future over which Mr. McConkey and many of his contemporaries felt
they had no control, have taken on the patina of distant historical events. But
for the author, "the destiny I feared gave me an extraordinary infusion of love
for my own family, for all individuals I had come to know and respect, and even
for the tiniest creature or object in the natural world."

This is a refreshing memoir full of unashamed tenderness mediated by a healthy
self-regard. The author is blessed with a long and happy marriage, the rare kind
that seems, in this time of easy divorce and casual companionship, to create
mythic dinosaurs of its celebrants. He is so diffident -- or even superstitious
-- about the prodigious strength of this union that he has been unable
throughout the text to use his wife's "public name."

Mr. McConkey says this avoidance stems from his need for "a psychological
screen, or necessary esthetic distance." While Jean, as he calls her, is present
as willing partner, she comes through a little less vividly than this reader
would have liked. And, as is common in books sewn together from previously
published essays, certain redundancies obtrude. In this case, the Greek Revival
farmhouse in upstate New York is identified too often in just these terms,
something an alert editor might have weeded out.

In one graphic scene, a bathrobe-clad Mr. McConkey confronts a trapper early one
morning who, poaching on the McConkeys' land, recently maimed their cat and was
probably responsible for earlier injuries to two of their dogs. But after
voicing a rage that leaves him deeply shaken, he empathizes with the miscreant:
"His wife was dead, his children gone. For most of his life, he had been
self-employed, a handyman, and now his income came from muskrat furs and welfare
checks."

AS the author searches for a balancing point between cruelty and mercy,
necessity and conscience, he makes one of his graceful segues into questions of
belief. On the one hand, there is the religion he was raised in (with its
"contrary aspects" of gentleness and grimness) and had rejected. "In the present
case, I was not God but an animal lover holding the flaps of a robe together. .
. . Stern as I tried to sound, I felt sorrier for him than I did for the cat he
had victimized, who at this moment probably was still sleeping against the belly
of a friend."

As a teacher of successive waves of creative-writing students, "one who has read
many autobiographical accounts thinly disguised as fiction," Mr. McConkey has
had occasion to reflect on the "open antagonisms between children and their
parents," fitting the pieces of the genetic bonds he sees within families into
the larger puzzle of resentments, motivations and resolutions brought about
through love and sorrow. He is a keen observer of his own losses -- a feckless
but adored father who twice left his mother for other women, a brother killed in
a car accident, outlived by his mother, who spent the last 10 years of her long
life in Mr. McConkey's house. Fierce affection informs all these relationships
and weights the deaths with dignified grief.

Memory and its uses, the "confused remembrance of truths," as Proust put it, is
Mr. McConkey's main subject. His is an admirable story, cleanly told, of trust
and caring among decent human beings, and it might well serve as an antidote to
despair.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Pillar Of The Post

BYLINE: By Edward Sorel;  Edward Sorel's cartoons appear in The Nation and The
New Yorker.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 554 words



HERBLOCK: A CARTOONIST'S LIFE
By Herbert Block.
Illustrated. 372 pp. New York:
A Lisa Drew Book/
Macmillan Publishing Company. $24.

The notion that art is long and life short needs to be re-examined. Consider
Herbert Block, age 84. The man can dash off a political cartoon in 12 minutes
flat, and he is able to look back on a career that began when Herbert Hoover was
our C.E.O. More impressive than Mr. Block's professional longevity, and his
undiminished capacity for outrage, is that he's still at the top of his form.

"Herblock: A Cartoonist's Life" is a professional autobiography with a glimpse
into Mr. Block's private life. It's a hearty bill of fare: delectable selections
of his best cartoons, sandwiched between wholesome slices of childhood memories
and career highlights, spiced with history and with anecdotes about people he
has known and caricatured. His chapters about growing up in Chicago are
charmingly candid, but once young Herb Block, reluctant student of the
catechism, becomes Herblock, political cartoonist, the writing turns circumspect
-- friendly, often jolly, but seldom intimate.

Clearly politics is his passion. Herblock's fellow cartoonists will be
particularly interested in what happened when his editors pressured him to
express views contrary to his own, and he refused. Most editorial-page
cartoonists -- Herblock is now one of the few exceptions -- have to show
preliminary sketches to their papers' thought police before doing a finished
piece. This practice (which columnists don't follow) dates to the time when
editorial cartoons illustrated editorials.

When Herblock worked for the anti-New Deal Scripps-Howard syndicate, he
sometimes had to show as many as eight sketches before achieving one innocuous
enough to pass muster. In 1942, management decided to shrink his cartoons. The
decision was reversed at the last minute when the Roosevelt-loving,
pain-in-the-neck cartoonist won a Pulitzer -- the first of three.

Returning from the Army after World War II, Herblock joined the struggling
Washington Post, where the political views were close to his own. Yet even there
he ran into trouble. During the 1952 Presidential campaign, when The Post
endorsed Eisenhower, Herblock's cartoons boosted Adlai Stevenson. To avoid this
embarrassing conflict, management dropped him from the paper, but a thunderclap
of protest soon returned him. Again, in the 1960's, when The Post supported
Lyndon Johnson's policies in Vietnam, Herblock's cartoons questioned them. Mr.
Block says he would take in his sketch, only to receive a lecture from the
editor, J. Russell Wiggins, followed by a good-humored retreat: "All right, but
God knows I tried to reason with you." Finally, some 20 years after joining the
paper, Herblock was unofficially relieved of the burden of submitting his
sketches before inking them.

This splendid book may not persuade newspaper owners to give political
cartoonists editorial autonomy, but it may inspire cartoonists to demand it. In
his closing chapter, Mr. Block reflects on his good fortune: "What could be a
more enviable or satisfying job than drawing a picture every day and getting in
your two cents' worth on whatever is going on in the world?" The answer,
obviously, is "nothing" -- providing you have Herblock's wicked gifts.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing: Herblock

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Bill, Take a Leaf From J.F.K.

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 571 words


To the Editor:

Russell Baker's experience, insight and writing skill combine to cheer his
readers when he occasionally turns out a serious column. And so it is with "Make
It Bill and Lyndon" (Oct. 9), in which he correctly points out that Bill
Clinton's focus on domestic issues matches that of Lyndon Johnson. But Mr. Baker
errs when he states that John F. Kennedy "was so absorbed in foreign policy that
he seemed to have no domestic policy at all" (until he became active with
respect to civil rights).

As manifested by a strongly pro-growth tax policy, Kennedy's effective attention
to the country's economic needs has been matched by few chief executives,
Democrat or Republican. Advised by a splendid economic team (Douglas Dillon,
Henry Fowler, Robert Roosa and Paul Volcker at Treasury; Walter Heller, James
Tobin and Kermit Gordon at the Council of Economic Advisers), Kennedy moved from
day one to promote the saving and investment essential to higher living
standards.

(1) In early 1961 J.F.K. called for enactment of an innovative tax credit to
promote investment in productive equipment. Congress approved his request
(against the lobbying of both Big Labor and Big Business) in 1962.

(2) Secretary Douglas Dillon started his Treasury technicians to work to revise
and liberalize business depreciation guidelines. (These two actions alone --
innovative tax credit and depreciation liberalization -- sharply reduced the
capital cost of productive investment.)

(3) In January 1963 Kennedy called for a strongly pro-growth general tax cut
(what we would now call supply side) on individuals and business. The proposal
passed the House before his death and Lyndon Johnson pushed it through the
Senate in 1964. The measure cut the top marginal tax rate on individuals from a
confiscatory 91 percent to 70 percent, and the rate on the lowest bracket from
20 to 14 percent (shades of Ronald Reagan's Kemp-Roth tax cut in 1981). The
corporate rate was cut from 52 to 48 percent, but Kennedy's request to reduce
capital gains tax rates was rejected by the Democratic Congress.

The results were an economic policymaker's dream. Saving and productive
investment took off, only to be sidetracked in the latter half of the 1960's
when, as one observer said, Johnson tried to conquer Vietnam, poverty and space
all at once.

The United States did not return to the pro-growth tax track until 1978, when
little-known Representatives Jim Jones and Bill Steiger and well-known Senator
Russell Long pushed through a bill cutting taxes on saving and investment over
Jimmy Carter's objections. Ronald Reagan's massive tax reduction in 1981 may
well have gone too far, but it at least temporarily created the most pro-saving
and investment tax system in the industrial world. Temporarily because Mr.
Reagan blew it all in 1986 by trading the investment tax credit and accelerated
depreciation for huge individual tax cuts.

There is an important lesson here for President Clinton. To be sure, his plate
is crowded now with health care, trade liberalization and foreign policy
problems. But significant tax restructuring for capital formation and fairness
should be on the agenda for his first term. If it is not, then his first term
may well be his last.

CHARLS E. WALKER
Washington, Oct. 12, 1993

The writer, former Deputy Treasury Secretary, is chairman of the American
Council for Capital Formation.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

New Immigrants Test Nation's Heartland

BYLINE: By DEBORAH SONTAG,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 2093 words

DATELINE: GARDEN CITY, Kan.


Its milky white sky sits squat on the plains, a horizon unbroken but for grain
elevators and water towers. At a feed yard off Old Highway 83, cowboys gallop
into the noonday sun, fringed chaps slapping their thighs. Blond girls practice
cheerleading jumps on square lawns adorned by pumpkins. Near a central
intersection, a large sign says simply: Have a Nice Day.

That is Garden City at first sight, stereotypical Kansas, wheatlands and cattle
pens and rosy cheeks. But before long, a second reality grows apparent. There is
a tortilla factory on Main Street, a Laotian market offering Thai videos on
Fulton Street. At dawn, hundreds of immigrants and refugees file into Slaughter
Employee Parking at a giant meat-packing plant.

'A Little New York City'

At nightfall, while locals head to the Grain Bin for Texas two-step dancing,
Mexican immigrants crowd into Saigon, a Vietnamese-run karaoke bar, and
Southeast Asians pack the Pho Hoa One Restaurant, where the fish sauce and lemon
grass are plentiful.

Multiculturalism has come to the heartland, especially to this cow town in the
short grass and sand-sage prairie of southwest Kansas. In the direct center of
the country -- 1,640 miles from the Atlantic and 1,625 from the Pacific --
Garden City offers an ideal case study of the many forces at work as the latest
wave of immigration spills over into the Middle West.

"We've become a little New York City in the land of Dorothy, Toto and Auntie
Em," said Roxy Thompson, an elementary school teacher here.

As in New York City, Los Angeles and Miami, immigration into the heartland is a
story of conflict and accommodation. But in places that have never known much
racial and ethnic diversity, foreignness in and of itself is an issue. Since so
many immigrants to the heartland are uncertain whether they are just passing
through or will stay, the towns cannot tell if their young, tentative ethnic
communities are a temporary challenge or a historic transformation of identity.

In the last 13 years, after the biggest beef-packing plant in the world opened
here, Garden City's population has grown by 42 percent to about 25,500. Most of
the newcomers -- who work grueling jobs as bleeders, tail rippers, flankers,
head droppers, gutters and horn sawers -- are Hispanic and Southeast Asian
immigrants and refugees.

The immigrants have made the town worldly while shaking its stability. They have
ushered in an era of growth while contributing to an increase in crime and
drop-out rates. Privately, ethnic antagonism simmers. But publicly it rarely
finds a voice, because newcomers and old-timers live, work and play in worlds
that barely intersect.

Packing Plants Draw Wave of Immigrants

Eight years ago, Marcial Cervantes, the Mexican-born son of a migrant miner, met
a packing company recruiter at an unemployment office in New Mexico. A day
later, with the guarantee of a $6.70-an-hour job in Garden City, he and his
newlywed wife crammed their belongings into a 1966 G.M.C. pickup and hit the
highway for a place he assumed would be "100 percent guero," -- fair-haired,
blue-eyed American.

But in his first day on the kill floor, Mr. Cervantes looked around with
amazement.

"I hadn't seen so many mexicanos since I left Mexico in 1976," he said.

Immigrants do not end up in the heartland by chance. They are either plopped
here by the Federal Government's refugee resettlement program or lured by jobs
in increasingly industrialized rural America. Meat-packing plants, in
particular, have cut costs by moving away from unionized cities and closer to
the feed yards in areas antagonistic to unions.

When IBP Inc., one of the nation's major food-processing companies, made such a
move to just outside Garden City in 1980, the town was typically heartland.
About 16 percent of the residents were descendants of the Mexicans who came to
work in the early 1900's on the railroads and in the sugar-beet harvest, but
only about 2 percent of the residents were foreign-born.

Unemployment stood at about 3 percent as IBP set out to hire 2,850 people and
another plant began to double its work force to about 1,400.

"At first, IBP tried to recruit all our people from Nebraska and Iowa," said
Duane West, a retired lawyer and former city commissioner. "But the simple fact
is that this is hard, tough work, and farm boys just didn't want it."

The Mexicans, Salvadorans, Vietnamese, Cambodians and Laotians who showed up to
do the plant's dirty work presented no economic threat. In fact, the town
offered IBP a decade's worth of tax breaks, and issued $100 million in bonds to
help finance construction. The meat-packing plants were seen as the key to
future prosperity, and that set the tone for the polite reception the thousands
of new immigrants received.

Garden City is a town that prides itself on civility.

"Basically, there isn't anyone here with the intestinal fortitude to raise
heck," Mr. West said. "Sometimes, when you do speak out, people look at you like
you're crazier than a pet coon. This really isn't a clash-y kind of community,"

Still, while conflict has been kept to a minimum, so has contact between the
old-timers and the newcomers.

"Except for driving down the streets, I don't much notice them immigrants," Greg
Ayers, a 37-year-old cowboy, said. "But now, my boy, he's in the second grade
and he probably has more Mexican friends than Americans, and they're, well, just
buds."

Transients Challenge The Staid Heartland

The Garden City area's past claims to fame were the 1959 murder of the Clutter
family in outlying Holcomb (immortalized in Truman Capote's "In Cold Blood") and
the nation's largest free concrete municipal swimming pool. Now Garden -- as its
residents call it -- is renowned not only as the state's fastest-growing town,
but also as its most cosmopolitan one.

Where else in Kansas would a 10-year-old girl born in Laos and raised in a
refugee camp in Thailand proudly declare that she, Sopha Bounthasen, loved
America and her favorite American food: "Tacos!"

At least 20 percent of the town is now foreign born -- compared with 7.9 percent
nationally -- and 40 percent is nonwhite. New immigrants keep arriving, many
from California and Texas. Some are recruited by relatives, who are paid a small
bounty by the plants. Some come without any job guarantees, gambling that life
is easier in Kansas.

Bob Ma, a Vietnamese refugee, and his wife, Elba, a Mexican, met in Los Angeles,
where they lived from hand to mouth on their earnings in construction and
garment jobs. Now, after six months at IBP here, they own a used van and have
made a down payment on the trailer they share with their son, Richard. The
trailer is already home, with a new videocassette recorder in one corner, a
shrine of apples and incense to Mr. Ma's mother in another.

"Over there, in L.A., it's too wild and expensive," said Mr. Ma, 29."Over here,
it's boring but it's better. The kids play outside on the street, and you don't
worry about gangs and drugs. And you don't got to stay forever. You can save up
and move on."

Indeed, the immigrant population has proved to be a transient one, in part
because turnover in the hazard-ridden packing industry is so high, averaging
about 7 percent a month, said Donald Stull, a University of Kansas
anthropologist.

Tracking new students entering the school system in 1986, a study by Dr. Stull
for the Ford Foundation found that only a third remained in town two years
later.

A rare few immigrants have made a commitment to Garden City, among them, Donald
T. To, the town's first Vietnamese insurance agent, who started in the plants
nine years ago. "I'm trying to put down roots in this area," he said.

But many more cannot see their lives here beyond the immediate future. "If they
can get out and be their own boss, that's a goal," said Levita Rohlman, refugee
services director here for the United States Catholic Conference. "So there is a
lot of out-migration to Texas, Hawaii, Louisiana."

The police chief, Roger A. Schroeder holds the newcomers' transience --
especially the movement of young, single males -- partly responsible for the 54
percent increase in violent crimes between 1987 and 1992.

But, paradoxically, the transience has also worked to keep tensions low.
Absorbed in their six-day-a-week jobs with no plans for a future here, many
immigrants lead a wholly separate life that does not threaten the town's
traditional identity.

Indeed, despite all the change, despite the publication of a Spanish-language
weekly by The Garden City Telegram, despite the Vietnamese-language mass at St.
Dominic's Church, despite the new Buddhist temple, there is surprising
constancy.

The town is still perfumed by dung. It is still adorned by a 40-year-old sign
advising, "Eat Beef, Stay Slim." It still counts only one Asian police officer,
and one Hispanic and one Asian teacher in core courses at the high school. And
its power still lies in the hands of an elite of old-timers who mix little with
the immigrants who tend to live and work on the edge of town.

And sometimes it is the immigrants themselves who keep things segregated.
Recently, 75 Laotians put down $5,000 each toward a 120-acre lot that they
intend to convert into a "Laotown" if the city permits.

A Gracious Facade Masks Latent Biases

One recent afternoon, Bountome Pheuahakphay, who swam the Mekong River to escape
his homeland in 1984, parked his U-Haul in East Garden Village, a mobile home
park built for packing-house workers. Mr. Pheuahakphay had arrived the previous
night from Fresno, where, despite an engineering degree, he had lived off public
assistance.

One night, in Fresno, he had met a Laotian from Garden City, who was in
California to persuade welfare-dependent refugees to start over again in the
heartland, moving at taxpayer expense as part of a Federal program.

"We tell them, 'We guarantee that if you listen to us you will save $12,000 to
$15,000 a family your first year,' " said Roger Vilaysing, executive director of
the Southeast Asian Mutual Assistance Association here. "We tell them, 'It's
easy job, meat-packing, if you know how to sharpen your knife.' We tell them,
'In Garden City, the kids see parents work hard, want to please parents, obey
parents. Not like in California.' "

Mr. Pheuahakphay had nothing to lose, and neither did Oudom Vongphakdy, another
Laotian from Fresno. Mr. Vongphakdy, however, was somewhat unsettled by his
first glimpse of East Garden's flat, unwooded acres on the outskirts of town.
"This looks just like a refugee camp," he said.

In 1987, several years after East Garden Village opened, a new elementary school
was built nearby. Victor Ornelas Elementary was known "with a lot of animosity
as that school for those kids," said Ms. Thompson, a teacher there. When the
school district proposed busing some white children there, parents rebelled. It
was as close as Garden City has come to a public confrontation over the town's
changing population.

Now, the 6-year-old school, spacious and modern, has a devoted staff that prides
itself on adapting to an America that defies the Norman Rockwell image of their
childhood. A kindergarten teacher joked recently about preparing a bulletin
board of student self-portraits, where crayon-drawn faces were decorated with
colored yarn for hair.

"It's not like the old days," said the teacher, Linda Walker. "I didn't need
much yellow yarn, as you can see."

Officially, from the police chief to the grocery store manager who stocks
chilies and peanut sauces in staggering varieties, the town sees its cultural
diversity as an asset. Townspeople proudly distinguish Garden City from
neighboring Dodge City.

Recently, the chairwoman of the Dodge City Commission, Laura Carlson, was quoted
in the local paper comparing illegal immigrants to cockroaches: "If you spray
for them there, they only end up here." She said she had been misunderstood, but
her comment nurtured latent xenophobia, prompting one newspaper letter
announcing the formation of a citizen's militia.

Although such public outbursts are not Garden City's style, ethnic animosity
does exist -- in muttered remarks behind closed doors about the "wetbacks" and
the "gooks," about Wal-Mart turning into "Wal-Mex."

Penney Schwab, Western Kansas director for the United Methodist Care Centers,
said: "If you were able to take a secret poll here, you'd find a lot of closet
Laura Carlsons who have been careful to keep their mouth shut. Garden is not
perfect, just polite."

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Many children of immigrants in Garden City, Kan., are learning
at the Victor Ornelas Elementary School. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)(pg.
A1); Despite an engineering degree, Bountome Pheuahakphay, a refugee from Laos,
lived off public assistance in Fresno, Calif. He seeks a more self-sufficient
life in Garden City, Kan. While conflict between long-time residents and the new
arrivals is kept to a mininum, so is daily contact. Cowboys herded cattle
recently at the Reeves Cattle Company feedlot in Garden City. (Photographs by
Jim Wilson/The New York Times)(pg. B7)

Map of Kansas showing location of Garden City. (pg. B7)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
Shifting Perceptions of a Presidency

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1431 words


Presidential reputations are protean things, continually revised and annotated
by shifting values and historical developments that vindicate or repudiate an
individual President's decisions and world view. Among the many factors that
both shape and reflect popular perceptions of a President are biographies,
memoirs and historical accounts of an administration.

The second volume of Robert A. Caro's biography of Lyndon Johnson ("Means of
Ascent," 1990) left readers with an image of Johnson not as an architect of
civil rights legislation, but as a politician of "utter ruthlessness" who
"stole" his 1948 Senate election. In contrast, David McCullough's affectionate
1992 portrait of Harry S. Truman ("Truman") served as the culmination of an
ongoing process of rehabilitation, transforming an unpopular President (who left
office with a 31 percent approval rating) into a kind of folk hero.

It is probably more than coincidence that the best-selling "Truman" arrived in
bookstores in June of 1992, at the height of the Presidential campaign, and that
George Bush soon traded in his former role model, Theodore Roosevelt -- who
happened to be the subject of an earlier McCullough biography, "Mornings on
Horseback" -- and began comparing himself to Harry Truman.

Bill Clinton also invoked the Truman mantle, as well as that of Franklin D.
Roosevelt, but as newspaper, magazine and television accounts attest, he has
most insistently cultivated comparisons to John F. Kennedy.


The 14-minute Bloodworth-Thomason film screened at the Democratic National
Convention last year showed a teen-age Mr. Clinton shaking hands with President
Kennedy at a 1963 Boys Nation reception, using the image twice as a kind of
symbolic passing of the torch. The day before he was sworn in, Mr. Clinton made
a pilgrimage to Arlington National Cemetery to lay roses on the grave of
President Kennedy, and in his inaugural address he used self-consciously
Kennedyesque language to call for public service and self-restraint. A recent
speech on national service invoked Kennedy by name, praising his creation of the
Peace Corps for changing "the way a generation of Americans look at themselves
and the world."

Although such speeches by Mr. Clinton conjure up an image of the idealistic
founder of the New Frontier, Kennedy's actual place in history remains open to
debate. While books by former Kennedy associates -- Arthur M. Schlesigner Jr.
and Theodore C. Sorensen -- attempted to cement the Camelot myth, later volumes
by historians like Garry Wills and Thomas C. Reeves provided decidedly less
flattering portraits of Kennedy as a manipulator obsessed with image.

The latest book about Kennedy -- "President Kennedy: Profile of Power" by the
political journalist Richard Reeves (Simon & Schuster) -- draws a portrait of
him as a highly pragmatic politician who was intelligent, disorganized and
careless. It is less a full-fledged biography of Kennedy than a study of his
Presidency, and it unwittingly sheds new light on Kennedy's young emulator,
William Jefferson Clinton.

Although Mr. Clinton appears only once in the book (and in a footnote, no less),
it's hard for anyone who has read about his Presidency or followed it on
television to finish "Profile of Power" without drawing comparisons, and
comparisons that tend to have less to do with vision than with circumstance,
temperament and managerial style. These inadvertent parallels are not always
flattering; indeed, they sometimes leave the reader wondering why Mr. Clinton
has chosen to make Kennedy such a favorite role model.

To begin with, there are the obvious similarities of youth and qualified
popularity. Although both men were highly skilled politicians and both were
hailed as avatars of a new generation, they were both elected with less than 50
percent of the vote and no guarantee of a Congressional majority for their
legislation.

Kennedy entered office almost totally focused on foreign policy, and found
himself forced by circumstance -- namely, the rising civil rights movement -- to
deal with domestic issues. Mr. Clinton entered office almost totally focused on
domestic issues and has found himself forced -- by developments in Bosnia,
Somalia and the former Soviet Union -- to deal with foreign policy.

In the early months of their Presidencies, both Kennedy and Mr. Clinton were
needled by the press about the slow pace of their appointments. Both made close
family members -- Robert F. Kennedy and Hillary Rodham Clinton, respectively --
trusted Administration confidants. And both got off to a rocky start with the
military: Kennedy losing its respect after his embarrassing summit with the
Soviet leader Nikita S. Khrushchev in 1961; Mr. Clinton starting off with
scepticism because he had not served in Vietnam.

During their first months in office, both Kennedy and Mr. Clinton struggled with
disorder resulting from their White House management styles. According to Mr.
Reeves's book, President Kennedy described his White House organization as a
wheel with many spokes and himself at "the vital center." Nearly the same words
were used last January by a Democratic Party official who told Time magazine
that the Clinton White House "has been structured as spokes of a wheel leading
into the President."

Mr. Reeves writes that Kennedy's love of rambling meetings and hallway
conversations had the effect of "a movable feast, a floating bull session."
Reporters have similarly noted that Mr. Clinton's open-door policy in the Oval
Office has nurtured the seminar atmosphere he loves.

Indeed Presidents Kennedy and Clinton seem to share certain personality traits
that incline them toward such a loose work arrangement: a personal mastery of
detail, a capacity to thrive on chaos, a distaste for being alone.

Certainly some of the similarities one might discern between the two Presidents
are fairly generic to the office or to the successful politician: confidence,
verbal facility, an ability to wing it when necessary. Kennedy, Mr. Reeves
observes in his book, delivered his famous 1963 civil rights speech with only a
partly finished text. Mr. Clinton made it through the first seven minutes of his
recent health care address with the wrong speech in front of him on the
prompter.

Other similarities are superficial, the stuff of gossip: allergies, a fondness
for the telephone, a penchant for watching movies when under stress. Kennedy,
Mr. Reeves notes, watched "Roman Holiday" late one night during the height of
the Cuban Missile crisis. Mr. Clinton, Newsweek reported, channel-surfed between
"Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid," "Zorba the Greek" and "The Crucifer of
Blood" while waiting for the Senate vote on his economic plan.


Other parallels, however, are more revealing and potentially consequential, from
the cultivation of image to both men's easy ability to charm those around them.

Kennedy's gift, in Mr. Reeves's words, "for convincing others that, whatever he
did or had to do, he was at heart with them" appears to have led to
misunderstandings within his own Adminstration, while Mr. Clinton's ability seem
to to empathize with assorted constituencies has already led to hurt feelings --
over such matters as homosexuals in the military -- when his actions have failed
to live up to perceived intent.

Mr. Reeves argues in "Profile of Power" that Kennedy "had little ideology beyond
anti-Communism and faith in active pragmatic government," that he "never made a
decision until he had to," that "invariably he chose the most moderate of
available options," and that he was "often willing to suspend" what convictions
he did have "if that avoided confrontation with Congress or the risk of being
called soft." Mr. Clinton, who has tried to avoid having the liberal label
pinned on him, has been repeatedly criticized during his first nine months in
office for his willingness to compromise and conciliate.

Of course one of the biggest differences between Kennedy and Mr. Clinton is that
Kennedy's Presidency is a matter of history now; though open to the revisions of
historians, his decisions belong to a closed book. Mr. Clinton's record is still
very much a work in progress, though the process of assessing him and his
Administration has already begun. "Promises of Change: The Clinton
Administration and the Politics of Renewal," by Roger Morris, is due out in
February. Also in the works are a biography of the President by David Maraniff,
and books on his Administration by Bob Woodward and Elizabeth Drew. And this
after just nine months in office.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Talk of Hollywood;
A Director Moves On, Whether He's Safe Or Out

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1204 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Oct. 17


It's close to midnight, and Barry Levinson is in the closing hours of completing
his newest film. The untitled movie, made by Paramount Pictures and starring Joe
Pesci and Christian Slater, is set in Hollywood and deals with actors but isn't
really about the movie business.

"The movie kind of crosses into two things," said Mr. Levinson, walking to his
trailer. "It's about the collapse of Hollywood, the place, and what it really is
now, and it's about someone who has illusions of being an actor. And the two
things kind of intersect."

Mr. Levinson, a one-time actor, shrugged and laughed at the cryptic description.
"Is it a comedy? A drama? I don't know. Like what was 'Diner' or 'Tin Men'?
Dramas with comedy. Comedies with drama. I don't know. It's both. They're funny
but have by nature a dramatic sensibility."

At 51, Mr. Levinson is a film maker who is highly confident, unpretentious and
surprisingly distant from Hollywood's turbulence and gamesmanship. Aside from
"Diner" and "Tin Men," which reflect his Baltimore background, Mr. Levinson's
movies include an array of hits and misses: "Good Morning, Vietnam," "Rain Man,"
"Avalon" and "Bugsy." His last film, "Toys," an absurdist comedy with Robin
Williams, was a personal movie that Mr. Levinson had sought to make for years.
The film was a commercial and critical failure.

Other directors would have been personally shaken by the experience, but Mr.
Levinson says he can only push onward. "It was always a very dangerous
endeavor," he said. "You know, there are always certain safe places to stay. And
I don't know that's necessarily something I want to do. I do the work, and
sometimes it's accepted and sometimes not. Some people get to a point where
they're like paralyzed. They spend several years trying to figure out, 'What am
I supposed to do now?' Maybe I'm not that introspective."

His next project was an Emmy Award-winning, nine-part television series,
"Homicide," based on a book by David Simon about a police homicide unit in
Baltimore. Four more episodes of the series have just been filmed by NBC and
will be shown early next year. The series and Mr. Levinson's film are produced
by his long-time partner, Mark Johnson.

Mr. Levinson, seated in his trailer, recalled that he came to Hollywood from
Washington more than 25 years ago and lived with two friends in an $80-a-month
apartment several blocks away. "You could walk the boulevard and see a couple of
double features and go to coffee shops, and it wasn't dangerous at all," he
said. "It's changed here like it's changed all over the country, except here you
have the mythology. It's Hollywood! I suppose that's why it appeals to me as a
writer."

Vibrations and Rumors

There's always talk in Hollywood of studio heads on the way out, and the talk is
starting to turn into a scream.

"It's time for musical chairs," said one of the biggest agents in town. "It has
to happen. The vibe is in the air."

The vibe is in the air, partly because the contracts of several prominent studio
heads are about to expire.

One of the executives is Thomas P. Pollock, the chairman of the MCA Motion
Picture Group. On the plus side, Mr. Pollock has overseen Universal Pictures,
which produced Steven Spielberg's "Jurassic Park." The dinosaur epic is now the
worldwide box-office champ, recently surpassing "E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial" and
grossing $735 million so far. The movie just opened in, of all places, Croatia.

On the debit side, Mr. Pollock's record of hits (beyond that big one) is spotty.
Mr. Pollock declined to discuss his current contractual negotiations.

Another prominent executive, Mike Medavoy, the chairman of Tri-Star Pictures, is
also facing an uncertain future. His contract expires in about 18 months, but
there has been talk of his being replaced earlier. This is partly because Mr.
Medavoy and his boss, Peter Guber, the chairman of Sony Pictures Entertainment,
are not on the friendliest of terms.

Of course, a year ago Mr. Medavoy was also rumored to be on the way out, and
nothing has happened. Sony, which has paid off tens of millions of dollars in
its executive shuffles, is at this point too embarrassed to pay off any more
millions.

Although Mr. Medavoy's record has also been mixed, his studio produced one of
the summer's comedy hits, "Sleepless in Seattle"; its major winter movie, the
Jonathan Demme AIDS drama, "Philadelphia," is already mentioned as a strong
contender for the Academy Awards.

Speaking philosophically, the 52-year-old Mr. Medavoy observed: "People were
talking about Tom Pollock and I being gone a year ago. Everybody has their
moment of being out. There's always musical chairs in Hollywood, but very few
people have done these jobs and been around as long as I have." Mr. Medavoy, a
one-time talent agent, was formerly part of the management team that ran United
Artists and Orion Pictures.

Even Jeffrey Katzenberg, the chairman of Walt Disney Studios, one of the most
stable companies in town, has been discussed as possibly changing his job and
replacing Lew R. Wasserman, the 80-year-old chairman of MCA Inc. Mr.
Katzenberg's office said he was unavailable for comment. But the 42-year-old
executive has told close friends that he would not leave his lucrative job at
Disney except to actually own a company.

Amid all the talk of executive changes, a larger issue began surfacing even
before last week's merger announcement. That is, whether Matsushita Electrical
Industrial Company, which owns MCA Inc., and Sony Corporation, which owns
Columbia Pictures and Tri-Star Pictures, have begun to re-examine their huge
investment in Hollywood. There has been some speculation that Sony or Matsushita
may try to sell all or part of its Hollywood investment. Sony, especially, has
spent billions on the entertainment business but has seen disappointing returns
from its movie studios.

Reflections on a Roast

But certainly not all the talk this weekend was about such somber subjects as
Japanese investment and the future of the entertainment business.

There's Whoopi and Ted.

Even friends of the couple seem to be cringing at Mr. Danson's black-face
routine and crude jokes at the New York Friars Club roast about his relationship
with Ms. Goldberg. A handful of friends defend the couple, saying Mr. Danson's
act was typical of the way the roasts are conducted. Others say, however, that
the act just underscored the out-of-touch nature of movie stars and Hollywood.

The Friars Club, a group of veteran comedians and performers, was initially
apologetic but is now defending itself. In a full-page ad on Friday in Daily
Variety and The Hollywood Reporter, the club said somberly of its roasts:
"Sometimes the language is the bluest, the insults the basest and the jokes the
most embarrassing, but they are all said with great love and affection and
gracefully accepted by our roastee, in this case, Whoopi Goldberg."

And one of Hollywood's most prominent producers took a decidedly Hollywood point
of view about the Friars Club affair. Asked if it would hurt Mr. Danson's
career, the producer replied: "Of course not. It's the most interesting thing
Ted Danson has ever done. It'll help his career."

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Is it a comedy? A drama? I don't know," said Barry Levinson, in
glasses, who stood with actors from his untitled new film outside the Egyptian
Theater on Hollywood Boulevard, where he was filming this month. (Jan Sonnenmair
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 19, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Policy Turf: Never-Ending Battle

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 94 words


The foreign policy struggle under way in Washington is especially confused these
days. The arguments for involvement in Bosnia, Somalia and Haiti all have appeal
that is considerable but not quite compelling, and nothing like the Communist
threat the country grew accustomed to.

And the tug-of-war over foreign policy, which reached a peak in the Vietnam War,
goes back to the very first President.

As the case of Haiti demonstrates, there is more than partisanship involved in
the struggle between the President and Congress.

News analysis, page A18.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 19, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

STANDOFF IN HAITI;
Clinton Vows to Fight Congress On His Power to Use the Military

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1079 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 18


President Clinton, trying to protect his power to control the use of military
force, vowed today to "strongly oppose" efforts by members of Congress to
restrict his authority to commit troops to restore democracy in Haiti or to work
with the United Nations in other global hot spots.

After consulting with his legal experts, Mr. Clinton said, he sent a letter to
the Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, and the minority leader, Senator
Bob Dole, saying his Administration would oppose several amendments now
circulating that would "unduly restrict the ability of the President to make
foreign policy" and to exercise his authority as Commander in Chief.

"My letter says that I want to resist, and I urge the Senate not to vote for
things which unduly infringe on the President's power," Mr. Clinton said in an
interview with radio correspondents at the White House.

Dole Willing to Negotiate

Mr. Clinton's counterattack in this long-standing fight over Constitutional
powers was a response to Mr. Dole, who said on Sunday that he would introduce an
amendment that would put conditions on the dispatch of troops to Haiti except to
meet a national security emergency.

Today, Mr. Dole signaled a willingness to negotiate with Mr. Clinton over his
proposal. Indeed, such negotiations have been going on in Washington for 200
years. [News analysis, page A18.]

"We're not trying to stop the President from taking appropriate action in an
emergency," he told reporters. "We don't want to offend the Constitution or the
Secretary of State. I don't want to micromanage foreign policy. We're going to
try to work it out."

Clinton Willing to Consult

Responding to reporters' questions, Senator Dole, who has twice run for
President and is often named as a contender for 1996, conceded that if he were
President, he would oppose the sort of amendment he was offering.

Mr. Clinton said he had already demonstrated a willingness to consult with
Congress on Somalia, Bosnia and Haiti, including talking with Mr. Dole. Indeed,
this evening Clinton and Dole aides were trying to work out an acceptable
amendment.

But, Mr. Clinton warned, any efforts by Congress to limit his powers might "send
a green light" to Haiti's military rulers.

To make certain that no wrong signals were sent, Mr. Clinton today tightened the
squeeze on Haitian military and police officials who are being held responsible
for blocking the return of the deposed President, the Rev. Jean-Bertrand
Aristide.

Tougher Stance on Haiti

The President ordered the Treasury Department to freeze any assets these
officials might have in the United States, largely in the form of private bank
accounts estimated in the millions of dollars, and the assets of the Haitian
central bank. Mr. Clinton also barred entry into the United States of any of the
Haitian military's key supporters and ordered United States warships enforcing
an oil and arms embargo of Haiti "to move closer to the shore, so they will be
in plain sight."

The United Nations trade and banking sanctions had been lifted in August after
Haiti's military rulers agreed to turn over power to President Aristide by Oct.
30, but were restored last week after the coup leaders began walking away from
their commitments. Officials said, however, that this time around the assets to
be frozen include those that belong to senior military and police officials and
business executives who support them.

While refusing to rule out any further military actions, Mr. Clinton seemed to
lean away from any use of troops to forcibly reinstate the elected Government,
which was overthrown in September 1991. He said: "Keep in mind, as we speak, the
Haitian Government has not asked for that."

With United States warships cruising off Haiti, and troops patrolling Mogadishu
and possibly being dispatched to Bosnia, President Clinton finds himself
confronting attempts by both Democrats and Republicans to limit United Nations
command over American forces and the freedom with which a President can dispatch
troops to conflicts where there are no clear-cut threats to national security.

Mr. Clinton, like many Democrats of his generation, was once a strong advocate
of limiting a President's freedom to commit troops to foreign combat.

It was that sentiment, widely held in the Vietnam era, that produced the 1973
War Powers Act. That act required Presidents to seek authorization from Congress
within 90 days of any commitment of troops to combat, but it has never really
been enforced by Congress and all Presidents since have more or less ignored it.

Since becoming President, Mr. Clinton has tried to balance his prerogatives to
conduct foreign policy with his instinct to seek Congressional views before
decisions are made.

"All I can tell you," he said today, "is that I think that I have a big
responsibility to try to appropriately consult with members of Congress in both
parties in a wide way whenever we are in the process of making a decision which
might lead to the use of force. I believe that.

"But I think that, clearly, the Constitution leaves to the President, for good
and sufficient reasons, the ultimate decision-making authority."

Senator Dole and his supporters counter that they are ready to write all sorts
of national security exceptions into their legislation: the need to evacuate
Americans, for example. But Mr. Dole said the President must explain clear
objectives, a withdrawal strategy and a realistic cost.

Senior Administration officials stressed that they appreciate the support Mr.
Dole gave the President when other members of Congress were trying to force an
immediate withdrawal from Somalia, and that they are not unalterably opposed to
some kind of less restrictive amendment.

Still, in his letter to Senators Mitchell and Dole, Mr. Clinton said, "It is
wrong and even dangerous to allow the questions of the moment to undercut the
strength of our national security policies and to produce a fundamental shift in
the proper relationship between our two branches of government."

In addition to Senator Dole's proposal, Senator Don Nickles, Republican of
Oklahoma, has proposed an amendment to the 1994 military spending bill that
would prohibit spending money on any United Nations operation where American
troops would be under the operational command of a foreign officer. But in the
face of Administration lobbying efforts, the amendment has been set aside for
now.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  Sanctions to be imposed if Haiti's leaders continue to defy the United
Nations agreement:

Ban on supply of petroleum or petroleum products to Haiti, excluding small
quantities for use in cooking or "essential humanitarian needs."

Ban on supply of weapons and ammunition.

Ban on supply of military vehicles, equipment and spare parts.

Freeze of assets abroad of Haiti's de facto authorities or "their agents."

(pg. A18)
Chart: "Censuring Haiti"

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 19, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

STANDOFF IN HAITI;
Foreign Policy Tug-of-War: Latest in a Long String of Battles

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 941 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 18


When Senate Republicans demand a greater Congressional role in foreign policy,
there must be a Democrat in the White House. And when most Democrats support the
use of troops abroad despite serious misgivings, the suspicion is confirmed.

Senator Bob Dole's demand for "certification" of American interests by President
Clinton before any further involvement in Haiti, for example, stands in dramatic
contrast to his words just before Congress voted to allow President Bush to make
war on Iraq. On that occasion the minority leader told the Senate, "I do believe
that our best chance for peace and best hope for peace is to strengthen the
President's hand in every way we can."

But there is not just partisanship involved in this latest flexing of Senatorial
muscle. Indeed Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, a Democrat but above all
else a guardian of Congressional prerogative, started it on Sept. 8 when he
sought to end United States involvement in Somalia.

And the tug-of-war over foreign policy, which reached a peak in the Vietnam War,
goes back to the very first President. Despite the nation's unquestioned respect
for George Washington, his decision to declare United States neutrality in
European conflicts in 1793 made Congress unhappy.

'Invitation to Struggle'

As Edwin S. Corwin, the constitutional scholar, wrote in 1957, the deliberate
divisions of power by the framers constituted "an invitation to struggle for the
privilege of directing American foreign policy."

As Senator Dole said at a news conference this afternoon, following up on his
initial statement on Sunday, all Presidents oppose Congressional efforts to curb
their powers. "If I were executive, I'd oppose it," said Mr. Dole, who was
defeated twice when he sought the Republican Presidential nomination.

The foreign policy struggle is especially confused these days. The arguments for
involvement in Bosnia (halting genocide), Somalia (preventing starvation) and
Haiti (restoring democracy) all have appeal that is considerable but not quite
compelling -- and nothing like the Communist threat the country grew used to
reacting to.

The easiest way to connect the dots and draw a coherent foreign policy is to say
that none of these problems is important enough to risk American lives. And
while Congress, especially the Republican side, has been increasingly ready to
criticize Mr. Clinton for being more attentive to domestic issues than to
international ones, Congress has also kept its focus domestic.

'Not a Pretty Sight'

Thomas Mann, a Congressional scholar at the Brookings Institution, said today:
"Individual members of Congress start making foreign policy, and it's not a
pretty sight. The committees with the responsibility for dealing with these
issues are flying blind here, are not engaged in serious deliberation to
determine what principles should be involved."

"Members of Congress are absolutely without anchor here," he said. "They find
themselves responding on an ad hoc basis, responding to public opinion and
pictures on television screens, and also by short-term ideological
considerations, and such that responsible members end up embracing
extraordinarily disparate and seemingly inconsistent imperatives on foreign
policy."

Congress's absence of determination is reflected in its lack of interest in
using a tool it already has that clearly applies to Somalia, where troops have
been present for nearly a year.

Under the terms of the 1973 War Powers Resolution, enacted over President
Nixon's veto when Watergate had crippled him, Congress could pass a resolution
ordering Mr. Clinton to remove the troops. If he refused, since his
Administration echoes every other in the last 20 years in not accepting the
measure's constitutionality, Congress could go to court to try to force him to
comply.

Little Stomach for a Test

But there is little stomach on Capitol Hill for that sort of test. Nor was there
when American ships were sent to the Persian Gulf in the Iran-Iraq war, or when
marines went to Lebanon in 1983, or even when they first went to Saudi Arabia in
1990.

Mr. Dole said in an interview this afternoon that Haiti is different from those
cases and from Vietnam, where he supported Republican Presidents, and even from
Somalia, where he has opposed efforts by Congress to set a date for withdrawal.
In all those cases, he said, American forces were at risk and challenging a
President threatened them, too. "We haven't sent them yet to Haiti," he said
today. "So let us speak before it happens."

Without the distinction emphasized by Mr. Dole, Haiti might seem an odd place to
test United States authority to intervene. As Mr. Clinton put it today to radio
broadcasters, "Haiti is very much in our backyard." But Mr. Dole argued that
Congress put all sorts of conditions on United States actions in El Salvador and
Nicaragua. He voted against most of them, but says Democrats who supported them
should not now argue that Congress has no right to do something similar today.


Mr. Dole's past dedication to the fate of American troops, imperiled not just by
Vietnamese, Lebanese, Iranians or Iraqis but also by Congress, never stopped him
from making political capital of the results.

In March 1991, after the Gulf war, he savaged the Democrats who voted against
it. A shift of three votes, he wrote in The Wall Street Journal, could "have
turned this smashing victory into a catastrophe."

Still, as one veteran Senate aide put it today, the party lines are pretty
obvious. "Something very old-fashioned is going on here," he said. "Party
loyalty is a pretty strong glue."


LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 19, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Army Goal: Somali Hearts and Minds

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 906 words

DATELINE: MOGADISHU, Somalia, Oct. 18


After a summer in which the United States used gunships and attack helicopters
to pound sections of this city, the elite American forces that spent the Vietnam
War trying to win hearts and minds have resumed the quest.

The United States Army Special Forces have thus begun to venture out in Somalia
and have found a rare oasis of support in southern Mogadishu, the hostile blight
that is the domain of the Americans' principal foe, Gen. Mohammed Farah Aidid.

It is called Medina, a neighborhood whose residents support another faction
leader, Mohammed Ali Mahdi. They are glad for any medicine or other help the
Americans can give. And the Special Forces, also known as Green Berets, have
been eager to provide it after arriving here six weeks ago in what was becoming
an urban guerrilla war.

"We understand that if you don't have the cooperation of the population, you
really don't stand a chance in a low-intensity conflict," Maj. Bill Robinson
said the other day as his unit was helping guard a makeshift medical clinic that
had been established in Medina for the afternoon.

'Driving a Spear'

The mission reflects the American shift in strategy from confrontation to
accommodation. To Major Robinson, who is from Lincolnton, N.C., it is the tack
that military forces here should have taken all along.

"You were basically driving a spear into the heart with what we were doing
before," he said as his soldiers loaded medical supplies and Army doctors into a
nine-vehicle convoy.

Like the rest of southern Mogadishu, Medina was left to fend for itself this
summer as relief organizations withdrew workers from the capital. Local elders
told United Nations officials this month that medical care was among their most
urgent needs.

In taking on the project, the Army has begun what its officers acknowledge to be
a modest mission. Only 50 officers and soldiers from the Fifth Special Forces
Group in Fort Campbell, Ky., are now in Somalia, and its duties are combat and
outreach.

And in Medina, its task of winning favor there is hardly a great feat: the
mostly Abgal residents battled General Aidid and his Haber Gedir subclan before
the Americans arrived, and they look to Americans and the United Nations as
their protectors.

Officers say they remain wary that their forays will leave the impression of
taking sides. But in a city still so tense that even American helicopter patrols
dare not stray over certain sectors, Major Robinson and others said they could
find nowhere else in which they might safely try to redress what they regard as
the mission's political failings.

As their convoy rumbled down the road where three American marines and an
interpreter were killed in an explosion of a remote-controlled mine on Aug. 25,
the Special Forces convoy encountered blank stares from some of the adults who
peered from shops and stalls along the crowded streets.

But there was none of the overt hostility the troops saw a week earlier, when a
woman emerged from her home with a butcher knife in hand and made a slashing
motion at her throat. This time, the scene was transformed into that of a
bustling street fair as men, women and children rushed to line up for treatment
when the Americans pulled up outside a former Unicef clinic, their machine-gun
equipped Humvee multi-terrain vehicles taking up positions at each end of the
alley.

A Rush of Patients

As Army doctors, Special Forces medics and four Swedish doctors hurried into the
compound, children shouted "America!" The line outside grew longer, and a crush
of bodies pressed to squeeze through the metal gates.

Inside the compound, the scene was almost joyous, as patients suffering from
everything bullet wounds to malaria saw doctors for the first time in months.
Omar Abdulahi Omar, a 12-year-old carried around by his parents since civil war
crossfire left him a paraplegic a year ago, received his first wheelchair, a
gift from Sgt. Kent Alterman, a Special Forces medic who had it labeled "Omar
the Kid."

In the courtyard, Moussa Sudi, who is regarded by local residents as the leader
of the neighborhood, says his animosity toward General Aidid gives him a bond
with the Americans. Among the throng, others shake with anger as they describe
how relatives have suffered at the hands of the Haber Gedir, and they speak with
pride about their militia.

A Sense of Futility

"All the people who live here know each other, and they are people who don't
want trouble," said Fatima Yusuf Ahmed, a 23-year-old English teacher who said
her younger brother was killed in fighting with General Aidid's forces two years
ago.

As the hours passed, the crowd outside the gate grew larger and more unruly,
shoving so hard against the metal that it began to buckle. Those who had been
treated became stranded inside, and after seeing 120 patients, the Americans had
had enough. The gates were allowed to open, and the Somalis who rushed into the
compound raised a chorus of complaint when told that the clinic was closed.

As the Americans began to don helmets and flak jackets to make their way back
through southern Mogadishu, some spoke with painful recognition of the
insignificance of their effort.

"My personal feeling is when the last U.S. convoy rolls out the gate, Somalia
will go back to being what Somalia was," said Major Robinson. "People won't be
hungry, but in a little while, they'll go back to being hungry again."

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: As United States Army soldiers resumed patrols in southern
Mogadishu, guarding medical clinics and trying to restore some good will in
their mission, more troops arrived yesterday at the airport. (Liz Gilbert/Sygma,
for The New York Times)

Map of Mogadishu showing location of Medina.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 19, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Had Role In Gold Disposition

SECTION: Section A; Page 28; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 267 words



To the Editor:

With one exception there is no particular mystery about Nguyen Van Hao's role in
evacuating the South Vietnamese gold reserve to New York in April 1975
("Mysteries Circle Vietnamese at Center of Brown Inquiry," news article, Oct.
10).

On April 14, 1975, Mr. Hao and the governor of the Vietnamese National Bank
notified the United States Embassy that the Vietnamese Government wished to ship
the remaining gold reserve of 15 tons out of the country. The destination was
the Federal Reserve Bank in New York, to neutralize allegations by Hanoi and its
U.S. support network that Saigon officials were appropriating the reserve for
personal use. President Thieu approved that decision.

Details including transportation by U.S. Air Force transport were worked out.
Shipment was set for April 25, but at Vietnamese request was delayed for 24
hours. President Thieu had resigned and left the country.

Early on April 26 Mr. Hao informed us that the successor government headed by
Tran Van Huong had changed its mind and that the gold was to remain in Saigon,
which it did until the North Vietnamese Army occupied the city four days later.

There is no doubt Mr. Hao was responsible for the decision not to evacuate the
gold. What is uncertain is whether this was a decision reached by Mr. Hao and
Mr. Huong on their own or whether it was the result of communications between
Mr. Hao and the North Vietnamese in those final days of the Vietnamese republic.


WOLF LEHMANN
Rockville, Md., Oct. 10, 1993

The writer was deputy U.S. Ambassador to South Vietnam, 1974-75.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

What's Different About the Horn of Africa;
Emotional Symbol

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 498 words


To the Editor:

The firestorm of commentary on the publication of the photograph of a dead
American soldier being dragged through the streets of Mogadishu by a crowd of
Somalis has raised once again the question of how much information the American
public wants to have about its wars, how much reality is tolerable to a society
whose free press has often been blamed for bearing bad news we would rather not
confront (front page, Oct. 5).

Certainly that photograph was gruesome, certainly it was horrifying to the
soldier's family, certainly it shows a Somalia more complex than the grateful,
starving African nation we went in to feed. And obviously it will be used by
those who see in Somalia a conflict between white Western colonialism and black
African nationalism (never mind that Somalis have already expressed sorrow at
the deaths and mistreatment of the corpses of American soldiers).

Photographs of war have always been powerful emotional symbols. It was not until
1943 that the first photograph of American dead in World War II was allowed to
be published, and it is why Vietnam (our only uncensored war) persuaded our
military never again to allow a free press in a war zone.

But the posturing about Somalia in Congress began even before this photograph
was published, and before we had complete reports on the casualties from the
failed raid on Mohammed Farah Aidid's clan. The photograph is a disturbing
symbol of our confusion about the United States role in Somalia; but if its
publication brings some clarification to our foreign policy, then the dismay it
has caused may have been worthwhile.

The most perceptive comments on the campaign in Mogadishu have come from one of
the soldiers wounded in Somalia, Sgt. Richard Lamb.

Speaking from his hospital bed in Germany in a National Public Radio interview,
he described the Somali complexities in diplomatic and human terms, not simply
as a military problem. And his understanding of the campaign in which he was
wounded showed more sense than anything I have heard out of Washington in the
week since we lost 3 helicopters and at least 17 American soldiers.

Sergeant Lamb's respectful description of the fighting ability of General
Aidid's clan compared with the Administration's naive dismissal of that ability
before last weekend suggests Defense Secretary Les Aspin ought to have listened
more carefully to military advice on the scene before denying our forces the
armored vehicles needed for protection.

Much of the carping at the Administration because President Clinton did not
serve in Vietnam has been misdirected. The relative absence of military
experience in the Clinton Administration does not necessarily affect
policymaking for today's conflicts. But if more of the President's people had
been junior officers in Vietnam a generation ago, they might know what any
competent military officer still knows: listen to the sergeants!

BRIAN GORDON
University City, Mo., Oct. 12, 1993

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

PRO FOOTBALL;
At Issue: Hold a Baby or Hold That Line?

BYLINE: By SAM HOWE VERHOVEK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1266 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Oct. 19


In a head-on collision between the family values of today's sensitive man and
the macho work ethic of pro football, a citywide furor unfolded over the Houston
Oilers' threat to discipline a player who missed a game last Sunday because he
stayed with his wife for the birth of their first child the previous evening.

Callers jammed radio talk shows here to vent their views about the team's
contention that David Williams, the starting offensive right tackle, should have
tried harder to join the club for its game against the New England Patriots in
Foxboro, Mass. The vast majority of callers supported Williams, and the Oilers,
apparently sensing a public-relations disaster in the making, had appeared today
to be backing off their threat to dock Williams $125,000 and possibly suspend
him for missing the game.

But tonight, the team announced that it was withholding Williams's pay for the
game. It did not make reference to any further disciplinary action.

At the same time, the Oilers have moved to silence some of their officials and
coaches, several of whom had let it be known that they thought Williams wimped
out.

"This is like World War II, when guys were going to war and something would come
up but they had to go," Bob Young, the Oilers' offensive-line coach, was quoted
as saying just after the game Sunday. Later, he added: "My wife told me she was
having a baby and I said, 'Honey, I've got to go play a football game.' David
just went blank. He let the guys down, and he let hundreds of thousands of fans
down."

Williams said he had no regrets over his decision to stay in Houston to be with
his wife, Debi, while she gave birth to their first child, a 9-pound-11-ounce
boy named Scot Cooper Williams.

Snapshots of His Son

"It was the most unbelievable thing that I've ever seen and I wouldn't have
missed it for anything in the world," Williams, a fifth-year starter who makes
$2 million a year, said in an interview today, one day after returning to the
team's practice field laden with Polaroid snapshots of his son and imported
cigars for his teammates. He had received permission from the team to skip
meetings and the team's charter flight Saturday, and said he had hoped to be
able to get to Boston in time for the game.

Professional sports has seen its share of principled work stoppages
-- Sandy Koufax sitting out a 1965 World Series game that fell on the Jewish
holy day of Yom Kippur, Muhammad Ali allowing himself to be stripped of a boxing
title rather than be drafted during the Vietnam War -- but the Williams saga
appears to mark the first time that an athlete has been publicly threatened with
disciplinary action for missing a game in connection with the birth of his
child.

Spokesmen for the professional football, baseball, basketball and hockey leagues
all said they had no record of such a punishment. But that's not because no
other players have missed games -- it's just that it always seems to have been
worked out with the team, which may support the argument among many fans here
that the Oilers drastically overreacted.

Missing a game in pro football -- which has a 16-game regular-season schedule --
is considered more crucial than in the other three major sports, whose teams
play many more games.

It was that thinking that apparently prompted the Oilers general manager, Mike
Holovak, to threaten to dock $125,000 from Williams's salary, the per-game
paycheck for a 16-game season, and suspend Williams on top of that.

Public Opinion With Williams

Some die-hard football fans here may have agreed with that position. But the
hosts of several call-in radio programs in Houston, all of which have been
dominated by discussion of the controversy in the past few days, said there is
no question that fan sentiment is running overwhelmingly in favor of Williams.

"They cannot understand how the Oilers really expected the man to leave his
wife's side for a football game," said Dan Patrick, the host of "The Dan Patrick
Show," a call-in sports radio program on KSEV-AM here.

"People are irate," he added. "I think people are even more upset about this
than the Oilers choking in the Buffalo game." (In a now-infamous playoff contest
this past January, the Oilers blew a 35-3 lead and allowed the Buffalo Bills to
mount the biggest comeback in the history of the National Football League.)

The 27-year-old Williams said that he had no intention of missing the game and
that he and his wife had scheduled an induced labor for Monday, one day after
the game. But nature intervened in the form of contractions on Saturday, and he
said he never thought about abandoning her in the hospital, especially since she
had suffered a painful miscarriage during a tubal pregnancy last year.

"My family comes first," he said today. "That's the way I've always been, and
that's the way I always will be, long after I'm finished being a football
player."

Grievance Could Be Filed

Williams's agent, Leigh Steinberg, said today that the birth fell in the
category of a legitimate family emergency and he promised to file a grievance if
the Oilers move to dock his client's pay. He cited a range of statutes,
including the Family Leave Act approved by Congress earlier this year.

But the act provides for unpaid leave, which may give the Oilers leeway to
deduct pay even if they don't suspend Williams, and a vague clause in players'
contracts allowing teams to suspend them for "conduct detrimental to the team"
could come into play as well.

Greg Aiello, director of communications for the N.F.L., said it was not looking
into the situation. "It's a club matter at this point," he said. Aiello
explained that the collective bargaining agreement has provisions for
discipline. "If anyone wants to dispute a club fine, he can, under what's called
a non-injury grievance," Aiello said. "He can see an arbiter."

Despite the angry comments from the coaches and Holovak, a spokesman for the
team said the whole matter had been misunderstood by the public. The spokesman,
Chip Namias, said today that the Oilers had never intended for Williams to miss
the birth, which occurred at 6:25 P.M. Saturday, but that they saw no excuse for
him not to figure out a way to get to Boston by game time, almost 18 hours
later.

Like any interesting controversy, a bit of mystery enters at this point.
KTRH-AM, another local station with a sports radio program, broke the story of
how an unidentified person had called a local charter jet company Saturday night
to inquire about the cost of a flight to Boston the next morning.

Whoever made the call ultimately balked at the $12,000 estimate. Williams said
he believed his father had checked around for charters but found nothing
available, and added that he had not really focused on his options at that point
anyway because he was too busy making sure his wife and son were in good health.

One man who called a program on KPRC-AM said he had shredded eight season
tickets in disgust at the Oilers' treatment of Williams, while another named
Johnny said Williams should get the game ball and give it to his newborn son. "I
missed the birth of my two sons, and I would give anything to get that back,"
said Johnny.

Patrick, the radio announcer, said he had a suggestion for ending the
controversy. "If Bud Adams were thinking straight," he said, referring to the
Oilers' owner, "he would go out and buy the biggest Teddy Bear he could find in
the state of Texas, and hold a press conference to say this is a big
misunderstanding and the Oilers are all a happy family."


NAME: David Williams

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: David Williams. (Allsport)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1133 words



International A3-14

LIMITED MISSION FOR U.S. TROOPS
The top U.S. commander in Somalia said that additional American troops would
help defend U.N. troops but would not join United Nations forces patrolling the
streets or disarming the warring factions.  A1

ELITE ARMY UNIT LEAVING SOMALIA
President Clinton is withdrawing the elite Army Rangers from Somalia. The move
showed his intention to seek a political solution there, the President said.
A14


ENVOY'S TIES INVESTIGATED
The State Department is investigating whether President Clinton's chief envoy to
Somalia, Robert B. Oakley, violated conflict-of-interest laws in his work as a
private consultant, officials say.  A14

RAPE AS AN INSTRUMENT OF WAR
A U.N. commission has concluded that rape has been used as an instrument of war
in Bosnia, especially by Serbs and against Moslems, but it said the number may
be much lower than the 20,000 previously estimated.  A1

BOSNIA PRISONERS EXCHANGED
The three warring armies in Bosnia began a prisoner exchange involving about
6,400 people after months of reports of abuse in prison camps. As they left,
they told more tales of poor conditions and abuse.  A6

RUSSIA WEIGHS AID TO GEORGIA
With the Republic of Georgia under siege by rebels and the noose tightening on
the capital, Russia said it is considering joint action with other nearby states
after an appeal from Georgia's leader.  A6

Ukraine's leader said the country may keep some nuclear arms.  A7

IMPACT OF HAITI BLOCKADE IS FEAR
The blockade of Haiti is sure to cause economic hardship, analysts said, but the
question is whether it will cause the country's military leadership to give up
power without resorting to more violence.  A3

Sen. Bob Dole, lacking votes, negotiated on Haiti.  A3

Benazir Bhutto returned to office as Prime Minister in Pakistan.  A12

In a gesture, Israel freed its longest-held Palestinian prisoner.  A5

Hue Journal: A suicide reminds Vietnam of Buddhism's hold.  A4

National A16-21

PROJECT REBUFFED AGAIN
The House apparently pushed a stake through the heart of the $11 billion
superconducting supercollider program, voting again to reject financing for the
vast Texas atom-smasher.  A1

A LOBBYIST'S PERKS
A lobbyist enjoys special access at a hearing on the North American Free Trade
Agreement. Why? He is a former Congressman.  A1

CUSTOMS TIED TO PACT
The Clinton Administration and Congress tied a sweeping revision of customs
regulations to the proposed trade pact, part of an effort by the agreement's
supporters to mollify transportation industries.  A20

A BIGGER BILL FOR STATES
Administration officials disclosed that the Clinton health plan would require
some state and local governments to pay more than private employers pay for
providing insurance to workers.  A18

TRADE GROUP ACCUSED
A group that favors the Clinton health plan accused an insurance industry trade
group of deceptively creating a front group to lobby against the plan.  A18

A SENATOR'S PERSPECTIVE
Health care hearings at the Senate Finance Committee under Daniel Moynihan's
chairmanship are unlike any other health care hearings: a discussion of the
soaring rate of illegitimate births underscores the Senator's interest in the
subject.  A19

DENNY JUROR'S FEARS
A juror in the racially charged trial of two black men accused of beating a
white truck driver in the Los Angeles riots has voiced fears for her safety, the
forewoman said. The jury is still debating two unresolved charges in the case.
A16

THE VIEW FROM COVINA
In the former hometown of the beaten truck driver, many residents say that the
jurors who have mostly acquitted two men charged in the assault have been
"intimidated" by fears of rioting.  A16

Few of the deaths in the 1992 riots have resulted in prosecutions.  A16

A movie scene linked to the death of a teen-ager is being deleted. A21

The Federal Reserve's chairman defended the need for secrecy.  D1

Education Page B7

The painful process of cutting costs as college endowments earn less.

The slow turnaround of Chicago's schools after decentralization.

Trying to recruit the MTV generation to Virginia Military Institute.

Metro Digest B1

TERM-LIMIT VOTE APPROVED
New York State's Court of Appeals ruled that New York City voters should be
allowed to decide whether to limit the Mayor, members of the City Council and
other municipal officeholders to two four-year terms. The term-limit referendum
will be on the ballot Nov. 2.  A1

FLORIO AHEAD, BUT SLIPPING
Gov. Jim Florio's standing with the voters has begun to erode in New Jersey's
race for governor, according to the latest New York Times/ WCBS-TV news poll,
but he still maintains a commanding lead over Christine Todd Whitman.  A1

MOVING FOR BETTER AUTOPSIES
When a second autopsy of a high school teacher in Vineland, N.J., found
something the Cumberland County medical examiner had missed -- two bullets to
the head -- it gave impetus to a pathologist's campaign to improve forensic
medicine in the state.  A1

Sports B8-13

HOLD BABY OR HOLD THAT LINE?
In a collision between the family values of today's sensitive man and the macho
work ethic of pro football, a furor is unfolding over the Houston Oilers' threat
to discipline a player who missed a game last Sunday because he stayed with his
wife for the birth of his first child.  A1

Baseball: Blue Jays romp in Game 3.  B9
Football: Jets' Lageman expected to play.  B9
Hockey: Rangers lose to Ducks.  B9

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-13

For the "Deny Me" Decade, the right cookie.  C1
After the flood with Elizabeth Hanford Dole.  C1
For blacks, chef jobs finally call.  C1

Health Page C14

Personal Health: Living with psoriasis.
The politics behind the dispute over breast cancer research.

Arts/Entertainment C15-22

Times Square project to start with 42d Street theater.  C15
Choreography and fashion against AIDS.  C15
Draw puts Kasparov near match victory.  C16
Head of Prado Museum resigns.  C16
Theater: "Show Boat" in Toronto.  C15
"Snowing at Delphia." C17
Film: "Strictly Propaganda." C22
Books: "VanDerZee: Photographer: 1886-1983." C21
Television: Evening for classical-music fans.  C22

Obituaries D19

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

How to police New York.
Isolation for North Korea?
Topics: Get a life, coach.

Letters

Bob Herbert: Blacks killing blacks.
Aleksa Djilas: Next, Serbs vs. Serbs.
Michael C. McGovern: Goodbye Emily, hello Oprah.

Bridge C18

Chronicle B20

Crossword C21

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Hue Journal;
Once Again, a Fiery Suicide Sets Vietnam Aflame

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 928 words

DATELINE: HUE, Vietnam


Clutching a small bunch of flowers and a few pieces of fruit that would be his
final earthly offering to the Buddha, Dao Quang Ho walked up the mist-shrouded
stone steps that lead to one of Vietnam's most hallowed shrines, the Pagoda of
the Heavenly Lady. He also carried with him a box of matches and a small plastic
bottle filled with gasoline.

Buddhist monks who were in prayer at the pagoda on that cool, sunny morning in
May would later say that they saw Mr. Ho place the flowers and fruit on three
plates, setting one before each of the pagoda's three golden statues of the
Buddha. He then walked a hundred yards to a granite courtyard at the rear of the
pagoda, where he doused himself with gasoline before striking a match.

"A group of students saw the flames rise up," one of the pagoda's senior monks
said, raising a gray-robed arm to point out the charred granite slab that was
the site of the self-immolation. "He was still alive when we reached him. He did
not have pain in his face as he died. He kept saying, 'Buddha.' "

Whoever he was and whatever the reason for his suicide -- and both are still in
question -- Mr. Ho has through his death made public a serious rift within
Vietnamese Buddhism, the dominant religion among this nation's 70 million
people.

Abbot Under Arrest

The furor has been an uncomfortable reminder to the avowedly atheistic
Vietnamese Government of the power still held by this nation's dissident monks,
whose willingness to use suicide as a form of protest created some of the most
shocking, most unforgettable images of the Vietnam War and hastened the collapse
of a South Vietnamese government.

Mr. Ho's death set off a chain of events that has seen the abbot of the pagoda
and two other monks placed under arrest, the pagoda under police scrutiny, and
this central Vietnamese city as the site of one of the largest unauthorized
public gatherings in Vietnam since the war.

One of the monks awaiting trial has threatened that he, too, might commit
suicide by self-immolation to protest what he says is Government repression
against Buddhists.

The Government says that Mr. Ho, 52 years old, was a simple man from the far
south of Vietnam who abandoned his family earlier in the year, despondent over
his relationship with his wife.

Government-controlled newspapers have quoted his family members as saying that
it was his marital problems, not any desire to protest Government policy, that
led to his suicide. There is no evidence to contradict the Government's account.


Monks' Action Called Illegal

The head of the Government's Religious Affairs Committee, Vu Quang, said that
"bad monks" at the pagoda in Hue were trying to portray Mr. Ho as some sort of
Buddhist martyr.

"I can tell you, these monks who are trying to destroy the solidarity of
Buddhism in Vietnam, they are not supported by the majority of the Vietnamese
people," he said. "The actions of the monks in Hue was illegal. It was against
the doctrine of Buddhism, which is non-violence."

Still, the symbolism of Mr. Ho's death was lost on no one here. The 19th-century
Linh Mu pagoda, set on hills above the Perfume River in Vietnam's former
imperial capital, is a shrine both to the Buddha and to Vietnamese nationalism.

On display in the temple grounds is the grayish-blue Austin sedan that, on June
11, 1963, carried a 66-year-old monk, Quang Duc, from the Linh Mu pagoda to the
former South Vietnamese capital of Saigon, now Ho Chi Minh City, where he
committed suicide by setting himself aflame in a busy intersection to protest
the treatment of Buddhists by the South Vietnamese President, Ngo Dinh Diem.

The shocking image was captured in a famous photograph that, as it was
reproduced around the world, brought pressure on foreign governments to distance
themselves from President Diem. He was assassinated five months later.

Stronghold of Dissident Sect

The Linh Mu pagoda used to be a stronghold of the Unified Buddhist Church of
Vietnam, a dissident sect that has long resisted efforts by the Government to
integrate it into the state-sponsored Vietnam Buddhist Church, which was created
after North Vietnam overran the south in 1975.

After Mr. Ho committed suicide in May, the abbot of the Linh Mu pagoda posted a
sign near the site that read "At This Place, a Buddhist Follower Set Himself on
Fire," and he set to work planning a Buddhist funeral.

The Government refused to give permission for a Buddhist funeral -- it says it
still has no proof that the dead man was a devout Buddhist -- and asked the
abbot, Thich Tri Tuu, to come in for questioning about the suicide.

According to Hue residents, other members of the Linh Mu pagoda, fearing that
the abbot was being arrested instead of simply being questioned, staged a
sit-down strike at one of the city's busiest intersections.

Witnesses said the gathering drew hundreds, if not thousands, of people to the
intersection and shut down traffic on Vietnam's main north-south highway for
several hours. During the incident, a small group of men overturned a Government
car, which erupted in flames -- a rare act of anti-Government violence in this
authoritarian country.

Within weeks, the abbot and two other monks involved in the demonstration were
placed under arrest.

In a letter released in Paris by a Vietnamese dissident group, the abbot, Tri
Tuu, has warned that unless the Government relents in its "persecution" of
Buddhists, he, too, will commit suicide by self-immolation. "I will make my body
a torch to light the truth," he said.


LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Buddhist in Hue burned himself to death in May, and the temple
where he died attracted one of the largest protests in Vietnam since the war.
Tourists visited a shrine displaying the car that in 1963 transported a monk
whose self-immolation hightened protests against those then in power. (Philip
Shenon/The New York Times)

Map of Vietnam shows the location of Hue.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Pop;
Surfing U.S.A. Revisited

BYLINE: By Peter Watrous

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 277 words


On Friday night, as it featured the surf guitarist Dick Dale, the Grand was
filled with trash-culture enthusiasts, people for whom the overlooked and
peripheral aspects of American popular culture are in fact a mainstream. Mr.
Dale, who helped invent the surf-music genre in the late 1950's and early 60's,
fit the audience's needs perfectly: he is a nearly forgotten figure whose music
reflects the mania and voluminousness of American culture at that time.

Surf music, guitar-based and full of huge, whooshing sounds, is the expression
of a certain type of innocent American modernity, pure California and
pre-pollution, -Watergate and -Vietnam. Mr. Dale, playing a Fender Stratocaster,
the quintessential American pop guitar, was hellbent on making noise. He ran his
fingers up and down the fret board in long glissandos, sending shimmering
metallic sounds out into the room. And he twanged away, letting the low notes
ring like a jackhammer on a construction site. In pieces from his new album,
"Tribal Thunder" (Hightone), Mr. Dale dipped into mambos and Arab scales, and he
performed Juan Tizol's "Caravan" with flair.

Surf music is the product of rootlessness, and sounds like it: deracinated,
lacking the clear jazz, blues or country antecedents of most popular music. It
sounds simply American, optimistic and fun. Mr. Dale, who is 56, has a rough
sort of charisma, and he's a virtuoso, flinging riffs and silvery, chiming solos
around the tunes. But after 30 minutes, his music reveals itself as a formula
and the fun becomes incessant, stuck in a narrow, innocent groove, one tiny,
limited piece of the American picture. PETER WATROUS

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 21, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
An F.B.I. Success Story On the Mob and a Mole

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 22; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 952 words



Gangland
How the F.B.I. Broke the Mob
By Howard Blum
349 pages. Simon & Schuster. $23.

In its final 100 or so pages, Howard Blum's new book, "Gangland: How the F.B.I.
Broke the Mob," finally becomes an absorbing report on how a special unit of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation eventually gathered enough evidence to convict
John Gotti, the seemingly indestructible crime boss; on how the unit ferreted
out a mole who was feeding Mr. Gotti information on the F.B.I.'s strategy, and
on how Mr. Gotti's second in command, the violent Salvatore (Sammy Bull)
Gravano, was eventually induced to testify against his compatriots.

Yet by finally grabbing the reader's attention, "Gangland" triumphs over nothing
so much as itself. For until that point, its author proves himself more a master
of anticlimax than a storyteller. For instance, he starts his narrative with a
breathless account of Jan. 17, 1990, the day that all the electronic listening
gear that had been focused on Mr. Gotti's headquarters on Mulberry Street in
Little Italy was expected at long last to pick up the name of the mole who had
been undermining the investigation.

After circling back to fill in all the background of the scene, the narrative at
last catches up with itself and on page 264 reveals what the electronic
equipment disclosed that day. The answer is . . . absolutely nothing. "The
microphones could not pick up a word. The mole had escaped." Readers can loosen
their collars and read on.

In the meantime, Mr. Blum has devoted a significant portion of his background
story to the assassination of Mr. Gotti's predecessor as Gambino family boss,
Paul Castellano. This is a tale that was told with much more verve and wit,
albeit from Mr. Castellano's point of view instead of Mr. Gotti's, in a book
published two years ago by two F.B.I. agents who worked on the case: "Boss of
Bosses: The Fall of the Godfather: The F.B.I. and Paul Castellano," by Joseph F.
O'Brien and Andris Kurins.

Mr. Blum's approach is apparent in one typical paragraph. "The night sky
exploded. Platinum tracers arched overhead. Suddenly, there was another deep
boom, only to be followed by a suspended moment -- and then, as if bursting from
heaven itself, a magnificent red star filled the sky. It burned like a
supernova. It was at this instant, just a few minutes before midnight on July 4,
1987, that John Gotti walked out the door of the Bergin and toward the street."

The purpose of this incendiary prose is to show how Mr. Gotti once masterminded
an illegal fireworks display, a point whose vestigial shock value is undermined
by an anecdote told earlier by Mr. Blum in which the F.B.I. is ridiculed for its
concern with something as petty as illegal fireworks.

Even when the narrative eventually takes hold and the mole is identified, we
realize that Mr. Blum has been telling this particular character's story from
the start in a series of arbitrarily placed passages that have no logical
connection with anything else that is happening along the way. This only
heightens the sense that the author is clumsily manipulating his readers,
something he also does by referring several times to information being exchanged
by two characters yet refusing to tell what that information is.

The resulting garble is unfortunate because much evidence of estimable work is
apparent in "Gangland." Mr. Blum himself has clearly done a job of investigative
digging, with techniques that ranged from pestering the F.B.I. to letting it be
known he had sold his story to the movies, which, as he reports, prompted
several previously reticent Federal agents to seek him out and "suggest why Tom
Cruise, perhaps, would be the perfect choice to play them."


And the story he tells is important. Law-enforcement agents took aim at the
heart of a criminal operation instead of at its appendages, and with spies and
the latest electronic gadgetry succeeded in making a major kill.

"Gangland" could have been inspiring, with its depiction of the Vietnam veterans
in the special unit who were searching for a decent cause to follow and who
fought successful jurisdictional battles against rival prosecutors who had
little more in mind than publicity, at least if we are to believe Mr. Blum's
interpretation. Bruce Mouw, the leader of the unit, has the makings of an
American legend, but what is missing in the book is the high style of Tom
Wolfe's reporting in "The Right Stuff," which managed to worship its
space-exploring heroes without ever losing its cool.

What you get instead is an earthbound story written in prose that can cause the
gears of the mind to freeze.  For instance, referring to a conflict between the
special F.B.I. unit and Diane Giacalone, an assistant United States Attorney in
Brooklyn, Mr. Blum writes: "When one frustrated member of C-16, James Abbott,
appeared in her office to proclaim, 'If you were a man, I'd hit you in the
face,' she jumped up from her desk. 'Don't let that stop you,' she challenged.
'Take your best shot.' And to her credit, no one doubted that she was less than
serious." Which, strictly speaking, means that she was really just kidding.

What you get is tediously obvious anecdotes like a three-page account of the
caretaker who for some reason kept bringing women back to Mr. Gotti's clubhouse
in the middle of the night. As the F.B.I. agents eventually figured out after
much scratching of their heads and pressing of their ears to the door, his
purpose was to have sex in Mr. Gotti's lair.

What you get in "Gangland" is a rushed and garbled execution of an admirable
project. It's almost as if in going away to jail for life, John Gotti had taken
the life of the story with him.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Howard Blum (Sigrid Estrada/Simon & Schuster)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 23, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A Fitting Penitence?

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 144 words


To the Editor:

Included in the sentence imposed on Katherine Ann Power for her involvement in
the 1970 Boston bank robbery and killing of Officer William A. Schroeder is the
prohibition against her profiting financially from the notoriety she has created
by the crime, her fugitive years, the decision to turn herself in or
imprisonment.

Wouldn't it be fitting if this well-educated, introspective woman wrote a book
about her experiences and gave all profits to the Schroeder family? Such an
assignment would satisfy the court's injunction; the Schroeders would receive
some monetary restitution for their irrecoverable loss; Ms. Power would further
her penitence, and we might gain some illumination of the pressures of the
1960's and 70's that caused many young citizens to defy our laws.

ROBERT J. MARMORSTEIN
Hackensack, N.J., Oct. 18, 1993

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 24, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Advertisements for Themselves: A Letter from Lewis Lapham

SECTION: Section 7; Page 39; Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 195 words


To the Editor:

As a former chairman of the board of the Cowles Media Company, I would like to
reply to your review of Willie Morris's "New York Days." The review is tainted
by numerous inaccurate statements, most of them from Mr. Morris, but some from
sources, equally uninformed, quoted by him.

I worked for John Cowles Sr. for 40 years. He was not a "Vietnam hawk," as Mr.
Morris describes him in the book, and he did not consistently support
Republicans -- his newspapers endorsed both Lyndon Johnson and Hubert Humphrey
for President.

I worked with John Cowles Jr. for 25 years and alongside him in our Harper's
days, but except for Mr. Morris (whose opinion is plainly biased) I never met
anyone who didn't think John was exceptionally intelligent.

Willie Morris scored many successes at the magazine, but the review puts it
well: "Perhaps he was not in the right post at the right time." Mr. Morris
himself wonders, "Should I have always just been a writer, and never tried the
editor's role?"

It should also be noted that with Lewis Lapham as editor, Harper's today is
enjoying both black ink and literary prizes.

OTTO A. SILHA
Minneapolis

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 24, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Profile: Kenneth Stone;
His Message for Mom & Pop: There's Life After Wal-Mart

BYLINE: By BARNABY J. FEDER

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1582 words

DATELINE: MERRILLVILLE, Ind.


IN the late 1980's, after spending more than a decade helping Iowa towns and
businesses cope with change, a rising tide of phone calls and speaking
invitations alerted Dr. Kenneth Stone that he might have the best data in the
nation on what happens when Wal-Mart and other mass merchants move into a
community.

Since then, the mild-mannered 57-year-old Iowa State University economist has
diligently accumulated something even more precious: insights into how local
retailers can survive -- even thrive -- when Wal-Mart and its competitors, like
Kmart, the nation's No. 2 retail chain, roar into town.

Now, as mass merchants expand across the landscape, Mr. Stone is being run
ragged. Although admits that he lacks stage presence and a gift for gab,
audiences, like the lawn and garden shop owners who recently came here to
northwest Indiana to hear him, can't get enough of him.  "What's fascinating
about all this is that a lot of people say they have come back to hear me two or
three times, even though I think I am a boring speaker," Mr. Stone said.

That demand certainly won't taper off as long as he does so little to capitalize
on his sudden renown. The ride from obscurity to guru status has made Mr. Stone
richer than he ever imagined, but not nearly as wealthy as he could be. By
hanging on to his job as a state extension economist, Mr. Stone is committed to
working free within Iowa. And when he uses his free time for outside consulting,
he sticks to a standard fee of $1,000 plus expenses, a fee that is laughably
modest on the business consulting circuit. Although Mr. Stone said he plans to
experiment with variable fees, he is determined to stay available to small
communities and groups for whom even $1,000 is "a stretch."

Typically, Mr. Stone starts his talks with a broad perspective. Here, he told
the garden shop owners they were seeing the "over-storing of America," citing
not just such mass merchants as Wal-Mart, but shopping clubs and "category
killer" chains like Toys 'R' Us. "The reason I pick on Wal-Mart is that they are
leading the way," he said.

In truth, Mr. Stone does not so much pick on Wal-Mart and its rivals as pick
over their strategies and use them as lessons. Some advice comes in the form of
admonishments to learn what works, like staying open on Sunday. Some advice
centers on how to cooperate with mass merchants, like signing agreements to
service equipment they sell. And some comes down to blunt warnings, like don't
try to undercut their price on items like disposable diapers or toothpaste
unless you are located far enough away that they are not routinely checking your
prices.

One key to Mr. Stone's appeal is that he persuades audiences that he has thought
about their individual concerns. Here, for example, instead of simply saying it
is important to carry product lines that Wal-Mart overlooks, he mentioned bonsai
trees and other specifics. And he talked about Kmart, which has been emphasizing
lawn and garden products.

Mr. Stone has delivered similar pep talks to tire and carpet makers, newspaper
distributors, hardware shops, eyeglass retailers and grocers. He has done it in
Iowa towns so small they barely appear on maps, and in cities as large as
Oakland, Calif. He has traveled to every state except Delaware in the last five
years.

In recent months, with Wal-Mart, based in Bentonville, Ark., headed toward the
New York City region, Mr. Stone has spoken to New York-area grocers at the
Tavern on the Green restaurant in Central Park, to rural retailers and community
leaders from New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania at a meeting in Middletown,
N.Y., and on Long Island.

The eldest of seven children who grew up in St. Marie, an agricultural hamlet in
southeastern Illinois, Mr.  Stone recalls suffering "unbearable shyness" when he
began speaking publicly. He seems to have as many anecdotes as Wal-Mart does
products but, faced with an audience, he tells them sparsely, building toward
conclusions rather than punchlines. In a story used to underscore the value of
good labeling, he simply said he had never realized Wal-Mart catered to elderly
shoppers by making price labels large enough to read without bifocals until he
absentmindedly left his glasses in the car on a recent visit to an outlet in
Iowa.

Mr. Stone may not entertain audiences, but his data often surprise them.
Wal-Mart and the other discounters, for instance, attract more high-income
customers than is commonly believed. They have begun to offer better service
too, using such tactics as hiring horticulturalists for their lawn and garden
sections.

While discounters are zealous about setting bargain prices on several hundred
items, there are tens of thousands more whose prices are similar to -- or higher
than -- those of smaller retailers. And although everyone realizes the mass
merchants are growing, the magnitude of this still stuns many people when Mr.
Stone lays it out for them.

THE centerpiece, of course, is Wal-Mart, which grew from $1.2 billion in sales
in 1980 to $55.5 billion in 1992. "This company has a good chance of becoming
the biggest business in the United States," Mr. Stone said.

Still, the secret of Mr. Stone's success is that his data give him the ring of
authority. That aura is reinforced by his bearing, which includes traces of a
military career that took him on two tours of duty in Vietnam. And his talk
reflects the years he worked as an engineer in the military industry before
seeking a Ph. D. in agricultural economics at the University of Illinois.

"He reaffirmed a lot of things we knew we needed to know," said Steve Tholen,
whose family owns the Tholen's Landscape and Garden Center stores in Kankakee
and Boubonnais, Ill. With 35 employees and just $1.7 million in revenues,
Tholen's now finds itself within a few miles of a Wal-Mart, a new Super Kmart,
Venture, Target, three big home-improvement chain stores and three lumber yards,
all of which are aiming at parts of Tholen's business.

Mr. Tholen and his wife, Nancy, said Mr. Stone persuaded them that they had to
spend more time checking competitors' prices and more time and money training
employees to offer customers expert advice.

Dr. Stone's favorite testimonial came from a hardware shop owner who came up to
him after a meeting in Denver and said an earlier talk by Mr. Stone had saved
his business. The shop owner had been planning to quit when a Wal-Mart opened
nearby but, after hearing Mr. Stone, he sought and won a contract to service
power equipment sold by the discount giant. He ended up with higher total sales,
Mr. Stone said.

Mr. Stone has mixed feelings about the thank-you message that Emily Teller of
Westford, Mass., left on his answering machine last month. She thanked him for
the contacts he provided and the role his research had played in helping her and
other community activists block an attempt by Wal-Mart to open in their town.

That research is not entirely unfavorable to Wal-Mart. It shows that the
original wave of expansion actually broadened the shopping region of many towns,
helping to bring new customers to local merchants. For some stores, the added
customers offset business lost to Wal-Mart. Increasingly, though, the chains are
making sure fewer people must travel long distances to get to them, leaving
local retailers to fight it out with the discounters.

Mr. Stone is delighted if such data help persuade communities not to grant
discounters tax abatements, but he does not want his work to be used to impose
artificial restraints on the mass merchants' growth. Indeed, Mr. Stone said he
has no qualms about sharing retail trade data with chains seeking good locations
in Iowa. And he has no sympathy for local merchants who are unwilling to work
harder and smarter when competition picks up.

Wal-Mart is among those impressed by such evenhandedness. "As near as I can
tell, Dr. Stone tells people facts about Wal-Mart, about retailing and about
their business, and lets the chips fall where they may," said Donald Shinkle,
Wal-Mart's chief spokesman.

MR. STONE did not see anything momentous brewing in 1988, when he published
research on the impact of Wal-Mart's arrival on some small Iowa communities. He
had been beavering away at the obscure task of studying the economic decline of
rural communities since getting his Ph. D. in 1976.

By taking advantage of Iowa's sales tax reporting system, which churns out data
from the state's 856 towns and cities by retail category, Mr. Stone built a
unique data base to study Wal-Mart's impact, and mass retailing trends in
general. Once word of his studies got around, journalists, retailers and
economic development officials around the nation began calling Mr. Stone.

"It's been quite a run," he said. He credits the consulting income with putting
two sons through college and helping him and his wife, Janis, an Iowa State
researcher, put away more retirement savings. But they have not moved from the
house they have lived in for 16 years. Until recently, Mr. Stone had always felt
that demand for his insights was about to peak. Now he expects to have more
business than he can handle.

Why not hire an associate, as have many successful consultants? Mr.  Stone says
it would be appealing to have more time for research, but he has already turned
down several offers from retail executives and others to work with him. "I have
too difficult a time coordinating myself to take anyone else on," he said.

NAME: Kenneth Stone

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kenneth Stone, an Iowa economist, is in demand for his insights
on mega-stores' impact. (Jeffrey Davis for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 24, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: October 24, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1430 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  63   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 2      3   2   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                and a poem.

 3      2   4   LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues
                the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour."

 4      4   4   SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two
                Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics
                and murder.

 5      5   9   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 6      6   7   THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                Concluding the "Griffin & Sabine" trilogy.

 7      7  28   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 8      8  32   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 9          1   A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A
                young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in
                Victorian England's high society.

 10    13  40   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                illustrated cards and letters.

 11     9   7   STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The problems,
                political and sexual, of a Florida Congressman.

 12*   10   4   POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $23.) A single
                mother and her teen-age daughter go on a spree after winning
                $60 million in a lottery.

 13    11  11   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction
                of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and
                woman and for the woman's first lover.

 14    12  12   STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a
                train robber and killer.

 15    15   2   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &
                Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates
                a child's mysterious death.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1          1   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 2      1   7   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 3      2  24   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 4      3   9   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 5      4   3   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 6*     7  10   MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays
                suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected
                ways and places.

 7     10   3   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by
                Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of
                marriage.

 8      9   4   THE FOUNTAIN OF AGE, by Betty Friedan. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                A call for men and women to regard life after age 60 as an
                exciting adventure.

 9      5  63   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 10     6  15   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A
                psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their
                effects on a person's self.

 11     8  20   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 12         1   STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski.
                (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played
                Capt. James Tiberius Kirk.

 13    12  45   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A
                psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.

 14        17   THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A
                journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history
                of the 1950's.

 15    14   3   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      3   2   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.

 2      1  23   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.

 3      2  13   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 4      4  17   EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.)
                Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 9, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.

THE ARABISTS: The Romance of an American Elite, by Robert D. Kaplan. (Free
Press, $24.95.) A thoughtful, balanced view of the inbred State Department
specialists whose fluffs (like their dealings with Saddam Hussein) have received
more attention than their successes (like the exodus of the Ethiopian Jews).

THE COST OF TALENT: How Executives and Professionals Are Paid and How It Affects
America, by Derek Bok. (Free Press, $22.95.) Mr. Bok, formerly president of
Harvard, examines, documents and analyzes the trends that have given David
Letterman an income more than 50 times that of President Clinton.

THE CROCODILE BIRD, by Ruth Rendell. (Crown, $22.) A coolly composed allegorical
suspense tale (not dependent on a detective) about a girl who accepts her
mother's tyranny though seeming to know that the woman is a mad murderer.

DAPHNE DU MAURIER: The Secret Life of the Renowned Storyteller, by Margaret
Forster. (Doubleday, $25.) An insightful life of the popular author whose
resentment at being born female never challenged the social arrangements that
depressed the status of women.

THE GIRL WHO TROD ON A LOAF, by Kathryn Davis. (Knopf, $23.) A heated, dramatic
novel narrated by Francie, an underachieving composer who finds redemption by
completing an inherited unfinished opera.

THE HOLDER OF THE WORLD, by Bharati Mukherjee. (Knopf, $22.) A woman of today
celebrates the life of a woman who lived three centuries ago and across two
cultures in this brilliantly conceived and executed novel.

MARGUERITE YOURCENAR: Inventing a Life, by Josyane Savigneau. (University of
Chicago, $25.) Yourcenar (1903-87), author of "Memoirs of Hadrian," intense,
cerebral, fascinated by sexual ambiguity, has found a perfect biographer in the
patient, wise, industrious Ms. Savigneau.

PRONTO, by Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $21.95.) Mr. Leonard's latest antihero, a
cheapo operator for the Miami syndicate, flees to Italy, pursued by the Feds and
by two quaint thugs who can't keep their minds on their work.

REMEMBERING BABYLON, by David Malouf. (Pantheon, $20.) Mr. Malouf's adroit
seventh novel confronts a band of settlers in Australia with Gemmy, a boy born
white and raised by aborigines; they dread that their own identities might be
compromised like his.

TRAVELS WITH LIZBETH, by Lars Eighner. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A writer who
until very recently made homelessness his full-time job has found a strikingly
unconventional voice and form to deal with life as the literate don't normally
live it.

THE WARBURGS: The Twentieth-Century Odyssey of a Remarkable Jewish Family, by
Ron Chernow. (Random House, $30.) Mr. Chernow's vast Warburg saga follows the
fates of a rich, thoroughly secularized German Jewish family betrayed by the
nation and culture they loved.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 24, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Advertisements for Themselves: A Letter from Lewis Lapham

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2319 words


To the Editor:

Every publishing season sponsors at least one cause celebre, and in New York
this fall the merchants of high-end literary opinion assigned the show window to
a book that dwells, not surprisingly, on themselves. "New York Days" (review,
Sept. 5) is a sentimental memoir in which the author, Willie Morris, describes
his tenure as the editor of Harper's Magazine in the years 1967-71 as a lost
golden age of American letters, when journalism was poetry and all the writers
at all the tables at Elaine's were the natural children of William Faulkner or
Henry James.

Preceded by a murmur of gossip in late August, the book made the promotional
rounds in early September (appearing as display goods in New York magazine,
Vanity Fair, The New Yorker and The New York Times Book Review), and on the
radio talk show circuit Mr. Morris told his tale of genius thwarted and art
betrayed in fragments cut to the measure of the retail trade. Faithful to the
text, he didn't omit a single cliche -- sensitive but lionhearted son of the
literary South travels north from Mississippi to rescue the lamp of American
literature from the cave of the Philistines; heroic editor, providentially
arrived on Manhattan's Upper East Side, rallies to the banners of conscience
every famous journalist in New York and wages remorseless war against the
enemies of innocence and truth; for a brief and shining moment the world is made
of metaphors, but then the awful day dawns on which the rain comes to Camelot,
and Mr. Morris is brought down by the hounds of finance capitalism.

Toward the end of "New York Days" Mr. Morris takes me to task for refusing to
endorse his version of the events in question, and for neglecting to resign as
one of the magazine's contributing writers when he resigned as its editor. Then
as now, I thought his gesture foolish and unnecessary, but he talks about what
was a difference of opinion as if it were a crime of lese-majeste. Although I
didn't become editor of Harper's Magazine until 1976, five years after Mr.
Morris returned to the South, he continues to imagine that somehow I arranged
his abrupt exit from the New York literary stage. The suspicion is of a piece
with the rest of his tale.

My own memory of the time and place so flatly contradicts his portrait in
nostalgic pastel (in the specific instances as well as the general propositions)
that on reading his book and its attendant publicity, I assumed that one of us
was looking at the reverse images seen in a mirror. What Mr. Morris presents as
a golden age I remember as an age of tinsel; his cast of fearless prophets I
remember as a crowd of self-important pharisees; the books that he names as the
last page proofs of authentic journalism (among them "In Cold Blood," by Truman
Capote; "Miami and the Siege of Chicago," by Norman Mailer; and "The Best and
the Brightest," by David Halberstam) I would name as the first spawn of the
synthetic melodrama that leads, more or less directly, to Oprah and Geraldo and
Joe McGinniss pretending to be Teddy Kennedy; what to Mr. Morris's mind appears
as disinterested reporting appears to my mind as relentless self-promotion, and
well before I had reached the end of "New York Days" I thought that it captured,
all too perfectly, the spirit of an age that debased the currency of its
idealism with the coinage of celebrity.

Given the prevailing rates of inflation cheapening the measures of value
elsewhere in the society, the loss of definition and purpose in what used to be
called the fourth estate was probably inevitable. Before 1960 most of the
writers and editors working on newspapers in New York understood that they had
more in common with carpenters or stone masons than they did with diplomats or
poets. Many of them were self-educated, and they hired themselves out as
journeymen, not as immortal artists. Having come of age in the 1930's and 40's,
they were schooled in the lessons of poverty, and they tended to identify with
the crowd in the bleachers rather than with the swells in the box seats. If
asked to state their occupation, they would have said "reporter" or
"newspaperman" (the term "journalist" pertained only to Englishmen and fops),
and they sought to write a simple and translucent prose, the idea being to make
more clearly visible the subject of the story.

I was attracted to the trade in the late 1950's because it seemed to offer a
means of questioning the delusions of grandeur that were beginning to afflict
the American oligarchy. As an apprentice member of that oligarchy, educated at a
New England prep school and Yale University, I understood that in return for
admission to the box seats the guests were expected to admire the benign wisdom
of the corporations buying the golf balls or the salmon on toast. Not wanting to
pay the price of a ticket, and admiring instead the skepticism of Ambrose
Bierce, H. L. Mencken and I. F. Stone, I assumed that the newspaperman who did
his job correctly couldn't expect to be welcomed with grateful applause at the
nation's better country clubs.

So bleak a prospect didn't sit well with the temper of the times. The 60's were
about having it both ways -- a reputation for principled objection and
first-class hotel suites at the political conventions, a publisher's advance
extended to six figures and a blue work shirt signifying the author's contempt
for money. The voices of conscience decorated the dinner tables of power, and
within a year of President John F. Kennedy's glamorous arrival in the White
House, the suddenly respectable "profession of journalism" was attracting
volunteers from Harvard and Princeton. The new recruits arrived with bound
volumes of the absolute truth, comfortable in the assumption that the aura of
academic entitlement conferred the badges of moral as well as intellectual
superiority. The rates of pay kept pace with the expanding wealth of the
communications industries, and by the end of the decade the higher-priced
operatives found it easy to regard themselves as the peers of the political and
theatrical figures about whom they composed their best-selling romances. The
ambiguity of the Vietnam War compounded the confusion, and just as the moralists
among them came to imagine that they were better qualified to govern the country
than the candidates elected to public office, so also they dressed themselves in
the mantles of self-righteousness.

IF before 1960 most people recognized irreducible differences among journalism,
literature, politics and the movies, the distinctions dissolved under the
technical and epistemological pressures of the next 10 years. The lines between
fact and fiction became as irrelevant as they were difficult to distinguish, and
the several forms of expression once known as the lively arts fused into the
common alloy of the mass media. News was entertainment and entertainment was
news, and everybody was staging his or her shows and special effects in the same
theater of celebrity.

Under the rubric of what was beginning to be called the new journalism, magazine
writers claimed the exemptions of novelists manque. The presumption allowed them
to arrange the materials at hand (descriptions of scene, tones of voice,
fragments of conversation, impressions of character, etc.) into whatever designs
attracted the most applause and the highest fees. By substituting the veneer of
a precocious style for the weight of fact, and making little or no distinction
between subject and object (the interviewer being as important as, often more
important than, the interviewee), they presented their own advertisements for
reality as literal renderings of the world of historical event.

In the hands of a genuinely accomplished writer, the sleight of hand sometimes
resulted in a genuinely good book (Tom Wolfe's "Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test" or
Norman Mailer's "Executioner's Song"), but mostly the license to invent dialogue
and assign motive produced portentous tracts ("The Powers That Be," by David
Halberstam; "Veil," by Bob Woodward) made of the same poor stuff as television
docudrama.

The technique worked reasonably well on the margins of society -- among Hell's
Angels and hopeful movie actresses, on tour with politicians, Jackie Onassis and
other journalists. The technique didn't work so well among people who didn't
need the publicity. Unless the journalist first translated himself into a
sycophant, he had trouble gaining access to the higher tiers of authority. Who
would talk to the fellow except in lies and half-truths? Certainly not newspaper
publishers or network executives; nobody in the investment banks, the Pentagon,
the influential law firms, the White House or the corporations. The high-priced
journalists of the day resolved the dilemma by taking to heart the lessons of
the Age of Aquarius and "Jesus Christ Superstar," and they began to write books
-- ostensibly about war, or politics, or the Presidency -- that could have been
uniformly entitled "All About Me."

As a corollary to the assertion of artistic temperament, the journalists coming
to prominence in the late 1960's appropriated the pose of bohemianism. Mr.
Morris strikes the pose throughout the whole length of "New York Days," placing
much of the book's action at the tables in Elaine's and presenting himself and
his companions as embattled artists who disdain the bribes and comforts of
bourgeois success.

Nothing in the book seemed to me as false, or so plainly at odds with my own
memory. Elaine's didn't achieve its notoriety during the 1960's because it was a
refuge for the avant-garde. Then as now, the restaurant served a double purpose,
both as a point of exit from the drawing rooms of polite convention and as a
port of entry into the gossip columns and the big money. Mr. Morris and his
friends appreciated the merit of the second purpose, paying assiduous court to
the ranking magnificoes of the media establishment, collecting the acquaintance
of well-known writers as eagerly as boys collecting autographed baseballs,
saying whatever it was necessary to say to receive an invitation to East Hampton
or Martha's Vineyard. Mostly they talked about the proofs of their own
importance, about playing tennis with Ben Bradlee or eating oysters with Sophia
Loren, about the effrontery of publishers who neglected to provide them with
limousines when they toured their books through Texas.

Very little of the supposedly tough-minded journalism that appeared in Harper's
Magazine during the late 1960's risked giving offense to the wisdom in office.
The putative champions of liberty took up the cry of dissent only after it had
become profitable and safe. The magazine published its denunciations of the
Vietnam War when the crowds of angry students were already in the streets; the
sentiments in favor of the civil rights movement appeared at a time when they
had become the stuff of corporate advertising.

An air of conscience-stricken protest was in keeping with the spirit of the age,
and most of the people who showed up in Elaine's in the years 1967-71 understood
the joke. The humor and good feeling of the place was grounded in the tone of
irony, but Mr. Morris was one of the people who believed their own press
notices. He reproduces the effect in "New York Days" when he talks about
Harper's Magazine as if his brief tenure as its editor encompassed the entire
143 years of its existence. Indifferent to the past and resentful of the future,
he succeeds in writing a memoir almost utterly bereft of a sense of history.

Although I can understand why Mr. Morris would want to write the book, I'm less
certain of the reasons for its polite reception in New York publishing circles.
By and large the reviews were sympathetic, and although the book itself was hard
to praise (the kindest adjective that anybody could come up with was
"romantic"), the critics managed to fill the assigned space with the bibelots of
their own nostalgia.

Maybe they have come to regret the trend toward solipsism that has afflicted
American writing over the last 20 years, a trend that argues not so much for the
lack of literary talent as for the loss of a standard by which people can judge
the acts of the moral and artistic imagination. The bookstores resemble circuses
and fairs, and the thousands of books so gaudily tricked up on the shelves
clamor for attention in the wheedling voices of fortunetellers, money-changers,
animal trainers, herbalists, cooks, sorcerers, augurs, gamblers, military
captains and successful thieves. The author-who-would-be-king achieves
expression in his life rather than his art, but as each new book becomes a
further dramatization in the theater of self, nobody can decide whether the acts
should be performed on a stage, in dumb show or on a trapeze.

Against the backdrop of celebrity biography, maybe Mr. Morris's exhibit of
illusions preserved looks like a window decoration by Ralph Lauren. In place of
shaving brushes and steamer trunks and English riding boots, Mr. Morris offers
square-jawed writers in tweed coats, striking defiant poses against the
establishment, smoking Lucky Strikes. Most of the critics perceived a
resemblance to the dreams of their own youth, and with the conspicuous exception
of Louis Menand in The New Yorker, they were glad of the chance to tell
themselves a fairy tale.

Yes, dearly beloved, once upon a time in America, and not so very long ago,
books still meant something and literature hadn't become a regional dialect
spoken only in the universities. The merchants of truth and light apparently
were so grateful for the romance of Peter Pan, still at large in Never-Never
Land, that they, like Mr. Morris, missed the irony. Even as they deplored the
shabbiness of the goods in their latter-day literary emporium, they gave thanks
for the counterfeit coin in which they counted their losses.

LEWIS H. LAPHAM
New York

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Willie Morris, editor of Harper's Magazine, 1967; Lewis H.
Lapham, editor of Harper's Magazine, 1980. (NYT)

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 24, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD

BYLINE: By JENNIFER STEINHAUER

SECTION: Section 13; Page 13; Column 1; The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 556 words



LONG ISLAND CITY

Artists Open Their Doors For a Walking Tour

The local painters, sculptors, photographers and printmakers who make up the
membership of Long Island City Artists will open their studios to the public
today.

The walking tour of the studios, in some cases the artists' homes, will enable
collectors and the simply curious to view works in progress, from photographs to
constructions to religious sculpture. Maps of the walking tour will be available
in all of the studios, and a group show will be on display in the Artloft's Hall
Gallery at 37-06 36th Street.

Long Island City, today from noon to 6 P.M. For directions, (718) 784-2935.

JAMAICA

Teen-Agers' Symposium: 'Nature of a Brother'

York College and Planned Parenthood of New York City will sponsor a symposium on
issues affecting young men coming of age in New York. The discussion, "Nature of
a Brother," will be led by youth counselors who will touch on topics like family
planning, drug addiction recovery, kinship roles and employment.

"We want to promote a sense of responsibility," said Peter Hundley, a community
health educator at Planned Parenthood of Queens. "We want to help adolescents
reach out to their brother and help them see what their roles and
responsibilities are in the future."

York College, Room M107, 94-20 Guy R. Brewer Blvd., Jamaica; Friday, 1 P.M. to 5
P.M.; free; (718) 526-5990.

MIDTOWN

Behind the Camera Of Frederick Wiseman

The Museum of Television and Radio will be host to two seminars with the
documentary film maker Frederick Wiseman this week as part of a retrospective of
his work.

On Thursday, Mr. Wiseman will discuss his often-controversial films, which have
included gritty examinations of a Philadelphia high school and of a G.I.
training camp during the Vietnam War. His first documentary, "Titicut Follies"
(1967), focused on conditions at the Bridgewater State Hospital for the
Criminally Insane; the film was banned by the Massachusetts Supreme Court on the
grounds that it violated the privacy of inmates. The ban was overturned in 1991.

Excerpts from these and other Wiseman films will be shown and the director will
answer questions from the audience.

On Friday the film maker will introduce a screening of "Hospital," his
documentary on New York City's Metropolitan Hospital. All 25 of his films will
be shown throughout the winter.

The Museum of Television and Radio, 25 West 52d Street; "A Conversation With
Frederick Wiseman," Thursday, 6 P.M. to 7:30 P.M.; "Hospital" screening with
introduction by Mr. Wiseman, Friday, 6 P.M. to 7:30 P.M.; single tickets $10, $8
for members; both programs $18, $14 for members; (212) 621-6800.

BENSONHURST

From Pop to Opera, Music at the Library

The Italian Opera Company, a small production company based in Bensonhurst, will
present "From Broadway to Opera" at a local branch of the New York Public
Library on Saturday. The free performance will include selections from "The King
and I" and Puccini's "Madame Butterfly" as well as Neapolitan folk songs.

Founded in 1970, the company performs frequently at small theaters, libraries
and schools around the city.

New York Public Library Highlawn Branch, 1664 West 13th Street, Brooklyn;
Saturday, 2 P.M.; (718) 837-1700.
    JENNIFER STEINHAUER

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Stabler," by Janice Dale Klein. Frederick Wiseman (John
Goodman/Zipporah Films)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 24, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

What He Did for His Country

BYLINE: By Douglas Brinkley;  Douglas Brinkley, visiting associate director of
the Eisenhower Center at the University of New Orleans, is the author of "Dean
Acheson: The Cold War Years, 1953-1971."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1589 words



PRESIDENT KENNEDY
Profile of Power.
By Richard Reeves.
Illustrated. 798 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $30.

IN the 30 years since John F. Kennedy's assassination, hundreds of books have
risen out of the ashes of his life and times. The myth of Camelot held sway in
the decade following his death, in large part because of the potency of "A
Thousand Days," by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., and "Kennedy," by Theodore C.
Sorensen, both published in 1965. Only the daft would have contemplated
embarking on a biography of the martyred President in the wake of a figure like
Mr. Schlesinger. Slowly, though, a historical revisionism took root, covering
Camelot and the New Frontier like kudzu. The glowing image of Kennedy began to
fade before a combination of newly revealed facts and malicious lies. Our
collective paranoia fed on new and improved assassination conspiracy theories,
as we lapped up the tabloids' sensationalized stories of J.F.K.'s sexual
escapades. Many historians went along for the ride, reveling in the destruction
of the Kennedy shrine.

Every popular President inevitably undergoes a certain deflation, but the extent
to which some scholars have tried to debunk Kennedy verges on vendetta,
political assassination carried out under the flimsy banner of investigating the
question of character. And so just when it seemed that Kennedy's reputation
might be irrevocably tarnished, along comes the syndicated columnist and former
reporter for The New York Times Richard Reeves to redress the balance with a
beautifully written, judicious and disinterested appraisal of Kennedy's
Presidency.

"President Kennedy: Profile of Power" is an engaging and elegant narrative of
the Kennedy era, although as biography it falls short of capturing the full
human dimensions of our 35th President. Mr. Reeves offers one of the most
intimate and telling accounts of what it is like to be President, to emerge from
a frenetic political campaign and find oneself alone in the Oval Office. But by
focusing predominantly on his thesis that Kennedy should be studied as a
pragmatic cold-war power broker, Mr. Reeves never fully explores the complex,
multifaceted man; at the book's end, J.F.K. remains one-dimensional and elusive.

Mr. Reeves tells his story unsparingly, with great verve and vigor. The
transition in 1961 from oldest to youngest President ever elected was one of the
most dramatic in our history, a true passing of the torch. But as the author
makes clear, Dwight D. Eisenhower passed on more than a torch to the then
43-year-old President-elect, who had won a razor-thin victory over Richard
Nixon. He also handed over an explosive international situation, one in which a
crisis loomed around every bend: a showdown in Berlin; a guerrilla president in
Cuba who had taken a liking to Karl Marx and Soviet munitions; an Asian policy
in shambles; a Latin America gradually unifying under the slogan "Yankee, go
home"; a Soviet leader who had come to believe his own exaggerated boasts about
burying the United States; a post-Suez Western Europe that questioned America's
commitment to NATO and demanded a more favorable trade balance with Washington;
and a proliferation of new African nations in dire need of American aid. And
this is merely the short list of foreign policy woes that greeted Kennedy when
he took the reins of power.

The domestic front was equally turbulent, for eight years of Eisenhower inaction
on the civil rights front had left the South still segregated and black
Americans seething in anger and frustration at the glacial progress toward
equality. As Mr. Reeves puts it, "President Kennedy found out there was a
revolution in his country by reading The New York Times on May 15, 1961." The
headline: "Bi-Racial Buses Attacked, Riders Beaten in Alabama." Whom could
J.F.K. rely on to deal with the domestic unrest and enforce the law of the land?
Certainly not a segregated F.B.I. headed by the bigoted wiretapper J. Edgar
Hoover. Mr. Reeves's descriptions of Hoover's consistent attempts to intimidate
Kennedy leave the reader queasy with disgust. Add Kennedy's painful and at times
debilitating personal battle with Addison's disease, a condition Mr. Reeves
treats in unflinching, clinical and perhaps unnecessary detail (including the
President's daily drug treatments and efforts to conceal his sickness from the
public), and you have a drama of colossal proportions: power in the hands of a
sickly novice, with no clear mandate to rule, confronted with turmoil at home
and abroad.

Mr. Reeves asks whether J.F.K. was up to the pressures of the Presidency. After
conducting hundreds of interviews and poring over previously unavailable
documents, Mr. Reeves attempts to answer his question by reconstructing the
heady atmosphere of Kennedy's White House, including vivid profiles of the other
leading players of the era, like Martin Luther King Jr., Edward Lansdale and
Mike Mansfield. Refusing to impose his own views on this scenario, Mr. Reeves
lets readers draw their own conclusions about how Kennedy fared as a power
broker, whether he actually did succeed as President.

Given the compelling circumstances of the times and Kennedy's relentless
pragmatic instincts, one must conclude that this quick-study Massachusetts
maverick was a remarkable leader, a man perfectly attuned to the era in which he
governed, a time of dramatic national change built on a rigid cold-war
consensus. No doubt J.F.K. made his fair share of major errors in judgment, most
notably the failed Bay of Pigs invasion (which, paradoxically, increased his
approval rating by 10 points, to 83 percent) and an overzealous commitment in
Vietnam (a shortcoming recapitulated by Mr. Reeves in that too much of his
narrative is devoted to Southeast Asia and not enough to Europe). Kennedy's
largely inconsequential affair with the mob "escort" Judith Campbell Exner also
reveals a serious lack of judgment, which Mr. Reeves discusses in a balanced
fashion. Still, it's the successes that shine through. Many will find J.F.K.'s
occasional racial slurs offensive; nonetheless, the man who emerges from Mr.
Reeves's pages is a cautious civil rights warrior who, when matters came to a
head, could be counted on to do the right thing. Mr. Reeves also vividly
recaptures the Administration's commitment to NASA, which was proved out by the
feats of Alan Shepard and John Glenn. And no matter how many previous studies
have been published criticizing Kennedy for his macho brinkmanship over
Khrushchev's Berlin ultimatum and the Cuban missile crisis, after reading Mr.
Reeves one cannot escape the conclusion that the strategies of the Kennedy
Administration during these confrontations were stunningly successful.

Kennedy was undoubtedly a cold warrior, but Mr. Reeves too often straitjackets
him into this role, giving little heed to his intellect. He was perhaps the most
innovative and visionary American President of the cold-war era. Bold Kennedy
concepts like the Peace Corps, the "grand design" for an Atlantic partnership
and the Alliance for Progress may have been overambitious, but they were
effective international gestures, greatly appreciated abroad. To devalue
J.F.K.'s lasting international reputation as a great American President, writing
it off as mere misguided nostalgia and residual grief for a leader slain in his
political prime, is to belittle Kennedy's real achievements, like the Trade
Expansion Act of 1962 and the 1963 Limited Test Ban Treaty. And to discount the
importance of charisma and rhetoric in the making of an influential world
leader, which Kennedy proved to be, is always a mistake.

By remaining emotionally distant from his subject, Mr. Reeves succeeds admirably
in presenting J.F.K. the action-oriented President as he really was -- tough,
courageous and flawed. But Kennedy was also idealistic, compassionate and
open-minded; Mr. Reeves prefers to discount these aspects of his character
because they don't fit comfortably into his power-broker thesis. Mr. Reeves's
portrait closely resembles the Kennedy that Mr. Schlesinger and Mr. Sorensen
wrote about almost 30 years ago, but with the liberal veneer of Camelot and the
New Frontier stripped away to showcase the hard and at times unsavory edges of
an extraordinary cold-war politician with a gift for leadership and an acute
penchant for power.



A VERY EXCLUSIVE CLUB

"I wanted to write a book about what it was like to be President, about what the
President knew, what the President did, what he said, and what he heard and
read," Richard Reeves recalled in a telephone interview from his California
home. "I knew it had to be a modern President if I was going to reconstruct his
viewpoint from the Oval Office. And when Kennedy was elected I was in college,
so I had a certain distance.

"There were two major forces that shaped him: he was sick all of his life -- he
had been given the last rites four or five times -- and he served in the war.
There is no doubt in my mind how important the World War II experience was to
everyone who lived through it. Those people saw, and see, life a little
differently from the rest of us."

Mr. Reeves believes the man at the center of our Government is sui generis; only
41 men have known the experience. "Talk about an exclusive club! I don't have a
romanticized view of it, and the people who were there all do. This was so much
the high point of their lives. They already know what Michael Jordan is going to
find out."
    LYNN KARPEN

NAME: John F. Kennedy

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John F. Kennedy delivering his Inaugural Address, Jan. 20, 1961.
Behind him, the outgoing President, Dwight D. Eisenhower, and Jacqueline
Kennedy. (UNITED PRESS INTERNATIONAL/BETTMANN/FROM "PRESIDENT KENNEDY")

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 26, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Joseph Driscoll, 70; Educator Opposed Antiwar Protesters

BYLINE: By RANDY KENNEDY

SECTION: Section B; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 358 words


Joseph L. Driscoll, the president of Southeastern Massachusetts University who
attracted national attention for his fight against student and faculty
opposition to the Vietnam War, died on Friday at his home in Sandwich, Mass. He
was 70.

The cause was pancreatic cancer, said his wife, A. Katina Boyatzis Driscoll.

Professor Driscoll, the first president of the Massachusetts university, was a
decorated Marine pilot in World War II, flying Corsair fighter planes in the
South and Central Pacific.

He became of president of the university, then called Southeastern Massachusetts
Technological Institute, in 1962. In the late 1960's his hard-nosed management
style came into conflict with rising sentiment against the Vietnam War,
culminating in a student boycott of classes in December 1969 and a call for his
resignation.

Dismissals and Then Boycott

The conflict started after Professor Driscoll decided to call the university's
athletic teams the Corsairs, although students had voted to call their teams the
Vikings. He then dismissed several popular professors after they protested the
Vietnam War, which led to a boycott by 80 percent of the student body that
lasted several days. The American Association of University Professors and Gov.
Francis W. Sargent ordered investigations into the dispute, but no action was
ever taken against Professor Driscoll.

He resigned in December 1971, several months after the university's board voted
to reinstate 30 faculty members he had dismissed.

He later worked as a freelance management and educational consultant.

He was educated at Harvard University, where he received a bachelor's degree
with honors in 1952, a master's degree and a doctorate. Before accepting the
post at Southeastern Massachusetts in North Dartmouth, he was a professor of
educational administration at Boston College.

He is survived by his wife; two sons, Logan Joseph, of Sandwich, and Joseph Leo
Jr., of Carmel, Calif.; a daughter, Mary Patricia Egan of New Canaan, Conn.; a
brother, Col. James Driscoll of Indian Rocks, Fla.; a sister, Teresa Driscoll of
Roslindale, Mass., and five grandchildren.

NAME: Joseph L. Driscoll

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

FUTURES MARKETS;
Worry About Rice Supplies Lifts Prices to 5 1/2-Year High

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section D; Page 13; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 364 words


Rice prices roared to their highest in five and a half years yesterday as
concerns about shrinking world supplies intensified.

The futures contract for November delivery of unprocessed "rough" rice rose 65
cents on the Mid-America Commodity Exchange in Chicago to $10.43 per 100 pounds.
Other contracts rose the permitted daily limit of 45 cents. The November
contract currently has no limit because of the nearness of its expiration.

The November contract has soared nearly $3.70, or about 55 percent, since the
Japanese Government announced on Sept. 30 that it would import 200,000 metric
tons of rice this year, with more likely in 1994 to compensate for its worst
harvest since World War II as a result of bad weather and disease.

The Japanese Government was expected to reduce its rice crop estimate further
today, and Japanese media have reported that the nation might need to import at
least 2 million metric tons. Japan has imported no rice since 1984. A metric ton
is 2,205 pounds.

Production Down Elsewhere

Poor weather has reduced rice production in Thailand and Vietnam, the two
biggest exporters in the Southern Hemisphere, and that will probably force the
Japanese to buy rice from the United States, the biggest exporter in the
Northern Hemisphere, said Neauman Coleman, a rice trader with Dean Witter
Reynolds in Memphis.

"There is nothing that suggests that the demand can be met by the production
which is growing right now in the Southern Hemisphere," he said.

Rice production in the United States is also down, mainly because of excessive
rain this summer in Arkansas. Earlier this month, the Agriculture Department
estimated this year's United States crop at 16.5 billion pounds, down from 17.9
billion pounds last year.

In other commodity trading, frozen concentrated orange juice for November
delivery sank 2.55 cents on the New York Cotton Exchange, to $1.075 a pound. The
decline extended a slide that began on Oct. 13 after the Agriculture Department
forecast larger Florida orange production than traders had expected.

Light crude oil for December delivery sank 28 cents on the Mercantile Exchange
in New York, to $17.37 a barrel.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

HOCKEY;
Keenan Tries to Make A New-Age Transition

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE

SECTION: Section B; Page 16; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 921 words


When Mike Keenan entered an upscale American college in 1968 as a poor, crew-cut
Canadian on an athletic scholarship, he attended classes six days a week and
lived in a dormitory from which women and booze were barred. By the time he
graduated in 1972, the long-haired Keenan was attending classes three days a
week with Vietnam vets and antiwar demonstrators, and his dorm was aquiver with
sex and awash in beer.

What he learned living through the enormous changes of those four years, the
Ranger coach says now, has become a source of psychic capital from which he
draws as a modern manager of men in the 90's, manipulative rather than despotic,
using sensitivity rather than intimidation to create winning teams.

"I would have told David Williams to stay with his wife," said Keenan, referring
to the Houston Oiler who missed a football game the day after the birth of his
child. "He was right. Family has to be the highest priority. When football or
hockey is over, the family will still be there. They come first."

But what about a player's obligation to the team? Keenan has often used the
killer phrase, "He let his teammates down," most recently after benching the
popular veteran James Patrick.

"That's within the context of a game," said Keenan quickly. "This was a
different situation. An early-season football game. It would be a harder
decision if it were a post-season game, a more meaningful time on how it impacts
more lives. I don't know the whole situation, but it seems as if the club could
have found a way to fly him out.

"More important, how can a coach use something like that? By showing compassion
to one player, the coach shows the whole team he cares about individuals. He
creates a climate of sensitivity in which individual players can bond with each
more quickly.

"The technical stuff you can teach, much of the physical stuff is within your
control. But it's the interaction of people that makes the real difference.
People have to feel good about themselves before they can feel good about each
other and about the group. And they have to have confidence in the coach's
system.

"And then after that, a coach might be able to inspire the players to make up
for the missing player, to rise to the occasion. Actually, to support his
decision in a way. Which would work if they have all bonded in a spirit of
caring."

Keenan paused to stare at Long Island Sound on the other side of his office
window at the Rye Playland ice rink last Tuesday. The waters were roiled by a
light wind and Keenan, a bright, thoughtful, alert 44-year-old, seemed to gain
energy from the view. In group interviews, he tends to project a bland hardness,
with hostility poised beneath the surface. One on one, humor and even
sentimentality are pushing their ways up, although he is fluent both in standard
bizbabble ("synergism is the key") and in Pat Riley sportspeak ("There's winning
and there's misery.").

But on his own, Keenan is persuasive. He speaks of the "incredible pain" of the
recent breakup of his 21-year marriage to a woman whose personal and
professional needs were not being met in a relationship with a man so dedicated
to a game that required travel, intensity and a surrogate family of brothers and
sons.

"I come out of that macho, stoic school of manhood," said Keenan. "Thirty years
ago, as a young player, I was in a world of negative reinforcement. Do this or
you're out. A one-way street. Twenty years ago, when I started coaching, the
subject of family never came up. Men went on the road, women stayed home and had
babies. Now, females have taken a much more dominant role and the relationship
of men in the family unit has changed.

"Five years ago, the top players were making $350,000. Now that's what the
bottom players are making. Half your club are millionaires, very comfortable in
their life styles. You have to appeal to their pride, their intrinsic sense of
self, make them feel responsible for the whole."

Keenan, who went on from St. Lawrence University to receive a master's degree in
education from the University of Toronto, may be hockey's premier example of the
new-breed sports coach, still basically hierarchical and conservative but trying
to upholster the old authoritarianism with plush and cozy New Age motivational
techniques. Keenan is capable of breaking a hockey stick for effect ("This is a
physical game, and sometimes you have to send a physical message.") while
allowing players to make mistakes so they will come off the ice with a "Dad, you
were right" attitude.

Keenan thinks hockey has its own special advantages and challenges. It is a
"survival" game played by working-class white men with "down-home moral fiber."
Of the 25 on a squad, at least 3 to 5 have to be great for the team to win big.
Keenan characterizes hockey players as a "hardy bunch" who have broken free of
such "socialistic environments" as Canada, Sweden and the former Soviet Union to
dedicate themselves to an "entrepreneurial sport in which men are bonded
together yet have the opportunity to show individual creativity."

It was just this combination of intellectualism and success -- Keenan was a
winner at Chicago and Philadelphia and won two Canada Cup championships coaching
Team Canada -- that inspired Paramount to hire him to try to win his first
National Hockey League championship as a Ranger.

"I want to win the Stanley Cup," said Keenan. "I don't need to win it for my
sense of self."

He needs only to win it to keep his job.

The coach laughed.

NAME: Mike Keenan

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Coach Mike Keenan says he believes in using sensitivity rather
than intimidation to create winning teams. (Barton Silverman/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 30, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

In Hollywood, a Former Vietnamese Star Rebuilds Her Career

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Oct. 29


For Kieu Chinh, acting out the most wrenching scene in the film "The Joy Luck
Club" -- when her character has to embrace twin daughters one last time, then
abandon them forever -- was reliving the greatest trauma of her own childhood.

Before the scene was shot, Wayne Wang, the director of "The Joy Luck Club," led
Ms. Chinh to a tree at the foot of a mountain in China and draped his coat over
her shoulders for a moment to shelter her from gusts of wind and cold rain.
"Think of anything in the past," Ms. Chinh recalls the director telling her.
"Say anything in Vietnamese that you want to say." Then he left her in front of
the cameras.

"And I called out, 'Con oi!,' 'Oh, my child!,' " Ms. Chinh said. "It was the
last thing I heard my father call out to me when I was a girl and he left me,
when he cried and he left me."

Twice a Refugee

Ms. Chinh, a quietly elegant woman of 54, has twice suffered great personal
loss. She was once the most popular film actress in Vietnam, but recently she
has been, like so many other Vietnamese, an obscure refugee. Now, 18 years after
fleeing her country, she hopes that her portrayal of Suyuan, the mother of the
central character in "The Joy Luck Club," will be the beginning of a revival of
her acting career.

In the film, she plays a woman who is forced by war and disease to abandon two
babies, and who does not live long enough to see those children again. In life,
Ms. Chinh was sent to safety by her father when she was 15. He died before she
saw him again.

That first loss came with the partition of Vietnam in 1954, when her father, a
widower, pushed her onto a plane that was flying south to Saigon. He remained in
Hanoi to search for her brother, who had joined the resistance. She was cared
for by friends, she said, and waited daily for word from her family, which did
not come.

"That scene was like a flashback for me," she said of the parting in "The Joy
Luck Club." "It was my own life, only now I was the parent and I could feel the
pain my father felt."

Within three years of parting with her father, Ms. Chinh had appeared in several
films, and over the next two decades she had major roles in many more. She was
voted most popular actress at the Asian Film Festival in Taipei in 1972.

The Last Flight Out

Her second loss came with the fall of Saigon in 1975, when she fled on the last
commercial flight to join her three children, who were already abroad. The
reunification of the country offered the hope that she would one day see her
father again, but he died in 1978, having been sick and poor and out of reach of
her help.

Sitting with her feet folded under her in a small, immaculate home in Studio
City where she lives alone, Ms. Chinh spoke recently of the hardships she shares
with other refugees: the interrupted life, the struggle to start again, the loss
of a cultural context for one's life and work.

"For Vietnamese in America, the biggest expense now is telephone bills," said
Ms. Chinh, who has not been back to Vietnam. "There is nothing left in our lives
but our loved ones." And the Vietnamese diaspora has scattered across the United
States and around the world.

"Especially, I see many artists and writers, how hungry they are that they
cannot create in the most effective period in their lives," she said. Here, Ms.
Chinh has had a number of small parts and has worked as a consultant for movies
and television filming scenes about Vietnam. But she said her life has been one
of frustration, waiting to be recognized in even a small way, after a life of
celebrity in Vietnam.

"It is unfortunate for me that I was born in a war and grew up in a war," she
said. "I lived more than half my life in a war and the other half uprooted from
my land. You become a stranger here, a completely unknown stranger. So the best
years of your life are wasted."

In Hollywood, Ms. Chinh has played small roles as a Korean, a Chinese and a
Cambodian. Starting on Wednesday, in a workshop presentation at the Brooklyn
Academy of Music, she will play a Japanese woman in the play "Sansho the
Bailiff," written by Terrence Malick and directed by Andrzej Wajda.

"Isn't it amazing that I haven't had a good Vietnamese part yet?" she said. "If
it was a story based on true feelings, a real story, I would know how so
easily."

The woman Ms. Chinh wants to portray, she said, is the sort of woman who
appeared in photographs seen frequently during the war: the grieving survivor,
holding her straw hat above her head and keening over the body of a child or a
husband.

"This is what so many women have experienced in my country in the last 40 years,
that poor little piece of land that has been the scene of war all the time, the
place the world has chosen for its wars," Ms. Chinh said.

She recognizes that the world has turned a page and moved its attention away
from Vietnam, Ms. Chinh said, but the stories she wants to tell are universal.
"They don't belong to one country any more, one nationality or one generation,"
she explained.

Ms. Chinh has a lifetime of experience, grief and perseverance to offer. "I'm so
frustrated, sometimes, that I cannot do anything," she said. "I just sit here
and wait. It's the frustration of the performing artist, that you have so much
to share, so much to express, but you have to wait."

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kieu Chinh, who portrays Suyuan, a mother, in "The Joy Luck
Club." (Jan Sonnenmair for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 275 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 31, 1993 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

David Gergen, Master of THE GAME

BYLINE: By Michael Kelly.

Michael Kelly is the staff writer of The New York Times Magazine.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 64

LENGTH: 11827 words


On Nov. 9, 1960, the day after John F. Kennedy defeated Richard M. Nixon to
become the 35th President of the United States, a reporter for The Washington
Daily News and a reporter for The Associated Press dropped by Nixon's house in
Washington, looking for a interview with the loser. The Vice President answered
the door himself, and standing on the front stoop, the three men settled into a
polite routine of questions and answers. Suddenly, Pat Nixon appeared. She was
angry and, it was clear, not in control of her emotions. She damned the
reporters and their colleagues for favoritism toward Kennedy that she said cost
her husband the election. Nixon calmed her and led her away. When he returned,
he said nothing about his wife's outburst, and the reporters resumed their
inquiry as if nothing unusual had occurred. Neither reporter ever wrote about
Mrs. Nixon's behavior; it wasn't news.

This small, oddly dignified scene, remembered by one of the reporters, belongs
to a world that has vanished utterly. A journalist interviewing the losing
candidate on the day after the 1992 election would have done so as a member of a
large pack, covering a set piece of political theater -- a media event, as it is
called. The event would have been scripted down to the level of minor jokes, in
an effort to insure that the candidate committed no gaffes before the cameras.
The reporters, hoping to shake things off-script, and aware of their own video
presence, would have shouted self-consciously aggressive questions. Had the
defeated candidate's wife interrupted to scold the press, this would have been
regarded by his handlers as a calamity (unless they had secretly arranged it)
and by the reporters as the news of the day.

The story of this vast change is the story of how the idea of image became the
faith of Washington, and how the President became the central figure of that
faith, the architect and ultimately the victim of the world's most elaborate
personality cult.

In this new faith, it has come to be held that what sort of person a politician
actually is and what he actually does are not really important. What is
important is the perceived image of what he is and what he does. Politics is not
about objective reality, but virtual reality. What happens in the political
world is divorced from the real world. It exists for only the fleeting
historical moment, in a magical movie of sorts, a never-ending and infinitely
revisable docudrama. Strangely, the faithful understand that the movie is not
true -- yet also maintain that it is the only truth that really matters.

By the time Bill Clinton was elected the 42d President of the United States, the
culture of Washington (and therefore of governance and politics) had become
dominated by people professionally involved in creating the public images of
elected officials. They hold various jobs -- they are pollsters, news-media
consultants, campaign strategists, advertising producers, political scientists,
reporters, columnists, commentators -- but the making of the movie is their
shared concern. They are parts of a product-based cultural whole, just like the
citizens of Beverly Hills. Some are actors, some are directors, some are
scriptwriters and some are critics, but they are all in the same line of work
and life. They go to the same parties, send their children to the same schools,
live in the same neighborhoods. They interview each other, argue with each
other, sleep with each other, marry each other, live and die by each other's
judgment. They joust and josh on television together, and get rich together
explaining Washington to conventions of doctors and lawyers and corporate
executives.

Not surprisingly, they tend to believe the same things at the same time. They
believe in polls. They believe in television; they believe in talk; they
believe, most profoundly, in talk television. They believe in irony. They
believe that nothing a politician does in public can be taken at face value, but
that everything he does is a metaphor for something he is hiding. They believe
in the extraordinary! disastrous! magnificent! scandalous! truth of whatever it
is they believe in at the moment. Above all, they believe in the power of what
they have created, in the subjectivity of reality and the reality of
perceptions, in image.

The growth of the faith of image has had a gradual but cumulatively momentous
effect. It has made the old distinctions of profession and ideology that had
defined the culture of Washington seem outdated and naive, like the blushingly
remembered fervors of adolescence. If the reality of an action is defined by the
public presentation of the action, then what is a television reporter but an
actor? What is a newspaper writer but a theater critic? If the truth of an idea
is defined by its advertising campaign, who but a mug can seriously believe in
one set of ideas or another? If perception is reality, what is the point of any
differences at all -- between Republicans and Democrats, between journalists and
Government officials, between ideologues and copywriters, between the chatterers
of television and the thinkers of the academy, between Washington and Hollywood?

Indeed, the differences have become harder and harder to see. Yesterday's
reporter is today's White House spokesman is tomorrow's pundit. On the Sunday
talk shows, the celebrity host and the celebrity reporter and the celebrity
political strategist sit side by side, and the distinctions between them are not
apparent to the naked eye. In effect, they are one, members of the faith, the
stars of a culture they themselves have created. Indeed, they have acknowledged
their oneness. They have given themselves a name, the Insiders, and a language.

The language reveals, as all languages do, a great deal about how its speakers
see themselves and the world. It is self-referential, self-important,
self-mocking and very nearly (if subconsciously) self-loathing. It is deeply
cynical. It portrays a society where to be knowing is to admit the fraud of
one's functions in the act of performing them.

This is how the Insiders describe the passage of a day:

The day is composed, not of hours or minutes, but of news cycles. In each cycle,
senior White House officials speaking on background define the line of the day.
The line is echoed and amplified outside the Beltway to real people, who live
out there, by the President's surrogates, whose appearances create actualities
(on radio) and talking heads (on television). During the rollout of a new
policy, the President, coached by his handlers and working from talking points
and briefing books churned out by war room aides, may permit his own head to
talk. There are various ways in which he might do this, ranging from the
simplest photo op to a one on one with a media big-foot, to the more elaborately
orchestrated media hit (perhaps an impromptu with real people) to the
full-fledged spectacle of a town hall.

The line, a subunit of the Administration's thematic message, is reinforced by
leaks and plants and massaged through the care and feeding of the press. It is
adjusted by spin patrol and corrected through damage control when mistakes are
made or gaffes are committed that take attention off-message and can create a
dreaded feeding frenzy. Reaction to the line is an important part of the cycle,
and it comes primarily from Congressional leaders of both parties, the
strange-sounding biparts, whose staff-written utterances are often delivered
directly to media outlets via fax attacks. The result of all this activity
passes through the media filter, where it is cut into tiny, easily digestible
sound bites and fed to already overstuffed pundits, who deliver the ultimate
product of the entire process, a new piece of conventional wisdom.

Every species produces its perfect flower and every culture its perfect moment.
In the late spring of 1993, the perfect flower of the insider species and the
perfect moment of the image culture met in the Presidential appointment of David
R. Gergen, Washington's circular man.

The career of David Gergen represents the triumph of image. The character of
David Gergen represents the apotheosis of the insider. The two are rolled up in
him together, in a shining, seamless roundness whose mirrored surface reveals
nothing but the political scene rolling by. In himself, Gergen has conflated all
the old distinctions. Over the course of 22 years, he has traveled from White
House to White House, from Government to journalism to punditry and now back to
Government (and soon enough, you may bet on it, back to journalism again), from
the Democratic camp to the Republican to the Independent to the Democratic
again. So perfectly is he of his time and place and class that he is himself
part of the tribal language. To be Gergenized is to be spun by the velveteen hum
of this soothing man's smoothing voice into a state of such vertigo that the
sense of what is real disappears into a blur. Nothing is more Gergenized than
Gergen himself. The blur is the man. He is his own magic movie, forever revising
the reality of himself.

On May 29, David Gergen was appointed counselor to the new President, a
Democrat. The move surprised many who had known Gergen as a servant of three
Republican Presidents, including one -- Ronald Reagan -- whom the new President
had charged with ruining America. Actually, Gergen hastened to say with bland
audacity: "I'm not a Republican. I've always been a registered Independent."

On June 7, standing at the podium in the White House press room where he had
often spoken on behalf of Republican Presidents, Gergen was asked to define his
politics more fully. His answer was marvelous for its accidental revelation of
the heart of the man. When he first went to work for Richard Nixon in 1971, he
had been a registered Democrat. Later, under Nixon, Gerald Ford and Ronald
Reagan, he had voted Republican, worked in Republican political campaigns and
served as the public defender of Republican policies. But he characterized this
as a matter more sartorial than ideological: "wearing Republican cloth." Leaving
the Reagan White House in 1984 to begin a career at the more rarefied levels of
journalism (a fellowship at the John F. Kennedy School of Government, a stint as
editor and later as columnist for U.S. News & World Report, and a regular spot
as a commentator on "The MacNeil/ Lehrer Newshour"), he had "thought it was
important" that he "not be seen as a, quote, 'Republican.' " And so he had
"evolved" into "an independent voice" that was "moderately right of center."

In most places, this sort of performance could win one a reputation for
opportunism. It does that in Washington too, but here the tag is meant as a
compliment. Possessing a large degree of what the Washington columnist and
talk-television star Michael Kinsley has called "intellectual, uh, flexibility"
is no sin here. Wrong lies in the opposite direction, in the gaucherie of
displaying passionately held convictions. (Stage passion is fine, but it is
crucial to know the difference. The real anger displayed by the Republican
strategist Mary Matalin during the 1992 Presidential campaign was considered
such a breach of manners that her boss, the deep-insider George Bush, forced her
to apologize. Meanwhile, the faux tantrums of Matalin's boyfriend, the
Democratic strategist James Carville, won him admiring fame.) A man like Gergen,
unafraid to admit that his loyalties and convictions are no more than outerwear,
is always welcome at the table.

The moment that proved this true -- the perfect flower's perfect moment --
occurred on the evening of June 4, and of course on television. The scene was
the set of "The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour," the insider's evening news, where
reasonable men and women meet to mostly agree and occasionally agree to disagree
(in the mildest possible manner). Until his latest Presidential appointment,
Gergen had been a weekly guest on the show, playing (barely) conservative to the
columnist Mark Shields's (barely) liberal, a relationship whose evident
amiability was never once threatened by even a hint of strong disagreement.

This evening's program focused on two related Presidential events of the past
week: the public relations disaster of Lani Guinier's abandoned appointment to
head of the Justice Department's civil rights division and the hiring of the
public relations impresario David Gergen.

Who did MacNeil/Lehrer invite to assess the impact of Guinier and Gergen? Who
but, as host Robert MacNeil put it, a man who was until recently "a weekly
analyst here on the Newshour . . . here tonight in his new role . . . David
Gergen, news maker."

After interviewing Gergen on Guinier and Gergen on Gergen (he was modest and
judicious on both subjects), MacNeil bade the news maker goodbye and introduced
the show's political panel, which appeared minus the regular guest . . . David
Gergen.

Once the panel host, Roger Mudd, had finished a bland discussion of the Guinier
mess, he then turned to a subject of more intimate concern, the White House
appointment of . . . David Gergen.

"Well, I wish David Gergen hadn't done it," said the conservative commentator
Linda Chavez. "Because he's a friend of mine. Who would wish this job on
anybody?"

The liberal commentator Eddie Williams chimed in: "I dropped him a note saying I
congratulated him on what I felt was a fantastic match, my words, the match
between Gergen and Clinton."

Added Shields: "Let me tell you what David Gergen brings, I think, to Bill
Clinton. . . . He has that ability to come in and speak the truth."

At which point, Mudd turned to face the table to Shields's right, and
reintroduced . . . David Gergen.

"Did you realize he's been sitting, listening to us the whole time?" Mudd asked,
as the director switched cameras to show Gergen there at the table, laughing,
grinning slyly, from under his long, pale blond eyelashes, as if to say: Aren't
we naughty? And everyone else, Williams and Chavez and Shields and Mudd, was
smiling and laughing, too. The joke was, really, delightful. The whole time they
had been discussing Gergen, acting as if they were trying to give an honest
appraisal of the man -- why, he had been right there sitting among his pals. How
delicious (how perfect) to admit that it was all just a great big shucks, that
it didn't matter where Gergen sat or whom he worked for at the moment, that he
and they were in on it together and that only those saps out there, outside the
beltway, were dumb enough to think it was for real.

Oddly enough, no one knows better what is wrong with all this than David Gergen.
It is a dislocating experience to hear him -- this former Nixon speech writer,
this former Reagan director of communications, this man who has spent the larger
part of his adult life building the images of Presidents and of himself, this
insider so dedicated to the insider's art of leaking that old colleagues call
him the Sieve -- as he disdains and regrets his life's work.

"So often now, Presidents are being judged, politicians are being judged by the
quality of their performances: how well do they play the game?" Gergen says.
"Did they give a good speech? Or did they do something interesting today? It's
all the same. The horse-race nature of the campaign, which gets covered ad
nauseam, now also dominates the Presidency. And I think in some ways that the
people who are in the business of government and the people in the punditry
business are almost co-conspirators. They are feeding off each other. The people
in the press are judging you on that basis and the people inside are responding
to that. Instead of saying, 'How do we change things in people's lives?' it has
become: 'How do we put the packaging together? How do we put the bright ribbons
on it that will make people think it is important, or interesting or different?
How do we make the pundits say, "Gee, that was impressive"?' And this has no
bearing on what happens underneath, and it creates a deepening cynicism."

What he's criticizing, it is suggested:

"Is stuff I've done. I admit that. I've done a lot of it. But you realize. . . .
" Here he pauses for a long moment. "Look, I plead guilty to having played the
game and inventing some forms of the game that I thought eventually went beyond
what was intended. . . . It gave way over time to -- and this is what I regret
-- a selling for the sake of selling. It had nothing to do with ideas. It had
nothing to do with anything that was real. Eventually, it became selling the
sizzle without the steak. There was nothing connected to it. It was all
cellophane. It was all packaging. And I feel I contributed to that. There's no
question about that. I'd been aggressive in my early years trying to get some of
that set up. I did that in part because I thought that was the only way you
could govern. I think now, as I get older, that the steak is very important,
too. Yes, the selling has to continue, but it's not sufficient in and of itself.
That becomes, over time, just an empty exercise."

What happened to the Presidency and to Washington was, Gergen argues,
inevitable. "We have an inherently weak institution in the Presidency," he says.
"It was intentionally set up that way by the founders. There is a reason why the
Presidency is Article II of the Constitution, not Article I. The Congress was
always intended to be the leading body, with the Presidency set up as a somewhat
weaker body. And it was the weaker body for most of our history."

But modern Presidents and the news media both tend to exaggerate the powers of
the office, says Gergen, voicing a theory most prominently advanced by the
historian Richard Neustadt. This exaggeration, the theory goes, has magnified
the gulf between what the President can accomplish and what the public expects
of him.

"Given this, and given the increasing power of the press, and the inability of
contemporary Presidents to master the press enough to master the message, there
has been a lot more effort on the part of the White Houses to manage the
message, to orchestrate," Gergen says. "And that, in turn, increases the
cynicism on the other side."

There is obvious truth in this vicious-circle theory, but the cloak of
inevitability obscures the more complicated, larger story -- and the role of
David Gergen in it. The empty exercise Gergen now deplores is not simply the
product of historical forces nor merely the result of the irresistible rise of
news-media power. It is also the conscious design of a small group of smart,
purposeful men -- advertising executives and scriptwriters and pollsters and
strategists -- who worked over a period of two decades to invent a new type of
Presidency, one that would be primarily defined by the television screen. Gergen
occupies a curious position in the group. He invented none of the big ideas or
foundation techniques of the image-age Presidency. But he had the good fortune
to find himself on the inside more or less at the beginning of the change (he
has a great knack for being in the right place at the right time), and he had
the skills to prosper.

He was intelligent and hard-working and he had a complex charm. A big man who
underplayed his presence, he was solicitous of the opinions of others and
expressed his own unthreatening thoughts in a soft, friendly voice that gave way
easily to laughter. He was not a brilliant student of history or politics, but
he was a dedicated one. He tended naturally to the accepted view and to the
middle ground. And he had one more important talent. He was gifted at
manipulating the appearances of all sorts of realities, including the reality of
David Gergen.

From Nixon to Ford to Reagan to Clinton, Gergen carried the faith of image and
the image of himself, polishing and adapting and expanding both. As the years
passed, his predecessors and peers fell by the wayside, the victims of changing
tastes and times. But Gergen changed apace, and quietly, almost inconspicuously
grew toward the great role to which he now aspires -- wise man of the age of
image.

On the day Pat Nixon told off the reporters on her doorstep, the age and Gergen
were both bright and young. Kennedy's 1960 campaign had redefined politics.
While other politicians had dipped into the waters of the new age -- Eisenhower
had starred in both the first televised Presidential news conference and the
first prime-time visit to the White House -- Kennedy was of the age. He had a
generational grasp of what screen presence was about, and he ran for President
essentially on qualifications of image: beauty, grace, youth, courage, wit,
charm. The public J.F.K., shaped with a lapidary precision by the patriarch
Joseph P. Kennedy, was a World War II hero, a Pulitzer Prize-winning author, the
pride of an ideal family and a devoted husband to a loving wife. That these
achievements were in considerable part the creation of professional myth-makers
was overlooked by a press corps that was (as Mrs. Nixon pointed out) largely
pro-Kennedy and also ignorant of the extent to which it was being conned. In
office, Kennedy was similarly attentive to image, and similarly successful. His
Administration shone with a gloss that maximized such minor accomplishments as
inviting Pablo Casals to dinner and minimized such major disasters as the
invasion of Cuba.

Kennedy's achievement made a powerful impression on Nixon and his advisers, who
had to overcome one of the worst images in political history. On Nov. 28, 1967,
the speech writer Ray Price, who would later become Gergen's boss and mentor in
the Nixon White House, wrote a memorandum to his campaign colleagues explaining
how the lessons of Kennedy could be applied to the problems of Nixon, who was
planning a second campaign for President the following year.

Nixon's woes, Price wrote, stemmed from "the fact that for years Nixon was one
of those men it was fashionable to hate," a reaction to Nixon's style -- what
Price called his "cutting edge." To change this political reality, Price said,
it was not necessary to change the objective reality of Nixon. Voter approval
for a Presidential candidate, Price argued, is not about reality but is "a
product of the particular chemistry between the voter and the image of the
candidate." He continued: "We have to be very clear on this point: that the
response is to the image, not to the man, since 99 percent of the voters have no
contact with the man. It's not what's there that counts, it's what's projected
-- and . . . it's not what he projects but rather what the voter receives. It's
not the man we have to change, but rather the received impression."

Price's insight, translated into a campaign plan of action by the advertising
executive Frank Shakespeare and the television producer Roger Ailes, was
revolutionary. The Democrats had never really advanced past the press-agentry
techniques of inflating accomplishments and hiding flaws -- maintaining a
tenuous connection to reality. Price postulated that a new political reality
need not correspond at all to objective reality, that a new image could override
both the known facts and the previous image of a candidate to become the only
reality that mattered.

By Election Day 1968, Nixon had been so thoroughly repackaged that he became, in
a sense, the first President to win the office by suicide. The man sworn in on
Jan. 20, 1969, was someone the press called the New Nixon.

There was, of course, nothing really new at all. "You see in history a number of
references to 'the New Nixon,' " recalls Herb Klein, Nixon's director of
communications. "What that really meant was that he came on with a slightly
different television technique. But he was the same man, had the same hostility
to the press, the same values."

In 1971, two years after the New Nixon took office, the 29-year-old Dave Gergen
-- a Navy veteran, a graduate of Yale and Harvard Law School -- went to work for
the President. The Nixon White House was Gergen's true university, and it was an
extraordinary school. Here, a public-relations-obsessed President and his staff
would create the prototype of the image-age Presidency. This model, which
remains in use today, assumes that the powerful, chronically hostile news media
work steadfastly against a President's interests, and that this must be
countered by a systematic program of propaganda. What a President (or
Presidential candidate) says or does must always be calculated for its effect on
his image, plotted as points along the arc of his ideal persona, a construct
largely determined by what the pollsters say the people regard as ideal at the
moment. Since the news media will trumpet the slightest deviation from the ideal
as evidence of a flawed Presidency, the marketing of the President and his
policies must be the primary concern of a White House, and campaigning must be a
permanent feature of governance.

Gergen remembers the selling of the Nixon image as a central fact of life in his
first White House. "The great cynicism had already begun when Nixon took
office," he says. "It came with Vietnam when a generation of reporters concluded
that their Government was lying to them. Nixon arrived on the back end of that,
and he came carrying this great personal animosity, a lack of trust in the
press.

"And Nixon understood that unless you mastered television, your Presidency would
be ripped apart. And so he developed, the Nixon White House developed, a whole
series of ideas about how one talks to the press and communicates through the
press. A sort of rules for the road for how a White House acts."

The Nixonian rules, Gergen says, "have been handed down from one Presidency to
the next and have had enormous influence. "In many ways," he says, "I think
almost everything we do now has come from those years."

Gergen's contention is borne out by the archival records of the Nixon White
House. In their first several years in office, the new President's men, guided
by an unending flow of orders from Nixon and supervised by a former advertising
executive, the chief of staff, H. R. Haldeman, invented virtually all the
practices of public relations and press handling that would become standard in
later White Houses.

Among the innovations were the coordination of an Administration-wide "line of
the day" that was in turn part of an overall thematic "message"; the
orchestrated use of surrogates and White House-connected "grass roots"
organizations to build support, plant stories and attack enemies; a continuing
effort to nullify the Washington press corps through an ongoing "outreach"
program to the generally more friendly and malleable regional press; the
carrot-and-stick technique of rewarding reporters and news organizations whose
coverage is positive and attacking those who are critical.

The ideas behind these techniques were not new. What Nixon's men did was to
systematize the tricks of puffery and calumny that had long been used in
campaigns and incorporate them into the routine operation of the White House. A
critical advancement in the corruption of the Washington culture, this not only
created new and expanded forms of such tactics, but also legitimized them.
Future White Houses would embrace them as essential elements of "how the game is
played," as Gergen puts it.

"It was much more than just 'line of the day,' " Gergen remembers. "This was
total orchestration. It was much more sophisticated than anything that had come
before. There was a desire to control the entire environment, and a feeling that
if you didn't control it, they would control it -- they, the great outside
they."

In their everlasting search for control, Nixon and Haldeman set up four separate
press and propaganda operations. The traditional office of the press secretary
remained, but with its power diminished by the exclusion of the person who held
that position, Ron Ziegler, from a great deal of information, thus increasing
White House control and providing the Administration with a mechanism for
denying statements that later proved inconvenient. In addition to the press
office, there were two inventions that would also shape the way future White
Houses worked: the Office of Communications, directed by Herb Klein, and the
Office of Public Liaison, directed by Charles W. Colson.

Klein created two devices of lasting import, the pan-Governmental coordination
of the White House line and the establishment of a press operation to feed
local, regional and specialty news organizations outside the Washington press
corps.

"My concept was that the problem with Government was that everybody went off on
their own way and there was no coordination," Klein recalls. "We set up weekly
meetings with the people assigned to public affairs in each department of the
Government, so the same song was singing through each department. At the same
time, we built up coverage from the regional press -- a Cabinet officer speaking
in Los Angeles or Minneapolis is going to make a lot more news than that same
person speaking in Washington."

The fourth division of the Nixon operation was Dave Gergen's home, the
speech-writing office headed by Ray Price. Charged with producing not only
Presidential speeches and talking points but also most of the endless stream of
speeches needed for Klein and Colson's surrogate operations, the shop employed
as many as 50 people during the peak period of the 1972 campaign. Price hired
Gergen in 1971 as a staff assistant, and in 1972 made him his deputy, which
entailed keeping track of writers' assignments and helping Price edit copy. By
the beginning of Nixon's second term in 1973, the continuing crisis of Watergate
had forced some officials senior to Gergen out of the White House and left those
who remained exhausted and distracted. Price quit the speech-writing department
to deal with Watergate full time, and Gergen took over the shop until Nixon's
resignation on Aug. 9, 1974.

Until Watergate, the overarching task of the entire press and public relations
operation was the perpetuation of the New Nixon image. The obsession with this
is illuminated in an unsigned "background memorandum" of December 1970. Kennedy,
the memo noted caustically but accurately, had compiled a record in foreign
policy of "utter disaster," but "his 'charm' saved the day for him." Eisenhower
had been "distant and all business" with his staff, but had succeeded in
projecting a "mythology" that he was really a "warm, kindly, fair man."

The memo prescribed a series of steps to "build" a public President Nixon who
would embody "those fundamental decencies and virtues which the great majority
of Americans like -- hard work, warmth, kindness, consideration for others,
willingness to take the heat and not pass the buck."

By the time Gergen came to work in 1971, the make over effort had been organized
into something that vaguely resembled a giant earth-moving job. Convinced that,
in the awesome task of rebuilding Nixon, God lay somewhere in the details, White
House "anecdotalists" dug and dug for "warm items" and "human-type incidents"
about the President. The effort reached its sublimely silly peak in the RN Human
Interest Story Program, ordered up in a 1971 memo from Haldeman to Price.

A speech-department staff member culled dozens of anecdotes about Nixon from
intimates and aides in a lengthy report, with each anecdote indexed according to
the character trait it was meant to advertise: Repartee, Courage, Kindness,
Strength in Adversity. What is most painfully obvious about these undertakings
is how little the anecdotalists had to work with. Exemplifying the President's
talent for Repartee was an account of Nixon silencing a New York businessman who
had upbraided him over the Vietnam War by telling the man not to "give me any
crap." Illustrating the President's Strength in Adversity was a bald little
story of how the young Congressman Nixon, falling on an icy sidewalk, still
managed to keep his 2-year-old daughter, Tricia, safe in his arms.

In this perfectionist and paranoid atmosphere, Gergen learned the bones of his
craft.

He learned the importance of saying the same thing, over and over and over:
"Nixon taught us about the art of repetition. He used to tell me, 'About the
time you are writing a line that you have written it so often that you want to
throw up, that is the first time the American people will hear it.' "

He learned about the gimmicks of phrasing calculated to catch the public ear:
"Haldeman used to say that the vast majority of words that issue under a
President's name are just eminently forgettable. What you need to focus on is
what's the line that is going to have a little grab to it."

He learned the theory of controlled access. If you gave the press only a smidgen
of Presidential sight and sound on a given day, reporters would be forced to
make their stories out of that smidgen: "Nixon used to go into the press room
with a statement that was only 100 words long because he did not want them
editing him. He knew if he gave them more than 100 words, they'd pick and choose
what to use."

He learned the endless discipline required to protect the image, which was as
evanescent as morning mist: "It went into everything -- the speeches, the
talking points, the appearances. Haldeman had a rule on appearances: if you
wanted to put in a scheduling request for anything the President was going to do
in public, your request had to fulfill what we called H.P.L. -- Headline,
Picture, Lede. You had to say, in writing, what the headline out of the event
was going to be, what the lede was going to be and what the picture was going to
be."

The young Gergen also learned lessons he does not volunteer to talk about. These
came under the tutelage of Chuck Colson, who managed the effort to shape
perception of the President through a variety of hidden-hand means.

"In 1969, Colson was brought in, and his big job was to rally national
organizations of various stripes to support the President, and to set up new
organizations to do this," recalls Lyn Nofziger, a longtime political operative
who joined the White House staff that year. "Colson was tougher than hell,
smarter than hell, meaner than hell. He built himself an empire there, 25 people
working for him, and their whole job was to build up Dick Nixon and tear down
his enemies."

Colson adapted to governance the campaign strategy of using carefully controlled
surrogates and grass-roots groups, using them not only to generate statements of
ostensibly spontaneous support for the President and his policies, but also to
attack political enemies from behind cover. In White House parlance, such
surrogates were said to be "programmed" for attack, and were regarded as
something akin to useful idiots. "Let's let columnists and Congressmen do that
kind of work for us," sniffed a Haldeman aide, Jeb Stuart Magruder, in a 1970
memorandum urging a White House-staged offensive against the recently retired
Supreme Court Justice Earl Warren.

The speech-writing department was charged with scripting such attacks, and
Gergen, in his administrative role, became increasingly responsible for assuring
that Colson's orders were carried out. The critical period of Gergen's
involvement -- and education -- came in the 1972 Presidential race between Nixon
and the liberal Democratic candidate, George McGovern. In this campaign, Colson
established a new standard in negative campaigning, using surrogates and the
"line of the day" to put together one of the most effective, sustained and
brutal political assaults in American history. Today's campaigns, dominated by
systematic, tightly planned, character-based attacks, are the direct descendants
of the 1972 Colson operation.

The operation was directed through a daily 9:15 A.M. "attack meeting," led by
Colson and famous still among old Nixon hands. Gergen attended the meetings as a
representative of the speech-writing department.

"These were real hardball meetings where we used to figure out, day by day, how
we were going to tear McGovern's hide off, and it was Gergen's job to see to it
that the necessary speeches were written to carry out each day's attack,"
recalls David Keene, a political consultant who attended the meetings in his
role as an aide to Vice President Agnew. "The group charted, about a week in
advance, what the attack message was going to be every day, what we were going
to hit McGovern with that day and how to mobilize the entire resources of the
campaign and even the Administration to focus on that single message and
dominate the news."

Some of Gergen's neat, handwritten notes of these meetings can be found in the
White House records from that time. Each entry describes a specific attack to be
carried out against McGovern. On Sept. 26, for example, Gergen wrote: "What do
we have on Hill to embarrass McG for voting absences? Try to have Dole hit." And
on that same day Gergen noted Colson's order that the campaign find "an incensed
P.O.W. wife to strike out at the former Attorney General, McGovern supporter and
antiwar activist Ramsey Clark. Get Sybil from Conn. Also get labor leader --
building trades."

In typed memoranda, Gergen gave status reports on the actions ordered at the
9:15 meetings. "Nixon supporter and future pundit John McLaughlin on Today
show," he wrote in one typical memo. "I spoke with him yesterday and fed him Ray
Price's line asking how well George would sleep the night our boys came home and
the N. Viets were slaughtering the S. Viets."

Gergen's last lesson at the Nixon White House was the most important -- how to
survive in Washington.

By mid-1973, Watergate had reduced relations with the press to a state of war.
"I have never seen anything like it since," Gergen says. "Every question was
seen as a dagger pointed at the President."

It was during this time that Gergen began to win an enduring reputation, both
inside the White House and among reporters, as (depending on your point of view)
a major leak or an excellent source. Toward the end, while most Nixon officials
were refusing to deal with the press, Gergen was talking to investigative
reporters who would write the history of Watergate. In one scene from "The Final
Days," Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein's sensational account of the last months
of the Nixon White House, Gergen admits to an angry chief of staff, Alexander
Haig Jr. that he was one of the ones leaking to the press. Pointing to a
Washington Post article that had particularly incensed Haig with its portrait of
a White House in wild disarray, Gergen confessed that he was the source of two
damaging paragraphs quoting "one Presidential aide." (Today Gergen acknowledges
that he did leak to Woodward, a fellow Yale graduate he had known for years, but
only as "a designated leaker," acting "with Nixon's blessing.")

Two points about this scene illustrate the basic relationship between Gergen and
the press. One, it shows Gergen in a flattering light. (He may have leaked, but
he did it for good reason, and he manfully admitted it.) Two, this flattering
light was provided by David Gergen. Unless the authors resorted to fiction,
Gergen had to have been at least one of the sources for the scene because his
private (blameless) thoughts are described in detail. This is not an isolated
happenstance. Gergen appears throughout "The Final Days" -- and always
sympathetically. In scene after scene, he comes across as a moral, sometimes
anguished man, who insists on doing the right thing while being lied to
repeatedly by his President.

This characterization is probably true. Gergen's recollection today of himself
as "tortured" by Watergate is confirmed by several associates. But it also seems
likely that Gergen has always known how the history he helped make in "The Final
Days" made him look. Recalling Watergate 20 years later, Gergen volunteers that
he has always "tried to maintain a standard of honesty," and twice suggests a
rereading of "The Final Days" as proof. "You go back and read that, and you'll
find I was trying to present a Government that was legitimate," he says.

Having learned that history belongs to those who create it, Gergen developed a
talent in the post-Watergate years for reshaping the historical perception of
himself, exaggerating his role in some instances and minimizing it in others. In
"The Power Game," Hedrick Smith's best-selling 1988 account of how Washington
works, Gergen is cited as the person "put in charge of scripting the '72
Republican convention." In political circles, this is an important credit,
because that convention was the first to be fully stage-directed for television,
now a standard procedure. The account Gergen gives in "The Power Game" of how
the operation worked is fascinating and wonderfully candid -- except that Gergen
was not at all in charge of scripting that convention.

Ron Walker, who was chief of advance for the White House in 1972, says that he
and a number of Nixon aides, including Dwight Chapin and Bill Timmons, were the
chief scriptwriters of the Republican convention that year. "Gergen wasn't
involved much," Walker says. "I can remember him sitting in meetings with us,
and as a speech writer. I'm sure he participated in some of those meetings, but
that's all I remember of him there."

But Gergen has quietly played down other activities of his early career. "He
tried to forget he was ever part of the 9:15 meeting," David Keene recalls. "I
remember Colson gave all of us who had been in it these cuff links that were
engraved with 9:15. Years later, I ran into Gergen at a dinner, and he saw I was
wearing those cuff links, and he was horrified. He said: 'You actually wear
those? Are you crazy? Someone might see them.' "

After Nixon flew away in the summer of 1974, Gergen went to work writing
speeches for William E. Simon, then Secretary of the Treasury. Simon, a Wall
Street financier whose investing acumen made him one of the world's richest men
after he returned to private life in 1977, was at the time considered
Presidential material. He was also a deeply committed conservative, to the right
of Nixon and well to the right of Gergen.

Gergen made the ideological adjustment with seeming effortlessness. "I had a
point of view and he understood it," Simon recalls. "He caught on real quick."

Bill Schulz, a Washington editor who later worked with Simon on two books,
remembers Simon's marveling at Gergen's adaptability. "Bill told me that Gergen
was the hardest hard-line speech writer that he ever had," Schulz says. "He knew
Gergen didn't believe in any of it. But when he wrote for Bill Simon, he wrote
what Bill Simon wanted."

In 1975, Gergen went to work for President Ford, in his first big-title White
House job, director of communications. After Jimmy Carter took the White House
in 1977, Gergen made his first forays into political journalism, writing
freelance articles and, in March 1978, becoming the first managing editor of
Public Opinion, a new magazine published by the American Enterprise Institute, a
conservative think tank.

On the side, Gergen the journalist remained Gergen the political operator,
writing speeches in 1977 and 1978 for Ronald Reagan and Simon, as they explored
their Presidential chances. But it was clear that Simon's appeal to
nonplutocratic voters was limited, and Gergen began looking for a candidate in
the 1980 race. He settled, very lightly, on George Bush, the slim reed upon whom
Republican moderates rested their hopes of stopping Reagan from taking over the
party.

"He became Bush's unofficial issues guy," recalls David Keene, who was then
Bush's national political director, "putting together gatherings of economists
in Kennebunkport and writing speeches." But at the time Bush attracted so little
support in the polls that news accounts called him the "asterisk" candidate.
Gergen kept a low profile, citing a busy schedule as the reason for turning down
an offer by Bush and his campaign manager, James Baker, who had also worked with
Ford, to join the campaign formally as issues director.

Then, on Jan. 21, 1980, Bush unexpectedly won the Iowa Republican caucus and
became the instant front-runner. "The very next day, Gergen called up Baker and
said, miracle of miracles, he had managed to clear his schedule and would be
able to take the job after all," Keene says. "When Baker said the job was
filled, Gergen came in as a volunteer speech writer." In the month between the
Iowa caucus and the New Hampshire primary, when Bush was the leading Republican
candidate, Gergen, according to Keene, "was very visible."

But on Feb. 26, Bush lost the New Hampshire primary to a resurgent Ronald
Reagan. "And Gergen just disappeared completely, I mean right away," recalls
Peter Teeley, Bush's press secretary at the time. "We never heard from him again
until he turned up with Reagan at the Republican convention."

Even the Reaganites, who benefited from Gergen's leap, were appalled by the
speed of it. "He came to us as soon as it began to seem Bush was going to lose,
definitely before Bush pulled out, and quite frankly this made us very
suspicious of him," recalls a former Reagan campaign official. "I mean, there's
jumping ship and there's jumping ship. This guy was elbowing the women and
children aside to get overboard."

Gergen strongly denies that he showed any undue haste in switching allegiances.
"It is not true that I disappeared in the campaign," he says. "I continued to
advise Bush much in the same way I had up to the point he was nominated Vice
President."

After the Republican convention, the Reagan campaign hired Baker as an adviser,
and Gergen was assigned, along with fellow Bush alumnus Frank Hodsoll, to the
task of preparing the candidate's briefing books for the Presidential debates.
He thus became party to the most infamous episode of the 1980 campaign -- the
appropriation by members of the Reagan camp of the briefing papers prepared by
President Jimmy Carter's staff for the campaign's first and only debate.

Gergen says today that he has "a vague memory" of receiving the Carter material,
which he remembers giving to Hodsoll. But he claims that the material consisted
of "a summary of what Carter had said publicly and public documents." He says he
"was not aware that the material was stolen; it could have been leaked by some
disgruntled person in the Carter camp." And anyway, he says, "We didn't really
use the stuff."

But a 2,413-page report of the House Subcommittee on Human Resources, which
investigated the "Debategate" affair in 1984, contradicts Gergen. The report
concluded that the Reagan campaign had "obtained foreign policy and national
defense briefing papers prepared to assist President Carter," that the papers
were the "property of the Federal Government . . . likely taken from the offices
of the National Security Council" and that the materials obtained "were not
publicly available." It also found that the Carter papers "were used . . . to
enhance Governor Reagan's performance in the debates. The persons using these
papers were aware that they were using Carter debate briefing materials."

Also a matter of sharply differing memories is Gergen's role in the 1980-81
Presidential transition. It was during this period that the Reagan team produced
a document that would become famous in political circles as "the 100 days memo,"
a blueprint for the successful post-Inaugural program to sell the nation on
Reaganomics. Gergen has routinely claimed authorship, or co-authorship, of the
plan; as recently as June 7 of this year, he recalled it as something "I wrote."
And this credit was one reason Clinton strategists sought out his advice during
the 1992-93 transition.

Richard Wirthlin, Reagan's chief pollster at the time and widely acknowledged to
be the primary author of the memo, remembers Gergen's contributions in more
modest terms -- a recollection corroborated by other former Reagan aides. "I
brought together a small team -- myself, Roger Porter, who later came to the
White House as a domestic policy adviser, and Richard Beal, who'd worked on
issues in the campaign," Wirthlin says. "We were the unit that produced the
paper. Gergen contributed in a minor way -- an 8-to-10-page historical overview
of other Presidential beginnings -- and a suggested first-month schedule."

Gergen joined the Reagan White House in January 1981, as a staff director, and
became communications director toward the end of the first 100 days, following
the shooting of James Brady, the press secretary. "Up to this point, our guys
had never really understood how to work a story," recalls Ed Rollins, who was
hired as deputy to Lyn Nofziger, the first director of the White House political
affairs office. "But Gergen really understood sound bites. He understood how to
pick a story, how to get a story that somebody was working on and change it, how
to get the reporters to call the people you wanted them to call and make the
story come out how you wanted. He understood that you had to be proactive about
it, as opposed to just letting you guys do your job and us just reading about it
in the paper the next day."

The Reagan White House set up a structure closely modeled on the Nixon
operation, with a coordinated program for disseminating the Administration line
through Government and party surrogates and a sophisticated system of news-media
manipulation. "It isn't hard to do," says Joe Canzeri, then a White House
advance man. "You get all your team together ahead of time and you say
'Gentlemen, this week we will be selling tacos, not nachos.' Whether they really
are tacos doesn't matter. If we tell you guys they are tacos enough times,
you'll believe they're tacos."

The news-media operation was principally directed by a group that included
Michael Deaver (the deputy chief of staff and the President's chief imagist),
Gergen, Richard Darman, Kenneth Duberstein and Canzeri. Deaver directed the
meetings, which took place every Friday afternoon at Blair House, the White
House's guest residence.

"We tried to plan and manage hour by hour what Reagan was going to do, to keep
the focus on the theme," Deaver remembers. "We would go through the President's
schedule day by day and hour by hour, and figure out what we wanted the story to
be at the end of each day and at the end of the week. And that worked about 90
percent of the time."

To Gergen fell the crucial task of spinning and leaking. "Baker decided early on
that there were only two constituencies that mattered -- the national media and
Congress -- and he devoted a great deal of time and energy to wooing the media,"
Rollins recalls. "Larry Speakes" -- the White House spokesman -- "wasn't allowed
in the key decision-making meetings, so he really couldn't tell the press
anything but the canned lines. Anybody who wanted to find out anything beyond
that had to go somewhere else. And in that White House, pretty much the only
place they could go was to Baker and Gergen.

"Gergen was Baker's man, and reporters had to go to him to get to Baker,"
Rollins continues. "Every major news organization had an hour a week with Baker,
every week. When he was chief of staff, Baker spent 35 hours a week talking to
journalists. He gave an hour a day to the three networks, to The New York Times,
The Washington Post, The Los Angeles Times and The Wall Street Journal. Gergen
had to fill in all the blanks. Baker would give the big overview to the press at
the end of the week -- this is what we're going to do next week, etc. -- and
then Gergen would, day by day, hour by hour, deal with things that came up."

As the chief daily leaker, Gergen became an essential figure for reporters,
someone with whom it paid to speak as often as possible. This gave him access to
valuable information in return -- the daily knowledge of what the White House
press corps was working on. Then, completing the circle, he was in a position to
spin the reporters, so that the final stories would reflect, at least in part,
the White House point of view.

"Dave was compulsive in his leaks," recalls one former White House official.
"When he would leave a meeting in a hurry, people would joke that he was rushing
to meet his deadline. People called him the assistant to the President for The
New York Times."

Gergen's work in shaping the image of Ronald Reagan allowed him to shape another
image -- that of David Gergen. "He was not discerning about how his leaks made
the President appear," says the former Reagan official. "There was a very strong
feeling that he was motivated more by a desire to ingratiate himself with
reporters than by any desire to help the President."

Eventually, according to several former Administration officials, including Vic
Gold, a Bush biographer and speech writer, Baker called Gergen in for a
discussion of the leaks. This led to Gergen's resignation in 1983.

"There is no question Gergen's leaking had something to do with his departure,"
says another official. "He did not leave by his own choice. He was strongly
encouraged to move on by Baker."

Gergen recalls today that Baker did indeed call him in for a meeting and told
him that there were "many daggers" aimed at him, including one wielded by the
well-manicured hand of Nancy Reagan. And, according to Gergen, when he told
Baker he had decided to leave the White House, Baker replied, "I think that's a
wise decision." But Gergen maintains the decision was strictly his own: "I was
not pushed."

It is the autumn of 1993, and Bill Clinton, who is as surely of the apex of the
image age as John F. Kennedy was of its dawn, looms over the video landscape,
cordless microphone in hand, forever talking, listening, empathizing. At times,
it seems his is the Presidency as public-access television; everyone gets on the
air with him sooner or later. He talks with Larry King and Tabitha Soren and
Katie Couric and Dan Rather and Arsenio Hall and Don Imus -- and with mall
shoppers and redwood loggers and hardhats and soldiers and sailors and teachers
and children and folks eating lunch.

In the selling of the Administration's health plan, politics, policy,
advertising and journalism have become, finally, a single organism. Speaking
before Congress to introduce the health plan on Sept. 22, the President holds
aloft a red, white and blue card of gleaming Visa-like plastic, on the back of
which is printed, in the language of a late-night-television insurance pitch, a
promise of such largesse as to give God pause: "This health security card
guarantees you a comprehensive package of benefits that can never be taken
away."

In the surrounding hoopla: Hillary Rodham Clinton makes five televised
Congressional appearances and sits for interviews with Tom Brokaw, Dan Rather,
Paula Zahn, Katie Couric and Joan Lunden. . . . The President answers questions
from the citizenry for two and a half hours on "Nightline," is the host of a
televised "town meeting" in California and conducts an Oprah Winfrey-style show
at a Queens diner, where people chosen by the White House to illustrate
inadequate health insurance tell of their suffering. . . . The Democratic
National Committee kicks off a direct-mail-and-telephone drive featuring
letters, which are Robo-signed by the President and resemble in tone Ed
McMahon's missives on behalf of Publishers' Clearinghouse. ("The winner of this
campaign would not be a politician, but every American family.") . . . The
Clintons hold what Gergen calls "a very dignified lunch" for two dozen big-foot
journalists, including R. W. Apple Jr. of The New York Times, David Broder of
The Washington Post, Jack Germond of The Baltimore Sun, Michael Kinsley of The
New Republic, Jack Nelson of The Los Angeles Times and Albert Hunt of The Wall
Street Journal. . . . Meanwhile, 55 radio talk-show hosts broadcast live from
tables set up on the front lawn of the White House, as Administration spinners
shuttle and weave among them.

By contrast, Franklin Delano Roosevelt introduced the Social Security Act in
1935 with a modest, brief message to Congress that was read by clerks; during
the ensuing legislative process, he spoke publicly about it only twice: once in
a short press conference and once in a radio address.

But the President in 1993 seems to have lost the option of exercising dignity or
restraint in support of his policies. The conversation of politics now is
carried on in the vernacular of advertising now. The big sell, the television
sell, appears to be the only way to sell. Increasingly, and especially in
Washington, how well one does on television has come to determine how well one
does in life.

The Attorney General presides over a disastrous commando raid on a religious
cult in Texas that leaves at least 80 people dead -- and is hailed as a new
American hero for performing well on "Nightline." The Vice President appears on
"Late Show with David Letterman," where guests are expected to mock themselves,
and wins applause by doing so with gusto; he says his Secret Service code name
is Buttafuoco and performs the Stupid Vice President Trick of breaking a glass
ashtray with a hammer. Ross Perot, a rich man who made his fortune on Government
contracts to computerize the welfare state, becomes a political force playing
the made-for-television character of a feisty, folksy, six-gunning outsider.
Washington writers work overtime crafting clever bits for turns on the talk
shows; a Sunday on "Meet the Press" does more to reaffirm a print reporter's
standing than all the work he might do in that week.

Washington has become a strange and debased place, the true heart of a national
culture in which the distinction between reality and fantasy has been lost, a
culture that has produced Oliver Stone as a historian, Joe McGinniss as a
biographer, Geraldo Rivera as a journalist, Leonard Jeffries as a geneticist and
Barbra Streisand as an authority on national policy. The standards and
boundaries that have been eroding for years have at last faded almost completely
away. The rare Governmental privilege of speaking under the cloak of anonymity,
traditionally granted only to Presidents, Secretaries of State and generals in
time of war, has become an accepted practice for midlevel White House aides
explaining routine policy matters to large roomfuls of reporters. Movie stars
show up with their press agents and their bodyguards to "testify" before
Congress. Politicians and reporters make cameo appearances as movie stars,
playing themselves in fictional scenes about politics and reporting.

Political operatives call themselves journalists and journalists behave like
political operatives, giving private advice to their politician friends -- and
this practice is so widely accepted as to be uncommented on. In early 1992, the
advisers to the Presidential candidate Clinton included the journalist Gergen.
In February, on the darkest day of the campaign, when the story broke of the
candidate's famous 1969 letter on his Vietnam War draft status, Gergen says he
"had a serious talk" with Clinton, "all about where he was going, what he was
going through." "I walked through with him what the essence of the charge
against him was," Gergen says, "and the essence of his response . . . and I told
him what particular point in his response had made the best impression on me."

Journalists have also joined politicians in the business of selling the pleasure
of their company to special-interest groups. Not long ago, only someone in
position actually to create objective reality -- a lawmaker, for instance --
could hope to receive an "honorarium" of thousands of dollars for spending an
hour or so chatting up a roomful of lobbyists. Now the marketplace recognizes
that those who create the perception of reality are equally worthy of honor in
the form of cash. At a convention of the American Medical Association last year
in Atlanta, according to an A.M.A. spokesman, the paid speakers included Tom
Brokaw, Michael Kinsley, Jeff Levine (the CNN health issues reporter) and
Marshall Loeb (the managing editor of Fortune magazine). In his last year and a
half as a journalist, before joining the White House, Gergen earned almost
$700,000 from speaking engagements.

The press pack has become both obese and incestuous. There are 1,700 accredited
White House reporters, and most of them keep in promiscuous electronic touch --
through Nexis and the Federal News Service and The Associated Press and Reuters
and CNN and PBS and C-Span -- with each other's work and with the vast
bloviation of words and pictures that Washington produces every day. Overwhelmed
by size and undermined by excessive intimacy, the pack has lost its howling way.
It has become as faddish as a teen-ager, vacillating in its attitudes toward the
powers that be, going from bubbling enthusiasm to hysterical anger, from
cheering all that the President says to denouncing all that the President does.
It is so thoroughly conformist that it celebrates group-think as (conventional)
wisdom.

Obsessed with the appearances of things, the pack is perpetually susceptible to
the machinations of the image-makers. It rewards, with glowing praise, triumphs
of form over content: medium-well-turned phrases, smart photo ops, effective
P.R. stunts. But it is also unhappily aware of its vulnerability, and exacts a
perverse revenge by seizing on the slightest misstep, the smallest deviation
from the perfect image, as an example of what Gergen calls "a naked moment in
politics," a metaphoric event that presumes to cut through the theater to show
the true man. A single such event -- Clinton and the haircut, Quayle and the
potato(e), Carter and the killer rabbit, Bush at the checkout counter -- its
significance heightened with every retelling, can permanently scar a public
figure, and several in a row can be fatal. Every year, a new species of
misdemeanor is defined as a high crime. This year, inattention to the tax laws
regarding baby sitters and house cleaners became the hanging offense.

Unhappily aware that much of what Government officials say and do in public is a
charade, unknowing of much that occurs behind closed doors and unwilling to
admit ignorance, reporters fashion reality out of perceptions. A New York Times
article in February reports that the President's advisers are worried about "the
perception thus wrought" by his rocky beginning, and says the Administration is
working "to refocus its image as a Government of broad, middle-class interests."
A Times report in May finds "a perception that the President," who won office as
a political centrist, "has come to look very much like the same old -- liberal
-- thing."

These bits of fatuousness are unexceptional in contemporary Washington
journalism; they stand out in my mind only because I wrote them myself.

A lot of people, even in Washington, look upon all this with regret and even
horror, but for David Gergen the reaction is more painfully personal. After 20
years of helping make the game of Washington what it is, he is now stirred, he
says, by feelings of sadness and guilt.

"This is a hard thing to discuss," he says. "It's very close to the bone. But in
our public affairs, including the Presidency, there's a certain amount of
propaganda that goes on, a certain amount of overselling, and I plead guilty to
doing a lot of it in the past. . . . I feel a measure of guilt about
accelerating the game, and making it bigger in years past. I felt at the time it
was important . . . and I contributed to it, participated in it, I believed in
it, I thought it was the right thing. And I think what I did helped lead to the
changes in the way the game is played today, where it has been taken beyond
where we were then. It had some consequences we didn't foresee. The game has
become more and more the thing, there is an overselling in politics now that was
not there to this degree 12 years ago, 14 years ago. . . . It has become
structural.

"But my larger sense of guilt, to the degree that I share in this
responsibility, is not about the P.R. game that has developed, but about what's
happening to the people of this country because of it. I don't think Government
over the last 20 years had been anywhere near as responsive as it should have
been with some very real problems. And I realize now that the measure of success
ought not to be, you know, Presidential rhetoric -- although that's an important
element of measured success -- but actions that really make a difference in
terms of how we affect people's lives. And in this sense, I think Government and
the people in Washington have been derelict over the last 20 years."

He defends his return to the White House as an act not of opportunism but of
expiation for the sins of his work in Administrations past. "I guess I feel I
pay my debt back to society by seeing changes made that would affect our lives
in a way that would match our public rhetoric," he says.

In two long conversations, Gergen returns again and again to this theme. "What
I've become cynical about is that a lot of what happens in Washington now is not
about things that have connection to people's lives outside this city. It's all
the ball game now. It's not about whether an idea makes sense in terms of
changing the country. And through all these games over the years, the country
has been going down the tubes."

He says he would like to leave the game behind. "I know that some of it is
necessary. I know that it is part of the way that the game is played, but I just
don't find it personally as alluring as I once did. . . . I've evolved. I used
to spend a lot of time worrying about how do we shape the next day's headline?
How do we shape that nice picture? Maybe it's a question of age, or maybe just
that I've been there, but I'm not the person who thinks about that sort of thing
every day now."

The Sieve leaks only on occasion now, and only at the highest levels. At 51, he
says, he sees Washington -- and himself -- differently from the days when he was
young and "very ambitious and very much going after the brass ring." When he
speaks of the men he admires, he speaks of the legends of the city, the
political players who became insiders' insiders and finally reached the apogee
of success, the special status known as wise man. The names roll off his tongue
-- Robert Strauss, the consummate deal maker; Bryce Harlow, the lawyer-lobbyist
who worked for two Republican Administrations, and, of course, Clark Clifford,
adviser to Democratic Presidents since Truman -- the city's eminence grise
until, Gergen contends, "he was smeared" in the B.C.C.I. scandal.

Gergen does not claim the wise man title for himself yet, but already he is
talking like one. When he speaks of counseling the 47-year-old Clinton, he
sounds a bit like a proud teacher noting the progress of a promising student.

"He's evolving," Gergen says of the President. "I think he's got a much better
grasp of the job." When Gergen first came to the White House in May, he says
Clinton "had been buffeted so heavily in the early months that I felt he had
lost his footing and wasn't as sure of what it is he wanted to be as I had seen
in the past. And it seemed to me over the course of the summer, he was gaining
it back."

There are still problems, Gergen says: "He needs more time to think. We need to
build more time into his schedule so he can think. . . . He's at his best when
he's decided what he really thinks. He's not comfortable otherwise. I've seen
this just again and again. On gays in the military -- he wasn't comfortable
until he had a chance to really work his own way through it. He wasn't
comfortable with Lani Guinier until he'd worked his way through it. He wasn't
comfortable in Somalia until he had worked his way through it."

In this ongoing process, Gergen sees his own role as "not to say, 'Here's what
you must do in the next three days on this issue,' but to say: 'Here are your
options. Let's talk about them and sort through what the consequences are. Let's
think it through. Let's ask some hard questions. Let's look down around the
corner. When the thing blows up in our faces, as it may, where do you want to
be, and how are you going to feel about that?' "

But even more important, Gergen says, the Bill Clinton of today, "has developed
-- and I've talked about this with him a fair amount -- a different view of the
Presidency and what leadership is about, and how to lead."

Interestingly enough, this different view of leadership harks back to the
Presidency of yesterday, the Presidency in a time before people like Gergen went
to work on it. "There have been so many lies told in the past, so many things
oversold in the past," Gergen says. The President, he argues, must abandon the
role of "commentator in chief," appearing on television every night to pronounce
on whatever needs to be sold that day or whatever the press wants reaction to.
"People don't need to see him out there with a comment on whatever it is."
Instead, Gergen says, the President must "set this larger vision and be working
toward that, and set goals for the nation, and try to inspire people toward
those goals. And I think he's gotten much better at that."

The selling of the President, Gergen says, has got to calm down, to return to a
closer connection with reality. "We have been subjected to so much hype and
fluff, that a bit more modesty could pay dividends," he says. "The resources you
have to deal with are so limited and the changes you can make are mostly so
incremental, that it is important not to oversell. If you do, the b.s. factor is
so high on both sides that people see it immediately as over the top."

It would be nice to think that this modest proposal isn't merely Gergen's
ultimate spin -- the spinner renouncing his past spinning, as he spins again. It
would be nicer yet to think that Gergen's words might become reality, that the
game might end or at least slow down, that the faith of image and insiderism
that defines Washington might finally lose its appeal. But not even David
Gergen, the budding wise man, really thinks that is going to happen any time
soon.

The other day, as I was leaving the White House," he says, "I counted the
cameras on the lawn for the evening standups. There were 24 of them.
Twenty-four! What do you do about that? What do you do about the line of
interview requests as long as your arm. If the President says to hell with them,
then he's inaccessible. If he does the interviews, he's overselling again.

"So much of what we do has become a necessary part of the game. It's almost
impossible to change the rules in the middle."

He sounds almost wistful. "To think that you can turn off the Government's
information machine and still run the Government is -- why, it's hard to imagine
it. It requires an enormous leap into a wholly different approach, and one that
would probably bring about some unforeseen consequences to the whole system. You
know, the Presidency probably would just become dysfunctional."


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2005

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Perhaps the second most important handshake to occur in
Washington this year. (DONALD R. WINSLOW/REUTERS/BETTMANN NEWSPHOTO)(pg. 64)
On the MacNeil/Lehrer News Hour during the 1992 Democratic convention, Gergen
(far left) was the (barely) conservative pundit. (JOSEPH SINNOTT/"THE
MACNEIL/LEHRER NEWSHOUR.")(pg. 65)
Gergen (bottom right, in his Nixon White House days)(NATIONAL ARCHIVES, NIXON
PRESIDENTIAL MATERIALS PROJECT) and his professors in press manipulation: Ray
Price (top left), Herb Klein (top right) and Charles Colson. (UPI/BETTMANN
NEWSPHOTO)(pg. 66)
After Nixon's makeover in 1968, the press didn't kick him around as much.
(HIROJI KUBOTA/MAGNUM)(pg. 67)
Reagan and Helmut Kohl (left) in Ottawa in 1981. In his dealings with the press,
Reagan usually drove the car. (MICHAEL EVANS/THE WHITE HOUSE/SYGMA)(pg. 68)
A look across the Korean DMZ for Reagan in 1983, a strategic photo op engineered
by Gergen. (WALLY McNAMEE/WOODFIN CAMP & ASSOCIATES)
 Just folks sitting around the living room talking, even if the living room was
really a stage. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARTIN SIMON/SABA)(pg. 71)

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 31, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: October 31, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 52; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1446 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  64   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 2      2   3   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                and a poem.

 3      3   5   LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues
                the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour."

 4      5  10   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 5      4   5   SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two
                Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics
                and murder.

 6      9   2   A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A
                young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in
                Victorian England's high society.

 7      7  29   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 8          1   THE FIRES OF HEAVEN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $24.95.)
                The fifth volume of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.

 9      6   8   THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                Concluding the "Griffin & Sabine" trilogy.

 10     8  33   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 11         1   DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) An
                architect-engineer gets caught between the warring factions of
                a clan that owns an English racecourse.

 12         1   GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN, by Phillip Margolin. (Doubleday, $22.)
                The wives of several Portland, Ore., businessmen disappear
                without a trace.

 13*   13  12   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction
                of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and
                woman and for the woman's first lover.

 14    10  41   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                illustrated cards and letters.

 15    12   5   POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $23.) A single
                mother and her teen-age daughter go on a spree after winning
                $60 million in a lottery.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   2   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 2      2   8   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 3      3  25   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 4      5   4   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 5      4  10   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 6     15   4   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 7     10  16   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A
                psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their
                effects on a person's self.

 8     12   2   STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski.
                (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played
                Capt. James Tiberius Kirk.

 9      9  64   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 10     8   5   THE FOUNTAIN OF AGE, by Betty Friedan. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                A call for men and women to regard life after age 60 as an
                exciting adventure.

 11     7   4   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by
                Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of
                marriage.

 12    11  21   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 13     6  11   MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays
                suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected
                ways and places.

 14         2   BLACK HOLES AND BABY UNIVERSES, by Stephen Hawking. (Bantam,
                $21.95.) The Cambridge physicist ruminates on his life and the
                cosmos.

 15         4   MORE MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Putnam,
                $21.95.) Stories about country music stars from the host of the
                "Nashville Now" television show.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   3   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.

 2      2  24   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.

 3      3  14   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 4      4  18   EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.)
                Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 16, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.

THE ARABISTS: The Romance of an American Elite, by Robert D. Kaplan. (Free
Press, $24.95.) A thoughtful, balanced view of the inbred State Department
specialists whose fluffs (like their dealings with Saddam Hussein) have received
more attention than their successes (like the exodus of the Ethiopian Jews).

BEFORE NIGHT FALLS, by Reinaldo Arenas. (Viking, $25.) Arenas, a Cuban writer
and exile who suffered from AIDS, killed himself in New York in 1990. His
passionate autobiography turns the usual circumstances -- persecution, betrayal,
coerced confessions, forced labor, attempts to "reform" him -- into something
exalted.

THE BEGINNING OF THE JOURNEY: The Marriage of Diana and Lionel Trilling, by
Diana Trilling. (Harcourt Brace, $24.95.) A conversational, direct, dignified
memoir that perforates the hygienic Trilling package; the Trillings, once
revered for their reasonableness, also deserve high marks for coping with the
irrational.

THE COST OF TALENT: How Executives and Professionals Are Paid and How It Affects
America, by Derek Bok. (Free Press, $22.95.) Mr. Bok documents and analyzes the
trends that have given David Letterman an income more than 50 times that of
President Clinton.

FIMA, by Amos Oz. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace, $22.95.) A novel whose
idealistic hero lives mostly in his head, daydreaming about seizing power or
bringing peace to Israel, while barely able to cope with his own life.

THE GIRL WHO TROD ON A LOAF, by Kathryn Davis. (Knopf, $23.) A heated, dramatic
novel narrated by Francie, an underachieving composer who finds redemption by
completing an inherited unfinished opera.

MARGUERITE YOURCENAR: Inventing a Life, by Josyane Savigneau. (University of
Chicago, $25.) Yourcenar (1903-87), author of "Memoirs of Hadrian," intense,
cerebral, fascinated by sexual ambiguity, has found a perfect biographer in the
patient, wise, industrious Ms. Savigneau.

PRESIDENT KENNEDY: Profile of Power, by Richard Reeves. (Simon & Schuster, $30.)
A journalist's judicious appraisal that casts Kennedy as a pragmatic cold-war
power broker and a manager of international confrontation.

REMEMBERING BABYLON, by David Malouf. (Pantheon, $20.) Mr. Malouf's adroit
seventh novel confronts a band of settlers in Australia with Gemmy, a boy born
white and raised by aborigines; they dread that their own identities might be
compromised like his.

TRAVELS WITH LIZBETH, by Lars Eighner. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A writer who
until very recently made homelessness his full-time job has found a strikingly
unconventional voice and form to deal with life as the literate don't normally
live it.

THE WARBURGS: The Twentieth-Century Odyssey of a Remarkable Jewish Family, by
Ron Chernow. (Random House, $30.) Mr. Chernow's saga follows the fates of a rich
German Jewish family betrayed by the nation they loved.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 31, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On The Road to Nowhere

BYLINE: By Marilyn Stasio;  Marilyn Stasio writes the Crime column for The Times
Book Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 25; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 653 words



THE MEXICAN TREE DUCK
By James Crumley.
247 pp. New York:
The Mysterious Press/
Warner Books. $19.95.

WHAT becomes a legend most? A country songwriter from Texas once explained it to
me this way: "Everybody respects Willie. And for all his craziness, you have to
admire Jerry Jeff. But Waylon is the outlaw we really envy. All the guys want to
be Waylon -- even the girls."

It's like that with James Crumley. Despite a meager output of three private-eye
novels in 18 years, the 54-year-old Texan has notched himself a high, wide and
handsome place in the hierarchy of hard-boiled crime writers. The force and
grace of his prose in "The Wrong Case" (1975), "The Last Good Kiss" (1978) and
"Dancing Bear" (1983) got the nod from master stylists like John D. MacDonald,
while down in the clay below, lesser scribblers have shown their regard by
endlessly rewriting the road-runner adventures of C. W. Sughrue and Milo
Milodragovitch, the Flying Dutchman antihe roes of these great gonzo novels.

"The Mexican Tree Duck," Mr. Crumley's first book in 10 years, does not displace
"The Last Good Kiss" as the definitive suicide mission of the
detective-as-outlaw in post-Vietnam America. But this fantastic road trip,
fueled by booze and dope and old war nightmares, does provide new direction for
the manic despair of its hero, C. W. Sughrue (pronounced "Shoog" as in sugar and
"rue" as in "rue the day"), while holding out hope of a violent redemption for
him and his wasted generation.

Sughrue is discovered, as in an acid flashback, tending bar at the Hell Roaring
Liquor Store and Lounge in Meriwether, Mont., when the lawyer Solomon Rainbolt,
the last legal resort of drug dealers for miles around, drags him off to make
peace with Abnormal Norman Hazelbrook, the C.E.O. of a local biker gang. A
vicious man who can't even be nice to his pet rats without breaking their backs,
Abnormal Norman persuades Sughrue to find his mother, who has been kidnapped
from the home of her current husband, a Texas oilman who is also a Presidential
envoy to Mexico.

"Suddenly I wanted to see it, all of it, West Texas, Mexico and points south,"
Sughrue realizes. "I wanted to go home someplace I had never been before." And
off he goes, tearing down the highway on a mad mythological odyssey through
spiritual deserts and blasted wastelands of the mind.

At various pit stops en route to the Tex-Mex border, Sughrue picks up a dying
cop, an alcoholic mailman and several other ravaged pieces of humanity who were
once his war buddies, arming them with enough firepower to kill or, in mellower
moments, maim the vicious hordes of Government agents and "vaqueros de farmacia"
on their tail. To maintain his chivalric code amid all the carnage, he also
becomes the obsessive protector of a woman, her baby and a goofy-looking
pre-Columbian pottery duck that could pass in the dark for a Maltese falcon.

The showdown massacre with which Mr. Crumley ends his crazy plot has a
head-cleansing effect on his ragged road warriors. The guys really needed this
war to exorcise the demons that have stuck to them ever since the real war. But
it is the journey, more than the battle at the end of it, that brings
enlightenment. "We had to admit that we were no longer what we had once been,"
Sughrue says, during one of the epiphanies that he and his friends share on
their insane road trip to sanity. "We didn't want to kill anybody anymore."

And it's the journey, with all its wild, wicked, sweet, painful, courageous,
outrageous and obscene encounters -- which must somehow also include those
between man and duck -- that will stay with the reader after the blood dries.
Characters as memorable as Abnormal Norman, Solomon Rainbolt and Sughrue himself
don't come blazing down the interstate that often. Neither do writers like Mr.
Crumley. Treasure them before they burn themselves out -- and take the flame
with them.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 31, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Matt Dillon May Look Tough, But Don't Get Him Wrong

BYLINE: By JAN HOFFMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 15; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1778 words


If face dictates function in Hollywood, then Matt Dillon's bristling black
eyebrows, bottomless pit of a gaze and stubborn jaw have stamped him for the
moody, explosive rebel roles; he has even said admiring things about Mickey
Rourke. And, with a few exceptions, surly, street-smart guys are the sort of
roles that find him, in films like "Drugstore Cowboy," "Over the Edge," "My
Bodyguard," "The Outsiders" and "A Kiss Before Dying." For years the press has
suggested that Mr. Dillon has been merely playing extreme versions of himself,
and interviewers repeatedly have found him tardy, coy, arrogant, withholding.

But Mr. Dillon is the first to arrive for a drink at a neighborhood bar on the
Upper West Side in Manhattan, and his grin is genial, even expansive. Then he
flops back in his chair, long legs sprawling and, throwing up his hands, says by
way of an opener, "So, like, what's with Mogadishu, huh?"

Earnest and yet hilarious in a spacey sort of fashion, Mr. Dillon, who is
closing in on 30, is not so much resistant to scrutiny as he is made awkward by
it. That's part of his charm, a quality that reviewers have praised him for in
"Tex," "The Flamingo Kid" and, to a loopier extent, in last year's "Singles," in
which he played the planet's dumbest would-be rock star.

"I do get bottled up in interviews," he says. "You're thinking about what you're
saying, and suddenly you get all tangled.

"So people think I'm sullen, or that I don't have much to say." He leans across
the table, looking hapless. "But my friends will tell you: a lot of times I talk
too much."

It is hard to be a certified grown-up when you're dogged by the public persona
of a scowling teen-ager, a situation that Mr. Dillon nonetheless exacerbated by
playing variations of that role on screen well into his 20's. Following "The
Flamingo Kid" in 1984, in which he played a ripe, seducible cabana boy from
working-class Brooklyn, he floundered in a half-dozen or so turkeys, with the
critics sniping at him for being a low-rent James Dean or Montgomery Clift with
pouty mannerisms.

While the heroin addict and thief Mr. Dillon played in "Drugstore Cowboy" in
1989 plowed some old ground, Stephen Holden of The New York Times called it the
role of Mr. Dillon's career and described the character as "alternately
appealing and appalling." Now Mr. Dillon has returned with back-to-back roles
that seem like mature versions of his best earlier work. In "Mr. Wonderful," a
new romantic comedy, Mr. Dillon plays a Con Ed worker who tries to marry off his
ex-wife, played by Annabella Sciorra. He is a sweet, rough-edged fellow who
could be an older brother of the cabana boy in "The Flamingo Kid." And in "The
Saint of Fort Washington," which opens Nov. 17, Mr. Dillon plays a
gossamer-fragile, disturbed homeless man befriended by a Vietnam veteran played
by Danny Glover, whom he meets in a city-run shelter. Although critics have had
decidedly mixed reactions to "Mr. Wonderful," they have noted that the cast,
which also includes William Hurt and Mary-Louise Parker, is much more sprightly
than the script.

Mr. Dillon, of course, will not speak about having grown up or coming into his
own -- that sort of thing is utterly beyond him ("I find talking about myself
really boring"), though his friends heartily agree that he has calmed down.
Instead, over the course of two evenings, Mr. Dillon does his dutiful best to
promote his films. "Don't we have to talk more about 'Mr. Wonderful' ?" he asks
with a squirm.

Although he has been a working actor for more than half his life, promotional
pieties don't come readily to him. Asked about any lingering effects from his
harrowing role in "The Saint of Fort Washington," in which he is menaced by
thugs in the shelter, chatters back nervously at the voices in his head, and
spends nights on subways and park benches, Mr. Dillon replies, "People asked me
if I wanted to start a charity, but when I was done with that movie, I just
wanted to get the hell out and go to Martha's Vineyard."

IT IS HARD TO IMAGINE SUCH candor tumbling from the lips of Tom Cruise, Rob
Lowe, Patrick Swayze, Ralph Macchio or Emilio Estevez, all of whom appeared with
Mr. Dillon a decade ago in "The Outsiders," directed by Francis Ford Coppola.
Not surprisingly, Mr. Dillon's career has been less conventional and less
commercially successful than those of his co-stars. But Tim Hunter, who directed
Mr. Dillon in "The Saint of Fort Washington" and in "Tex" almost 12 years
earlier, says that he is first among his peers:

"He's not yuppie lead material," says Mr. Hunter. "He's Matt. He's
down-to-earth. But I've always felt that while he's not the easiest person to
cast, he has more depth and soul than anyone else in his acting generation." .

Mr. Dillon's critical stock has fluctuated over the years; Mr. Hunter says he is
a good actor who has made some unfortunate choices. "I know from working with
him on 'Tex' that he has a vulnerable side that isn't always exploited in the
films that he does. He can really break your heart."

While Mr. Dillon's funny blue-collar hero in "Mr. Wonderful" is about as close
to the mainstream as he ever gets, in "The Saint of Fort Washington," he can't
get any farther from it: as Matthew, a promising photographer crippled by mental
illness and repeatedly institutionalized, he lives in a shadowy world of fears
so profound that he is too jittery to count the money he earns from washing
windshields at stoplights.

And though Mr. Dillon doesn't break into his version of the Actor's Guide to
Meaningful Social Policy (the actor, bless his soul, says things like "when I
finished that job"), his dithering about whether to accept the role and the
subsequent frenzy with which he prepared for it amount to a quieter, though no
less passionate statement.

His reluctance to take the part, he says, had nothing to do with the
questionable commercial appeal of a movie about the stark life of two homeless
men who cling to each other for survival. "I was concerned about whether it was
an honest depiction of the homeless," he says. He didn't want the project to
come off, he adds, "as too sentimental or a buddy movie."

Mr. Dillon spent three months researching schizophrenia and homelessness,
reading books, watching documentaries, going on forays with Project Help, a
program in New York City that ministers to the homeless mentally ill. "This film
was very subjective," he says, "not some intellectual exercise, some PBS thing:
'This is why these people are homeless, blah, blah.' If it works, it's because
you get caught up in their lives."

He says making the film, which included numerous scenes shot in the Fort
Washington Armory, a city-run shelter, and which used many residents as extras
and in bit parts, "wasn't emotionally draining. It was emotionally saturating."

Mr. Dillon himself has moved to the Upper West Side, after spending most of his
20's in lofts and apartments downtown. "He's wonderful to watch in New York
City," says Mr. Hunter. "Matt goes around like an un-self-consciously natural
aristocrat: he knows everybody in every restaurant, the cop on the street and
now some of the homeless people. It really is his town." Annabella Sciorra, his
co-star in "Mr. Wonderful" and a fellow New Yorker, calls him "life-smart."

Lynn Snowden, a writer who, with her husband, has befriended Mr. Dillon, says
that his digs, filled with a stylish, eclectic mix of French and American
antiques that he has been avidly collecting for years, fly right in the face of
his scruffy image. Indeed, while Mr. Dillon describes his interests as
"basketball, baseball and, uh, music," his pals talk about his knowledge of
vintage wines, his voracious reading habits, his gifts as a sketch artist.

Mr. Dillon's father, a former investment manager, now paints portraits; the
family, which includes Mr. Dillon's mother and five siblings (including his
brother Kevin, also a film actor), lives in Westchester and by all accounts is
rambunctious and close-knit. Mr. Dillon lived at home until he was 19.

One day when he was cutting class, loitering by his locker at the Hommocks
School in Larchmont, N.Y., the 14-year-old Mr. Dillon was spotted by a casting
agent who was searching for nonprofessionals to star in Jonathan Kaplan's film
"Over the Edge." Mr. Dillon continued making movies, but he never managed to get
his high school diploma. "I didn't drop out in the classic sense," he says. "But
I kept getting incompletes constantly because I was on movie sets." He looks
exasperated: "Gym! Now how was I going to get my gym credits?"

After that first movie, he became entranced with acting, so that unlike many
friends from his school days, he has long had a focus, a career. "But I really
regret not having a collegiate education," he says. "Like French literature? You
get to discuss it in a class. You don't do that when you read by yourself."

The upside of becoming a movie star, he says, are "the chicks and the checks.
I'm joking, I'm joking!" The downside, he says, is losing his anonymity:
particularly in his earlier years, Mr. Dillon was a bona fide teen idol, with
all that entails. Ms. Snowden, whom Mr. Dillon occasionally taps as an escort,
says that even now, "the fame factor is overwhelming. I've gone to an event with
him, and it's amazing how you drop into the shadows as far as everyone else is
concerned. Once, my place card read 'Friend of Matt Dillon.' "

Mr. Dillon's professional life is healthy these days -- a third film, "Golden
Gate," a drama about ferreting out Communists in the 1950's written by the
playwright David Henry Hwang and co-starring Joan Chen, is due later this year
-- but, Mr. Dillon says, he is not happy: his personal life is in a slump. Ms.
Wonderful has not yet made an appearance.

Whether the actor is ready for marriage is not exactly clear, though. "Sometimes
I think: 'Matt -- why don't you settle down and get married, like a Paul Newman
kind of thing,' " says Mr. Dillon, fingering his St. Christopher medal. Alas,
St. Christopher, explains Mr. Dillon, is the patron saint of travelers, and Mr.
Dillon's thoughts turn to a recent lengthy jaunt through Asia.

"That's the problem with wives," he says. "Too much planning. Her schedule, my
schedule."

Well, then, just what kind of a boyfriend is Mr. Dillon anyway? Good guy or
creep?

He stares down at his glass of club soda and cranberry juice for a long pause.
At last he replies: "Define creep."

A definition is proffered.

Another long pause ensues.

"I'm not the greatest boyfriend, but I'm not a creep," he says at last. "It's
more like I'm . . . absent-minded."

NAME: Matt Dillon

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In "The Saint of Fort Washington," one of two new movies he
stars in, Matt Dillon plays a homeless man. (Warner Brothers)(pg. 15); Matt
Dillon and Annabella Sciorra in "Mr. Wonderful" -- Sweet and rough-edged as a
Con Ed worker trying to marry off his ex-wife. (Warner Brothers)(pg. 22)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 31, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Making It Work;
On the Garbage Team

BYLINE: By CONSTANCE L. HAYS

SECTION: Section 13; Page 3; Column 1; The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1280 words


IT was an ungodly 2:48 on a Wednesday morning when a yellow-and-black-striped
heap of a subway train puffed and jerked into the station at 59th Street and
Lexington Avenue. On the platform, a woman who seemed to have had a long
evening, judging by her scowl and the wig that sat askew atop her head, began to
yell.

"Move this thing faster," she ordered, clearly grasping the fact that her train
would not arrive until this thing was gone. "Get this out of here!"

Aboard the outcast train, Vera Kitt was unfazed by the words. Typical abuse for
one of New York's more thankless jobs.

Night after night, Ms. Kitt and six fellow travelers board this rattling,
squealing, dust-blown, truly Stygian assemblage -- a diesel engine propelling
two flatcars and a stripped-down former passenger car -- on a seemingly
impossible mission: to clean the subway tracks.

Snaking out beneath New York, they, and perhaps 60 other workers on any night,
collect bag after bag of jettisoned coffee cups, cigarette butts, crushed beer
cans, lost sweat shirts, potato-chip bags, torn newspapers, gum wrappers,
abandoned shopping carts and other debris of urban life that is thrown or blown
onto the subway system's 722 miles of track.

"It's a never-ending job," said John Cardona, the Transit Authority's general
superintendent for track maintenance, who started out as a track worker more
than 20 years ago. "It's frustrating. It gets real bad when you see the public
with their elbow on a garbage can and eating a cheeseburger, and then they throw
their garbage onto the tracks. Then they'll yell down to our guys on the tracks,
'Hey, you get paid a lot of money for picking up garbage.' "

The pay is $8 to $18 an hour, depending on seniority, and the conditions could
hardly be less attractive. The garbage train is ground zero for a crew of five
track workers and a pair of supervisors, all in hard hats, gloves, and safety
vests with light-reflecting stripes. And heavy-duty work boots, since nails,
hypodermic needles and other sole-piercing dangers are all too common. For the
most part, this crew, on one of two trains scheduled each night, is picking up
bags of garbage assembled by other colleagues; most of the division's workers
spend their time on the tracks with brooms and shovels to corner trash that
might cause a fire or stop a train.

When not actually retrieving garbage, the workers sit inside the car on seats
with broken backs. There is no light inside the car; the floor is patched in
places with a gravel-and-tar mixture. When a regular subway train is glimpsed in
passing, its lights and relatively clean interior make it look like the Waldorf
on wheels.

At 11:30 P.M. on Tuesday, a crew assembled at the Canal Street station of the R
line and waited to board the garbage train that had been parked there. There was
Robert Mami, now a supervisor, who had worked on the tracks for 14 years. A
single parent, he arrives at 10 P.M. after tucking two children into bed, heads
home to Brooklyn at 6 A.M. and sleeps after they've headed off to school. His
father painted subway cars for a living. As the trains lurch, Mr. Mami rarely
has to hold on. "You kind of get used to it," he said.

Then there's Ms. Kitt, a four-year veteran who wears gold hoop earrings for work
even though it takes place in darkness well underground. And Clarence J. Davis,
who fought in Vietnam and joined the Transit Authority in 1969. Mr. Davis works
all night while his children are sleeping soundly like much of the rest of New
York. "Basically, that's why I'm out here," he said, "because I'm thinking about
my family."

Another supervisor, Ralph Mack, moved to New York from Barnwell, S.C., a
quarter-century ago. He still speaks with awe of the first time he looked up
from the tracks to behold a subway train inches away. "That was the biggest
thing I'd ever seen," he said. After 24 years with the garbage train, Mr. Mack
said he didn't mind the work at all. "No, I'm happy," he said, "because I know I
am going to have a job to come to."

As the garbage train plies its route, supervisors watch through cracked, dirty
windows for bags of garbage that have been assembled by track workers. When they
spot them (and it is difficult, given the dim lighting), they call out, the
train is halted, and workers step down onto the tracks, flashlights in hand, to
toss the bags onto the flatcars. Ultimately the garbage ends up in one of two
subway yards, where it is taken away by a hauling company. Recycling is not yet
in the picture.

Every station gets cleaned once a week, the busiest stations twice. In one
seven-week stretch earlier this year, workers retrieved 1,424.4 tons of litter
in a systemwide cleanup, Mr. Cardona said. Most work takes place at night when
trains are fewer, because the garbage train often uses the regular tracks.

On this night, because of delays over repair work, it was nearly 1 A.M. before
the crew's train began heading north. It traced the same tracks twice, between
Canal Street and Lexington Avenue at 59th Street, then headed for Queens, where
the workday would end just before 4 A.M., at 21st Street in Long Island City. By
then, the crew would cover the two flatcars with about 75 plastic sacks of trash
-- not a record-setting night, the workers said, but nothing to be ashamed of,
either.

Along the way, as cool and grimy air poured through the gaping doors of the
train, there were the usual glimpses of big rats (one dragging something equally
big in its maw), workers in hard hats repairing a section of track, graffiti
cryptograms deep inside the tunnels and passengers asleep aboard subway trains
on parallel tracks.

Particles of steel dust, which come from contact between train wheels and rails,
were visible in the light that bobbed from flashlights. The crew told of how
perspiration dripped black from their pores, a result of absorbing steel dust
over time. They also said it was dangerous work, since they must step across the
electrified third rail and stand to one side as trains blast by. Six track
workers have been injured so far this year, Mr. Cardona said, mostly from
tripping.

Cheerful and conversational even as the night crept into the wee hours, the crew
talked of rats they had seen and of their garbage-strewn impressions of the
city.

"Queens," intoned Morris Ward, a serene Bronx resident on the crew who has
worked for the Transit Authority for 15 years. "We pick up more garbage there
than anyplace else." Manhattan? "The West Side is worse than the East Side," he
said.

Ms. Kitt offered the most reassuring behavioral analysis of subway rats, which
she encounters every night. "They run one way, and I run the other," she said.

As necessary as the garbage train is, it may not be part of the subterranean New
York landscape forever. Officials have seen the future, and it is a rolling
train-size vacuum cleaner that can lift litter from the rails more efficiently
than humans can. That doesn't bother Mr. Mack, whose voice resonates like a fine
cello whether he is talking about trash or about his Southern heritage.

"There should be enough garbage," he said, "to go around."

NIGHT MOVES

Of Trash And Cash
Besides passenger trains, the Transit Authority operates four kinds of
late-night trains.
Money trains: Secured by armed guards, eight trains visit the 469 stations each
night to retrieve cash and tokens.
Garbage trains: Two trains a night pick up litter from tracks.
Refuse trains: Seven operate nightly, replacing full garbage cans on station
platforms with empty ones.
Track-maintenance trains: Some 35 roam the system nightly, stopping here and
there to do repairs.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Morris Ward, a member of the Transit Authority's garbage crew,
faces a daunting mission: retrieving trash from the subway tracks. (Rebecca
Cooney for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 31, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

UNIVERSITY PRESSES;
In Other Words

BYLINE: By Angeline Goreau;  Angeline Goreau, who spends her summers in France,
is completing a historical novel.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 53; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 742 words



FRENCH LESSONS
A Memoir.
By Alice Kaplan.
221 pp. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. $19.95.

"I HAD never heard my grandmother speak more than a sentence or two in a foreign
language until she lost her mind," Alice Kaplan tells us at the beginning of her
engaging memoir, "French Lessons." Her grandmother's madness, she remembers, was
awash with babel: Yiddish from home, Hebrew from synagogue, Russian from school.
"The change from one language to another, from ritual to conversation, was all
the communication she could produce."

Ms. Kaplan's immigrant family had, in one quick generation, shed not only the
language of their forebears, but its appurtenances as well. Ensconced in an old,
white-shoe Minneapolis neighborhood, she grew up speaking Midwestern without the
shadow of an accent. And she grew up in an America -- the America of the 1950's
-- where the very idea of foreignness was alien -- remote in a way it will
probably never be again. "It seems now," she reflects, "that no one will ever
again have that sense of being American that we had then, in the time between
the Second World War and Vietnam."

In one of the ironic reversals generations so often undergo, the emblem of her
grandmother's madness became Ms. Kaplan's salvation. Sent to boarding school in
Switzerland at the age of 15 to get over her father's death, she rescues herself
by learning to live in another language. Initially, what draws her to French is
the sense of control she derives from conquering the impossible French "r" -- a
speech exercise beyond the pale for most Midwesterners. But later on, it is the
possibility of escape -- the possibility of becoming someone else -- that
attracts her.

Learning French allowed Ms. Kaplan to put her world into order, which in its
turn awakened her to the pleasure of intellectual discovery. "That was what woke
me up," she writes in "French Lessons," "absorbing a new reality, repeating it,
describing it, appreciating it. . . . Knowing how to find out more. Inventing
methods for listening. . . . Then the pleasure of writing down what I had heard
and getting every detail, every accent mark right."

By the time she returned to the United States, Alice Kaplan had fallen
irretrievably under the spell of her adopted language. "French Lessons" examines
the consequences of her infatuation and its evolution into a career as a
teacher. Along the way, she offers useful advice for coming to grips with the
most daunting of French sounds, those that separate the barbarians from the
chosen. To get the "r," practice gargling with mouthwash. To find the "u" of
"tu," Ms. Kaplan instructs: first, "say 'o' with your mouth in a perfect round,"
then " 'eee' with your mouth stretched out in a horizontal smile like a trout,"
then a combination of the two.

ANYONE who has ever struggled with these two intractables and come out the
victor will feel a frisson of recognition reading her description of what it
felt like: "First feeling them wrong, like an impediment, feeling them again and
again in their wrongness and then, one day, opening up and letting the right
sound come."

Though less compelling than the earlier autobiographical chapters, Ms. Kaplan's
description of her career as a graduate student at Yale in the 70's is
instructive. Yale, under the guiding light of Paul de Man, was at the cutting
edge of deconstructionism, which in its turn was the avant-garde of French
literary studies. She recalls the heady experience of discovering a new way of
reading, whose premise was that "language can never tell the whole truth."

Surrounded by theorists who eschewed historical context, Ms. Kaplan chose to
work on a subject that "made history impossible to ignore": fascist propaganda
of World War II. Her initial impulse was to "transgress a purity that I
mistrusted in literary studies." The irony of her decision was apparent only
years later, when Ms. Kaplan heard that Paul de Man, the man who had taught her
to separate literature and life, had written for the pro-Nazi press in wartime
Belgium.

What is best in "French Lessons," though, has to do with Ms. Kaplan's skillful
interlocking of memoir and inquiry, her insistent probing into the complex
connection between language and self. With a novelist's eye for detail and a
critic's acuity, she has given us a rare and moving evocation of what it feels
like -- and what it means -- to fall in love with a language not one's own.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Town Full of Queries on Health Care

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 849 words

DATELINE: GARDEN CITY, Kan., Oct. 30


The health care issue descended on western Kansas today. Farmers, doctors and
hospital administrators were told that change was coming. They wondered about
how it would work and how it would affect their small businesses, or their
hospitals or the chances of getting a doctor to practice in a small town.

The state's two Senators, Bob Dole and Nancy Landon Kassebaum, both Republicans,
did not exactly appear as advocates of President Clinton's program though they
brought two speakers who did. Indeed, when one speaker said, "If you assume that
the Clinton plan passes," Mr. Dole grinned and shook his head vigorously.

But Mr. Dole, the Senate Republican leader, was there to tell 450 Kansans
assembled in a high school auditorium in this town of about 24,000 to prepare
for some kind of change. He recalled Hillary Rodham Clinton's openness to
compromise and said, "Give us time in Congress to do it right."

The audience seemed worried about too much change too soon. People looked
serious when Mr. Dole warned of job losses and bureaucracy. And they applauded
when their Republican Representative, Pat Roberts, summed up his views by
saying, "I don't believe the American dream is for everyone to be leveled with
everyone else."

Some Conflicting Concerns

Back in Washington, there is a tendency to believe that when the capital is
consumed with an issue, so is the country. Except when the issue is war, that is
rarely the case. But today it is.  There is a nationwide debate on health care,
even if it lacks the clear dividing lines of some broad concerns of the past,
like President Richard M. Nixon and Watergate or the Vietnam War.

Here in the flat wheat country the worries sometimes conflicted. Edie Dahlsten
from the Kansas Farm Bureau complained of imprecision: "Don't give us a
percentage, and don't tell us how wonderful the program will be, though that's
part of the vision. But what will it cost?"

On the other hand, Penney Schwab from the Methodist Ministry to
Mexican-Americans complained about the amount of detail and said, "I question
whether any legislation that takes 1,500 pages to write can actually reduce
Federal bureaucracy."

And some doubts here, like those heard in Congressional hearing rooms or
doctors' offices, related to a particular worries.

Dr. Eugene Davidson worried whether he and his fellow chiropractors would be
included in the plan.

Karl Sommers of the Mennonite Mutual Aid Association wondered if Mennonites
would have to join health care alliances with others who did not share their
beliefs about health.

But most concerns focused on two kinds of distance: the distance between towns
and hospitals in an area where the high school football team often travels 150
miles or more for a game, and the conceptual distance from Washington, where it
seems national issues are always decided.

Several people complained that regulations were written in Washington with urban
areas like New Jersey in mind. Mr. Roberts said Medicare reimbursement rates
paid "75 cents on the dollar" in this area, so the Federal Government was
already to blame for the shifting of costs that raised the bills and insurance
rates of everyone else.

Denise Denton, the executive director of neighboring Colorado's Rural Health
Resource Center, said that she was generally enthusiastic about the Clinton plan
but that she feared that its intended cuts in the growth of Medicare would prove
"crippling to many of your rural hospitals." The plan involves $124 billion in
Medicare cuts; Senators Dole and Kassebaum did not pipe up to say that the plan
they support would call for cuts of about as much.

Ms. Denton said, "It's not a lot of choice if you have to go to Topeka to access
care." (Two hours later, Ms. Denton experienced the isolation of Garden City
herself, missing the 11:45 plane to Denver. There was not a scheduled flight to
anywhere until Sunday afternoon.)

Yet there was an undertone, not of unanimity, but at least of widespread
agreement. One speaker after another said it was important to have universal
health care. Mr. Dole put it bluntly: "If you can't get health care, you've got
problems."

Jeffrey Human, who came from Washington where he is director of the Office of
Rural Health Policy at the Department of Health and Human Services, drew nods of
agreement when he said, "If you don't have health insurance, then all the rest
of us have to pay for it for you."

Carrying the message of compromise, Mr. Human said, "we can live with a changed
plan if it encompasses universal coverage" and comprehensive benefits.

Mrs. Kassebaum was there to remind the audience, ever so gently, that they had
survived change in the past.  She told of getting a call from an elderly woman
who insisted that whatever Congress did, it should not impose "socialized
medicine." She asked the woman if she had health insurance, and the women said
no, she was on Medicare and doing just fine.

"Do you remember," Mrs. Kassebaum asked the woman, that when Medicare was
enacted in 1965, it, too, had been denounced as "socialized medicine?"

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Seeking Beverage Curbs

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 152 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam Oct. 31


The Prime Minister of Vietnam, Vo Van Kiet, wants to restrict soft-drink and
beer imports and will examine new joint-venture proposals to insure adequate
domestic investment, the state-owned English-language newspaper Vietnam News has
reported.

All new joint ventures in beverages will have to be cleared by the Prime
Minister to encourage domestic investment and local production, the daily said,
quoting a statement from Mr. Kiet's office.

Joint ventures involving foreign brewers and soft-drink companies catering to an
increasingly prosperous market of 70 million Vietnamese have grown rapidly in
recent years.

Among the companies that have started producing under, or signed agreements for,
joint ventures with local companies are Pepsico and Coca-Cola, Carlsberg,
Heineken and Schweppes. In the case of American companies, business must await
an end to the United States' economic embargo.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

East China Sea Opened to Oil Exploration

BYLINE: By JOSHUA MILLS

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 561 words


Chevron, Texaco and two foreign oil companies have signed contracts with the
Chinese Government to begin exploration in the East China Sea, opening another
front in China's search for oil for its booming economy.

In a contract signed Friday and announced yesterday in Beijing, Chevron Overseas
Petroleum Ltd., a subsidiary of the Chevron Corporation, was granted a
seven-year contract to explore for crude oil and natural gas in a
700-square-mile area southeast of Shanghai. Terms were not disclosed, and a
Chevron Overseas spokeswoman, Pam Low, declined to place a dollar value on
Chevron's commitment.

On Thursday, Texaco Inc., AGIP Petroli S.p.A. of Italy and Maersk Oil China A.S.
of Denmark signed a contract to explore an area about four times as large as the
Chevron region.

Telephone calls to Texaco's headquarters were not answered yesterday; a news
release handed out at the signing in Beijing estimated that exploration would
cost at least $100 million in the first three years.

Pumping oil from its own land and waters, China has become the fifth-largest
producer in the world. It is expected to agree soon to additional exploration by
other foreign companies.

For years China has licensed foreign companies to develop oilfields in the South
China Sea, off its coast between Hong Kong and Vietnam, in return for a share of
the profits. But the search for oil in the East China Sea, while discussed for
years, is only now beginning.

The East China Sea is ringed by South Korea, Japan, Okinawa and Taiwan. China
has asserted for years that the continental shelf under the sea is an extension
of the Chinese mainland, while other governments in the region have continued to
insist that they have rights in the areas closest to them.

In recent years China has been able to meet its own energy needs. But oil
consumption has been growing faster in much of East Asia than in other parts of
the world and by next year, China -- whose economy has been growing about 12
percent a year -- is widely expected to need imports.

Incentive to Find Oil

That gives it a heightened incentive to find oil. Earlier this year, it agreed
to allow foreign companies to explore for oil in the Tarim Basin, in the far
west of the country.

Chevron, based in San Francisco, has been one of the most active American
companies in China, with numerous operations in the South China Sea through its
participation in a partnership with Texaco, AGIP and the Chinese National
Offshore Oil Corporation. The partnership drilled its first wells in October
1984, near the mouth of the Pearl River in the South China Sea, and brought its
first oilfield into production in 1990.

Chevron is also a 50-50 partner with Texaco in the Caltex Petroleum Corporation,
which sells gasoline at the retail level and produces motor oil.

Shanghai Office to Be Opened

Chevron said it hoped to begin exploration early next year and was opening a
Shanghai office to handle operations. It said that Len Bzdel, who has worked in
its Canadian and Albanian operations, would direct the East China Sea project.

The Chevron contract was signed by Wang Yan, president of the Chinese National
Offshore Oil Corporation, and Richard Matzke, his counterpart at Chevron
Overseas.

"We are favorably impressed with the geological prospects of the area," Mr.
Matzke said in a statement.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of China showing location of the proposed drilling area. (pg. D4)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Politics By Smear

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 710 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Joe McCarthy is long dead. But McCarthyism is alive and well in Washington, its
evil undiminished.

That is clear from the case of Morton Halperin, President Clinton's nominee to
be Assistant Secretary of Defense for Democracy and Peacekeeping. The extreme
right is running a campaign of smears to block his confirmation, even to deny
him a hearing. And the campaign is ruthless enough to succeed -- unless the
President speaks up for his nominee.

Mr. Halperin served in the Pentagon in the Johnson Administration. He was an
assistant to Henry Kissinger in the Nixon White House, until he and others on
the staff left over the invasion of Cambodia. Then he headed the Center for
National Security Studies and the Washington office of the American Civil
Liberties Union.

No one can doubt his ability, his broad knowledge of national security issues or
his toughness. He has never been infected by Washington waffle.

The attack on him portrays him as unpatriotic. Its method is innuendo and lies.

A "position paper" by the Republican staff of the Senate Armed Services
Committee says Mr. Halperin "was implicated at one point in Daniel Ellsberg's
illegal release of the classified material known as the Pentagon Papers."

Mr. Halperin, in fact, had nothing to do with the conveying of the papers to The
New York Times, which published excerpts from them. In any event publication did
no damage, as the Government's lawyer in the Supreme Court case over the papers,
Erwin N. Griswold, later conceded. The papers enabled the public to learn how
this country had slipped into the Vietnam War.

The "position paper" attacks Mr. Halperin for helping the legal defense of Mr.
Ellsberg and others it dislikes. The critics do not accept the American
principle that you can defend someone's legal rights without agreeing with him.
The A.C.L.U. at Mr. Halperin's direction also defended Oliver North and Lyn
Nofziger when they faced criminal charges.

The attackers denounced Mr. Halperin for opposing covert U.S. military
operations abroad. Many others have taken the same stand, including former
Secretary of Defense Clark Clifford. The Church Committee, which investigated
C.I.A. covert actions, concluded that many had gone wrong and that they should
be limited to extraordinary occasions when the country's survival is at stake.

Underlying such criticism, I believe, is the notion that intelligence activities
should not be subject to the Constitution and laws. Mr. Halperin has taken the
opposite view. Which is the un-American position?

In foreign affairs, the attackers are critical of the fact that Mr. Halperin
opposed the U.S. invasions of Grenada and Panama. So did many other reasonable
people.

What I hear in those criticisms is a hangover of old cold war hates. The people
who are attacking Mr. Halperin are some of the same ones who opposed arms
control and said President Nixon was selling out the country in his policy of
detente with the Soviet Union. With the cold war over, these people have to find
a devil somewhere.

Joe McCarthy used to say, "I have in my hand" a list of Communists. Republicans
on the Armed Services Committee said the C.I.A. had files on suspicious meetings
Mr. Halperin had overseas. The C.I.A. looked and found nothing.

Virtually nobody in the Senate believes the rubbish used in the attack on Mr.
Halperin. But the campaign against him, in its viciousness, has evidently
intimidated people of reason and moderation.

Senator Sam Nunn, chairman of the Armed Services Committee, has not yet even
scheduled a hearing. He may be waiting to see whether President Clinton is going
to stand by this nominee. So far Mr. Clinton has said not a word.

The President could turn this situation around easily. All he has to do is to
say out loud that he fully supports Mr. Halperin and intends to stick with him,
that he is entitled to a hearing and that, after one, the Senate will confirm
him.

Perhaps Mr. Clinton thinks this is some far-off battle that cannot harm him. But
it could. In the case of Morton Halperin a handful of right-wing extremists are
using their old methods to cripple the system. To let them succeed would be a
blow to Bill Clinton's Presidency -- and to decency in our civic life.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 2, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Citibank in Hanoi

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 6; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 85 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Nov. 1


Citibank, the second United States bank to set up shop in Vietnam, will formally
open its representative office in the Vietnamese capital on Nov. 11, bank
officials said today. It joins Bank of America, which opened a representative
office in the city earlier this year. Both have permission from the United
States and Vietnamese Governments. About 30 foreign banks have representative
offices in Hanoi or Ho Chi Minh City that can advise and make contacts for
clients but may not conduct banking business.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1058 words



International A3-18

GORBACHEV NOT COUNTED OUT
Although his popularity rating is low, Mikhail Gorbachev, in an interview, would
not count himself out of politics and was evasive about whether he would run for
President.  A3

DEFEAT FOR JERUSALEM MAYOR
Early returns showed Teddy Kollek swept from office after 28 years as Mayor of
Jerusalem. The results were a blow to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin as well,
because he had called the election a test of his agreement with the P.L.O.  A18


CONFLICT AT MIDEAST TALKS
Palestinians broke off their talks with Israel in protest over Israel's plans
for repositioning troops in occupied territories, but Israel said that it
expects talks to resume.A18

EMBARGO SQUEEZES WRONG HAITI
The oil embargo is causing severe hardship in Haiti for average citizens, but it
has not worked on military leaders. Some are even getting rich, through
smuggling.  A7

CLINTON PRESSES FOR TRADE PACT
President Clinton placed the reputation of his Administration on the line,
saying that rejection of the North American Free Trade Agreement would harm
foreign policy and be a victory for partisan politics.  A8

U.S. OPPOSES AMNESTY IN BALKANS
A high official said the United States has ruled out granting amnesty for war
crimes in the Balkans and will seek sanctions against countries refusing to hand
over suspected criminals for trial.  A16

ITALIAN TYCOON SURRENDERS
Carlo De Benedetti, the computer tycoon who is the highest-ranking business
figure arrested in Italy's bribery scandal, gave himself up, but was released
under house arrest after he was questioned.  A16

The U.S. and Russia were urged to take nuclear missiles off alert.  A10

New guiding principles were set for the Russian Army.  A11

U.S. urged Japan to accept a missile defense system for Asia.  A12

U.S. and China held military talks, with peace the focus.A13

Colombia increased inducements for drug traders who surrender.  A9

In London, a prosecutor described a child's killing by two boys.  A16

Ho Chi Minh City Journal: Returning to a reviving city.  A4

National A20-25, B13-14

PACKWOOD STRUGGLE CONTINUES
The Senate voted, 94 to 6, to back the ethics committee's enforcement of a
subpoena for Senator Bob Packwood's personal diaries.  A1

The fight over the diaries ventures into uncharted ground.  B13

MORE FIRES STRIKE CALIFORNIA
A new fire driven by strong desert winds cut a swath of destruction through the
Santa Monica Mountains and down to the Pacific Ocean at Malibu.  A1

LEARNING TO LOBBY, AGAIN
Although Congress has tried to toughen the nation's lobbying laws and ethics
rules, aiming to restrict lobbyists' interaction with lawmaker, the lobbyists
have kept pace with the changes.  B14

BAIL UPHELD IN BEATING CASE
A Judge refused to lower bail for Damian Williams, who was convicted in the
beating of a white truck driver in Los Angeles.  B14

NO-BEARD BAN OVERTURNED
A Federal appeals court has ruled that Domino's Pizza must waive its ban against
beards for black employees who have a common skin ailment.  A20

JURY-SELECTION BY SEX IS WEIGHED
The Supreme Court tackled the question of whether lawyers can remove potential
jurors on the basis of their sex.  A22

Archivists said the public can obtain the Court's audiotapes.  A22

NEW VIRGINIA GOVERNOR
George Allen, a conservative former Republican Representative who once was far
down in the polls, won the Virginia Governor's race.  A24

CHALLENGE FOR DOCTORS
The Government challenged two joint ventures formed by doctors who sent patients
to medical equipment companies in which the doctors had invested.  A25

The nation's data highway is groaning under rush-hour traffic.  D1

New home sales surged 20.8 percent in September.  D1

Education Page B15

CAMPAIGN FOR MINORITY TEACHERS
The shortage of minority teachers is so bad that Philadelphia, like other big
cities around the country, is bypassing the usual hiring channels to put more
blacks, Hispanics and Asians in classrooms.

Pregnant cheerleaders can stay on the squad in Texas.

On Campus: Student newspapers stolen at University of Maryland.

Metro Digest B1

GIULIANI BEATS DINKINS
Rudolph W. Giuliani unseated Mayor David N. Dinkins in a reversal of their 1989
contest. Mr. Giuliani will become the first Republican to run New York City
governmen in more than a generation.  A1

A FINAL APPEAL TO SUPPORTERS
Weary but resolved, Mayor Dinkins went to the voters one final time and took at
least as much comfort in the progress of African-American political history as
he did in the day's critical -- and ultimately failing -- vote on his own
future.  A1

WHITMAN WINS IN NEW JERSEY
Harnessing anger over taxes in new Jersey, Christine Todd Whitman narrowly won
election over Gov. Jim Florio, becoming the first woman governor of the state.
A1

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-14

At work with Sean Driscoll.  C1
Drumming for the 90's: Much more than a beat.  C1
One potato, two potato, more, more, more.  C1
Wine Talk C12
Review/Fashion: An easy grace by de la Renta.  C14

Health Page C16

Fighting the panic that M.R.I. scans induce in some patients.
Personal Health: The importance of childhood eye exams.

Arts/Entertainment C18-24

Fall auction season opens.  C19
Columbia Pictures on literary ground.  C19
Theater: "The Treatment." C19
Film: "Tango Player." C23
Music: Rod Stewart, live.  C19
Books: "Girlhood Embroidery," in two volumes.  C18
Television: "Missing Persons" and "Moon Over Miami." C24

Sports B16-22

Baseball: McDowell wins Cy Young.  B17
Hockey: Rangers deal Patrick.  B17

Obituaries D24-25

Severo Ochoa, biochemist who won a Nobel Prize.  D25
Walter L. Palmer, an internist, scientist and a teacher.  D25

Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27

Editorials

A misleading health estimate.
No loans to boost arms sales.
The young prove mortal again.

Letters

Bob Herbert: The verdict.
Richard Ravitch: Mantra for the Mayor -- deficit, deficit, deficit.
Amy Knight: Beria, the Reformer.

Bridge C18

Chronicle B12

Crossword C18

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Ho Chi Minh City Journal;
The Boat People Fly Back, With Riches to Invest

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1026 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


After fleeing Vietnam seven years ago with nothing but the desperate hope to
make a better life anywhere else, Minh Le returned this fall with a bottle of
perfume, a bottle of champagne and $2,000 in cash.

They were gifts for his aging parents, who remained behind when Mr. Le, now 30,
slipped across the border into Cambodia in 1986 and found a rickety boat to take
him to Thailand. He eventually made contact with relatives in the United States,
and today he is a budding computer entrepreneur in Falls Church, Va.

"When I left, there was nothing in Vietnam," said Mr. Le, whose pastel
Hawaiian-style shirt gave him away in the streets of this city as a Viet kieu, a
Vietnamese expatriate. "Now people have money. Everywhere, I see
Vietnamese-Americans who are coming back to Vietnam to do business. They buy
land, they buy houses, businesses. Someday I want to come back and do business
here, too."

Ho Chi Minh City, the southern Vietnamese city that most inhabitants never
stopped calling Saigon, is being revived to a large, and still secretive, degree
by the same people who were once desperate to leave.

Nearly 20 years after the first of them risked their lives to escape Communism
and poverty, many of the so-called boat people are returning, lured by a wish to
help the family members they left behind and to invest in one of the most
promising economies in Southeast Asia.

Visitors Now Welcome

Although the Vietnamese Government initially treated the returning Vietnamese
with suspicion and even scorn, it now welcomes most Vietnamese-American visitors
-- and their dollars. American dollars are used in virtually all major business
transactions here.

"It would be difficult for us to be rude to these Viet kieu because so many of
them are our relatives," said a Vietnamese diplomat who has a cousin living in
Washington and another in California. "We are a very pragmatic people. We need
investment from everywhere to rebuild our country."

For several years the United States has allowed Americans to travel to Vietnam
as tourists, although there are still restrictions on the amount of money they
can spend here.

At Tan Son Nhut International Airport in Ho Chi Minh City -- once the central
American air base in what was then the South Vietnam capital -- dozens of
Vietnamese-Americans arrive every day to tearful reunions with parents and
brothers and sisters.

"I am an American now," said a prosperous looking Vietnamese-American
businessman from Orange County, Calif., waiting in the immigration line at the
airport and holding tight to his blue American passport. He said he owned a
convenience store "and I am proud because it is very successful."

Stacks of $100 Bills

"Now I come back to help my family," he said. "Maybe I help myself, too." He
allowed a passenger arriving on the same flight a peek inside his black calfskin
attache case, which contained stacks of $100 bills. "Everybody does it," he
said.

Vietnamese Government economists estimate that Vietnamese-Americans have
invested hundreds of millions of dollars in their homeland in the last several
years, taking advantage of free-market reforms begun in the late 1980's. But for
one very good reason no one is sure exactly how many Vietnamese-American
investors are here, and exactly how much money they have brought: most of the
investment is illegal, a violation of the 18-year-old United States trade
embargo on Vietnam.

Under Federal law, Vietnamese-Americans can provide "humanitarian assistance"
for their families in Vietnam, but much of the investment clearly goes beyond
that, and almost no one interviewed for this article would allow their names or
their photographs to be used.

"For Vietnamese-Americans, the boom business at the beginning was Vietnamese
real estate," said Yen Do, editor and publisher of the Nguoi Viet, or Vietnamese
People, newspaper in Orange County, Calif., one of the largest Vietnamese
dailies in the United States. "Then some began providing money-changing
services. The latest boom is selling used cars brought from southern China."

Until recently, he said, it was dangerous for Vietnamese-Americans to
acknowledge that they had traveled to Vietnam, let alone that they invested in
the country, because of the aggressive anti-Communism of their
Vietnamese-American neighbors.

"Now, everybody is going in and out of Vietnam," he said. "You can't hide it
anymore because you see your neighbors from Orange County in the streets of
Saigon."

Going by the rumors heard around Ho Chi Minh City -- and getting beyond those
rumors can be very difficult -- whole blocks of the city are now owned by
Vietnamese-Americans who have used family members living here as fronts. The
relatives sign the deeds.

Two of the city's leading private hotels are said to be secretly owned by
Vietnamese-Americans, as are several restaurants, travel agencies and
electronics stores. While most of the Vietnamese-American investment is going to
the long-capitalist southern half of the country, there is also evidence of
their money in Hanoi, the capital, and elsewhere in the North.

"We are owned by Vietnamese, not by Americans, but we have many Viet kieu from
America who come here to enjoy our food," said a manager of the popular Thanh
Tra restaurant, where many Vietnamese-Americans play host at extravagant feasts
for their families -- and for their new Vietnamese businesss partners.

Embargo Helps Business

Decorated with neon lights and rows of video screens, the restaurant looks much
like a disco, with loud music drowning out business conversations that a number
of the restaurant's Vietnamese-American guests might not want overheard.

Beneath one of the video screens sat a Vietnamese-American businessman from San
Jose, Calif., who said he had been doing business in Vietnam for nearly two
years, importing American computer equipment by shipping it through other
countries in Southeast Asia.

"For me, the embargo is a good thing," he said, laughing as he downed another
glass of the expensive imported whisky that is often used here to toast new
business deals. "It keeps out the competition."


LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Many expatriate Vietnamese are returning to their homeland, to
help relatives left behind and to invest in one of the most promising economies
in Southeast Asia. Patrons dined under video screens at the Thanh Tra restaurant
in Ho Chi Minh City, where many Vietnamese-Americans play host at extravagant
feasts for their families. (Philip Shenon/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 4, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Blaze in Vietnam Kills 39

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 50 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Nov. 3


At least 39 people were killed and 60 were injured when a fire erupted as a
crowd tried to steal fuel from a burst gasoline pipeline, the state-run Vietnam
News Agency reported today. The fire erupted on Tuesday in Uong Bi in Quang Ninh
Province, about 60 miles east of Hanoi, the agency said.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Art in Review

BYLINE: By ROBERTA SMITH

SECTION: Section C; Page 31; Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 309 words



Oyvind Fahlstrom
 Sidney Janis Gallery
 110 West 57th Street
 Manhattan
 Through Nov. 13

The work of Oyvind Fahlstrom, a Swedish artist who died of cancer in 1976 at the
age of 47, occupies a frequently overlooked niche in the history of Pop Art, one
that is illuminated by this small, excellent retrospective. It includes 25 works
dating from 1963 to 1975: drawings, paintings on paper and a collage whose
magnetized motifs can be moved around, as well as three colorful cutout
sculptures, reintroducing an artist who was, in essence, a political
miniaturist.

Born and reared partly in Brazil, Mr. Fahlstrom completed his childhood in
Sweden and moved to New York in 1961. Here he became a friend of Robert
Rauschenberg and Claes Oldenburg, and an admirer of R. Crumb and Krazy Kat. As
the work on view demonstrates, his admiration for popular culture was equaled by
a suspicion of nearly all forms of government.

In the 1960's, he evolved a dense, compartmentalized surface that was part map,
part squashed-together cartoon, part written commentary and all art. His mature
works, mostly paintings on paper from the early 1970's, teem with tiny
caricatures of politicians and current events (the Vietnam War, the coup in
Chile) and startling statistics about economics and world history, while glowing
with rich color-coded hues (red for communism, blue for capitalism, green for
the third world). At once grim and hopeful, these works depict the world as an
absurdly evil place without seeming to lose their faith in humanity.

Such balance may stem from the fact that Mr. Fahlstrom leavened his art with
large doses of humor and held pleasure (both his own and his viewer's) in high
regard. His ability to be politically acute and visually entertaining is a
lesson that more contemporary artists should absorb.   ROBERTA SMITH

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 6, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Sports of The Times;
Boxing's Longest Count

BYLINE: By DAVE ANDERSON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 727 words

DATELINE: LAS VEGAS, Nev.


WHEN a boxing buff was reminded of tonight's heavyweight title fight, he asked,
"When's Tyson getting out?"

Not a word or a thought or an opinion about who will be here in the ring at
Caesars Palace tonight; instead, a question about the future of Mike Tyson, who
won't be here.

But the Mike Tyson mystique is here.

Boxing's popularity usually thrives in direct proportion to the mystique of its
heavyweight champion. At their best, Muhammad Ali, Rocky Marciano, Joe Louis and
Jack Dempsey transcended the not-so-sweet science. Just about everybody seemed
to be aware of them. And just about everybody still seems to be aware of Tyson,
for better or for worse, despite his rape conviction.

Riddick Bowe, who defends the International Boxing Federation and World Boxing
Association titles tonight against Evander Holyfield, has yet to make himself
aware to just about everybody. If Holyfield were to regain the championship he
lost to Bowe a year ago in a unanimous 12-round decision, the heavyweight
doldrums would be even deeper during boxing's longest count: the 17 months until
Tyson walks out of his Indiana slammer.

But until Tyson again climbs into a ring in his black trunks and black shoes,
the heavyweight division might be the weakest it has ever been.

Lennox Lewis, the World Boxing Council champion, lost luster in two vague
victories over Tony Tubbs and Frank Bruno. Tommy Morrison was exposed as a
pretender by Michael Bentt's first-round knockout. Michael Moorer looms as a
virtually unknown mandatory challenger.

Pernell Whitaker is now boxing's most celebrated artiste, but a welterweight
doesn't stir the public the way a heavyweight champion does.

If Bowe demolishes Holyfield quickly, yes, it would add a 30th knockout to what
would be a 35-0 record but it would subtract from his appeal. Any heavyweight
champion is only as credible as his competition.

Muhammad Ali needed Sonny Liston, Joe Frazier and George Foreman. Rocky Marciano
needed Jersey Joe Walcott and Ezzard Charles. Joe Louis needed Max Schmeling,
Billy Conn and Walcott. Jack Dempsey needed Jess Willard, Luis Firpo and Gene
Tunney.

If Holyfield falls quickly to Bowe, after Michael Dokes fell in one round and
Jesse Ferguson fell in two, the champion's competition would be virtually
nonexistent.

Bowe needs Tyson for credibility, but Tyson also needs Bowe. For all his savage
knockouts, Tyson never cemented his stature against a respected rival, and his
credibility collapsed when Buster Douglas dethroned him in Tokyo in a stunning
10th-round knockout. And whatever credibility Douglas had, it vanished when,
flabby and lazy, he was quickly dethroned by Holyfield in a third-round
knockout.

Shortly after a Tyson-Holyfield showdown was scheduled, Tyson complained of sore
ribs. Before the fight could come off, Tyson was convicted of rape.

In various jailhouse interviews, Tyson has talked of maybe never boxing again,
of settling in Africa or going to college. But when he's offered possibly as
much as $25 million for a title extravaganza, he'll surely return to the gym.

If Tyson is released from prison on schedule in April 1995, he will be 29 years
old. Young enough to resume a career, as Ali did at 28 in 1970 after a
three-and-a-half-year exile for refusing induction into the armed services
during the Vietnam War.

And just as Joe Frazier was waiting for Ali to return, chances are Riddick Bowe
will be waiting for Tyson to return.

On paper or on canvas, about the only boxer who looms as a threat to Bowe now is
Bowe himself. At the weigh-in Thursday, he was a hefty 246 pounds, somewhat
overweight and somewhat overconfident.

"He's too small; he's not that strong," Bowe keeps saying of Holyfield, who
weighed 217. "He just can't win."

But if Bowe doesn't stop Holyfield by the middle rounds, if he isn't in shape to
go 12 rounds because he has taken Holyfield lightly and hasn't trained properly,
the champion could be dethroned in a 12-round decision. Or even stopped or
knocked out.

"Bowe is a front-runner," Holyfield has said. "If he ever gets in trouble, he'll
drop. He gives his all until he gets hurt. When I was using him as a sparring
partner in 1987 and early 1988, he got hit in the eye one time. I could see him
wimping."

But no matter what happens tonight, the boxing public will be waiting for Mike
Tyson to happen.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mike Tyson (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 6, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Washington at Work;
It Takes a Peacekeeping Nominee To Show the Cold War's Still Burning

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1738 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 5


Morton H. Halperin, President Clinton's nominee for Assistant Secretary of
Defense for peacekeeping issues, was supposed to have spent this year fighting
policy battles over Somalia, the former Yugoslavia and Haiti. Instead, he finds
himself under fire on the battlefields of the cold war.

In tones reminiscent of 1950's national security hearings, conservative members
of Congress have branded Mr. Halperin an enemy of American soldiers, a threat to
national security and a traitor.

Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, the ranking Republican on the Armed
Services Committee, says Mr. Halperin is "dangerous to our national defense" and
accuses him of having "aided individuals engaged in undermining the nation's
security at the height of the cold war."

Move to Obtain Files

Mr. Thurmond and his Republican allies on the Armed Services Committee have
ordered the Central Intelligence Agency to produce files on Mr. Halperin,
hinting that a secret dossier will disclose his subversive activities abroad.

The agency swears that no such documents exist, though the senators swear they
do. Their staff members have told colleagues that Mr. Halperin unmasked C.I.A.
officers working undercover overseas, leading to their assassination by foreign
intelligence agents. According to Congressional staff members who say they have
heard those accusations, the words "traitor" and "killer" have been used.

In many ways, Mr. Halperin is an odd target for conservative rage. A former
Republican, he is a veteran Washington national security intellectual who has
worked in administrations of both parties. His published works show him to be
politically moderate, said Arnold Kanter, Under Secretary of State for political
affairs in the Bush Administration.

"His writing on national security, peacekeeping and multilateralism is
conventional, mainstream, right down the middle," said Mr. Kanter, "and that
comes from someone who served four years under President Bush."

Mr. Kanter said the newly created peacekeeping post for which Mr. Halperin was
nominated was partly responsible for the attacks on him.

The deaths of American soldiers and Somalis in what began as a humanitarian
mission, and the continuing carnage in Bosnia and Herzegovina have made it clear
that no one knows exactly how American armed forces are supposed to make peace
and build democracy. Many conservatives believe that role, and in particular a
role subordinate to the United Nations, may be inappropriate for the world's
sole superpower.

But what seems to have struck a rawer nerve is Mr. Halperin's involvement on
what conservatives view as the wrong side of a variety of cold war issues and
organizations: the Vietnam War, the Pentagon Papers, Watergate, the American
Civil Liberties Union. Conservatives have cast him as a symbol of the political
forces that vexed the two leading conservative Presidents of his age: Richard M.
Nixon and Ronald Reagan.

"This is a strained attempt to extract revenge for disagreements over the cold
war," said Alton Frye, national director of the Council on Foreign Relations.

In the meantime, Mr. Halperin waits for a hearing, serving as a Pentagon
consultant. Under the protocol for pending nominees, he must remain silent.
Friends say he finds his situation Kafkaesque, a death by a thousand paper cuts.
Two years ago, he published a paper with proposals for "ending the cold war at
home," but his nomination seems to suggest his ideas have not fully taken root.

Mr. Halperin, 55, is in many ways a creature of the cold war. In addition to
once being a card-carrying member of the Republican Party, he headed a Students
for Eisenhower group as a sophomore at Columbia College. In 1961, he joined the
faculty of Harvard University. At early demonstrations against the Vietnam War
at Harvard, he spoke out in favor of American involvement.

He was neither hawk nor dove but something of an owl on military issues, one of
those serious crewcut men who in the 1950's and 1960's spent a great deal of
time thinking about strategies for Armageddon. At the age of 29 he was asked to
join the Defense Department, and he oversaw a group that compiled a secret
history of the Vietnam War, later known as the Pentagon Papers.

Praise From Kissinger

In 1969 he joined Mr. Nixon's National Security Council, and in the words of his
boss, former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, he was "one who served his
country well." But he turned against the war, and he left the Government in
1970.

From May 1969 to February 1971, his home telephone was wiretapped at the
direction either of President Nixon, according to Mr. Kissinger, or of Mr.
Kissinger, according to Mr. Nixon. The wiretap, intended to stop the flow of
disclosures to journalists, turned up nothing incriminating. But the illegal
surveillance of Mr. Halperin and other citizens became one of the articles of
impeachment against Mr. Nixon before his resignation in August 1974.

Galvanized by Watergate-era disclosures of extensive spying on American citizens
by American intelligence agencies, Mr. Halperin wrote and spoke out against such
practices. As Washington director of the American Civil Liberties Union from
1985 to 1992, he defended people across the ideological spectrum on the common
ground of the Bill of Rights.

The chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence from 1988 to 1993,
David L. Boren, Democrat of Oklahoma, said Mr. Halperin worked closely with the
committee to help draw up legislation supported by both national security
officers and civil libertarians.

Mr. Halperin's supporters, who include four former Secretaries of Defense, two
former Directors of Central Intelligence and two former Secretaries of State,
call the accusations against him outrageous.

They say the ghost of Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, the Republican from Wisconsin
whose false accusations of Communist subversion set off witch hunts in the
1950's, is haunting the Senate. They attribute the tone and tenor of the attacks
in part to Senator Thurmond's chief of staff, Robert J. Short. In the 1970's,
Mr. Short investigated suspected subversives for the Senate Subcommittee on
Internal Security, the counterpart of the House Committee on Un-American
Activities.

Mr. Short did not respond to a request for an interview.

Burden of Proof

Paul H. Nitze, President Reagan's arms-control negotiator, says rumor has
supplanted debate on the nomination. "The Administration should get the benefit
of the doubt on this," said Mr. Nitze, who supports Mr. Halperin's nomination.
"The burden of proof is on those who object."

Mr. Frye said Mr. Halperin was being subjected to "Chinese water torture, and
worse than that."

"These are inaccurate, distorted, outrageous attacks," he said. "At what point
do his accusers lose the presumption that their accusations have any substance?
"

Today, eight months after Mr. Halperin's nomination was announced, Sam Nunn, the
Georgia Democrat who heads the Senate Armed Services Committee, tentatively
scheduled hearings for mid-November. Through those eight months, as the attacks
on Mr. Halperin grew in intensity, the White House did not speak out in his
defense.

While Mr. Halperin's opponents have excerpted his published writing and public
testimony to suggest that he is a dangerous leftist, a close study shows that
those accusations are either demonstrably false or based on statements wrenched
from their contexts.

For example, Mr. Halperin's opponents took a phrase from a textbook he wrote in
1973 -- "The Soviet Union never even contemplated the overt use of force against
Western Europe" -- to depict him as a pro-Soviet apologist. The context of the
sentence as written was the late 1940's, in the immediate aftermath of World War
II, not the entire cold war, as strongly implied in letters and memorandums
circulated in the Senate.

A memorandum by the staff of Senator Trent Lott, Republican of Mississippi,
under a caricature of Mr. Halperin sporting a beard and pony tail (he has
neither), called him "a security risk," saying he believed that "C.I.A.
operatives abroad should be publicly identified."

Testimony in Deportation Case

These accusations appear to have been based on the fact that Mr. Halperin was
asked by lawyers for Philip Agee, a renegade C.I.A. officer, to testify as an
expert witness at a deportation hearing brought by the British Government
against Mr. Agee in 1975. Mr. Agee published a book and magazine articles
identifying C.I.A. officers abroad, and one of them, Richard Welch, the station
chief in Athens, was assassinated in 1977.

In 1977, Mr. Halperin wrote that "the identity of particular spies, or other
information compromising to ongoing lawful operations, would, of course, be
appropriate matters for secrecy." The Congressional Record shows he testified in
1981 in favor of a law making such an unmasking a felony, saying that Mr. Agee
had no right to disclose the identities of covert agents.

The memorandum published by Mr. Lott's office went on to say that "Halperin is
opposed to all covert intelligence collection." Mr. Halperin wrote in 1976, "The
C.I.A. should be broken up into two separate organizations: one an
intelligence-evaluation organization and the other a small unit engaging in
covert operations."

A similar proposal was made last year by the chairmen of the Senate and House
committees overseeing intelligence agencies.

As a measure of the depth of their feelings, Mr. Thurmond and his allies blocked
passage of the $28 billion spending bill for all intelligence agencies until
Thursday, when they won a promise from the C.I.A. that the agency would renew
its search for incriminating documents on Mr. Halperin.

MORTON H. HALPERIN
 BORN: June 13, 1938
 HOME TOWN: Washington, D.C.
 EDUCATION: Lafayette H.S., Brooklyn NY B.A., government, Columbia University,
1958; M.S. Yale University, international relations 1959; Ph.D., international
relations, Yale University, 1961.
 CAREER HIGHLIGHTS: Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International
Security Affairs, 1967-68; senior staff member, National Security Council, 1969;
Washington director, American Civil Liberties Union, 1985-1992.
 FAMILY: wife, Carol Pitchersky, advisor to nonprofit organization; three sons,
David, Mark, Gary; grandchild, Peter.
 HOBBIES: Reading about neurophysiology; theater, contemporary art.

NAME: Morton H. Halperin

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Morton H. Halperin, President Clinton's nominee for Assistant
Secretary of Defense, has been branded by many conservative members of Congress
as a traitor and a threat to national security. (Paul Hosefros/The New York
Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Answers

BYLINE: By DAVID J. SMITH

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 14; Column 5; Education Life Supplement

LENGTH: 370 words



 1. West.

2. East.

3. Idaho.

4. South -- Hawaii; north, east and west -- Alaska, part of which crosses 180
degrees longitude, which separates measurements east of Greenwich, England, from
those west.

5. Pensacola.

6. One time zone. All of China is on Beijing time.

7. Chicago.

8. Denmark, with its two dependencies, Greenland and the Faeroe Islands.

9. Fairview, 66 municipalities; Midway, 52; Oak Grove, 44; Franklin, 40;
Jefferson, 28; Lincoln, 27; Washington, 27.

10. Guyana, Suriname and French Guiana.

11. All of them.

12. Florida. St. Augustine was founded in 1565, but in 1539 de Soto encountered
an Indian settlement that grew into modern Tallahassee.

13. Zimbabwe, dollar; Guinea-Bissau, peso; the Sudan, pound; Tunisia, dinar;
Turkey, lira; Djibouti, franc; Uganda, shilling.


Seventh-grade answers:

1. Portuguese is an official language in Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde,
Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal, Macao and Sao Tome and Principe.

2. North America -- United States, Canada; South America -- Trinidad and Tobago,
Falkland Islands, Guyana; Europe -- Britain; Africa -- South Africa, Namibia and
other former British colonies like Botswana, Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia and
Zimbabwe; Asia -- India, Hong Kong, the Philippines; Oceania -- Australia, New
Zealand.

3. Among the biggest are Algeria, Bangladesh, Brunei, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Morocco, Niger,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Turkey.

4. Here are only a few: in North America, the Painted Desert in Arizona and the
Mojave Desert in California; in South America, the Atacama in Chile; in Africa,
the Sahara throughout the north, the Kalahari in South Africa and the Sinai in
Egypt; in Asia, the Gobi Desert in Mongolia and the Arabian Desert in Saudi
Arabia; in Oceania, the Great Australian Desert.

5. Rain forests: in South America -- Brazil; in Central America -- Honduras,
Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama; in Africa -- Nigeria, Cameroon, the Central
African Republic, Zaire, Congo; off Africa -- Madagascar; in Asia -- India,
Bangladesh, Myanmar, Thailand, Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines.
David J. Smith

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

One Person Made a Difference

BYLINE: By David Oshinsky;  David Oshinsky, a professor of 20th-century history
at Rutgers University, is the author of "A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of
Joe McCarthy" and a forthcoming book on race and punishment in the South.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2928 words



NEVER STOP RUNNING
Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle
to Save American Liberalism.
By William H. Chafe.
Illustrated. 556 pp. New York:
Basic Books. $28.

IN the chaotic 1960's, against a backdrop of violent protests, racial strife and
televised assassinations, a new kind of politics emerged from a rather novel
source. It was a politics of impatience and idealism, propelled by elite college
students who had come of age in the prosperous baby-boom years following World
War II. And it was molded, in large measure, by a rumpled, frenetic tactician
named Allard K. Lowen stein, whose radical strategies sometimes masked his
throughly mainstream political beliefs.

The title of William H. Chafe's book "Never Stop Running" perfectly captures the
manic crusading, the rootlessness and the fear of personal relationships that
made Lowenstein unique. "How we behave in our public lives inevitably reflects
values, attitudes and experiences embedded in our private lives, and vice
versa," writes Mr. Chafe, a professor of history at Duke University. In pursuing
this vital link between the personal and the political, he has interviewed
dozens of people and mined every scrap of paper -- including private
correspondence and diaries -- from a subject who seemed to throw nothing away.
The result is both a superb biography of Lowenstein and a gripping history of
liberal protest and reform in an increasingly conservative age.

Politics came naturally to Lowenstein. His immigrant father preached the virtues
of socialism while slicing roast beef at the family's bustling cafeteria in
Manhattan. Born in 1929, Allard was, at age 7, handing out campaign leaflets for
President Franklin D. Roosevelt; at 9, he was raising money for the anti-Franco
forces in the Spanish Civil War. His idea of fun in these years was to chart
obscure elections and to argue politics with adults. "In almost all these
ventures," Mr. Chafe writes, "Lowenstein defended the underdog, the outcast, the
less established cause."

This was hardly surprising. As a child of the Great Depression, Lowenstein
admired the New Deal's spirit of liberal reform. And he saw that fundamental
change could occur within the political process, even in the most perilous of
times. That, Lowenstein believed, was what separated the United States from
totalitarian regimes. Americans used the strengths of their system to remedy its
faults.

As a brilliant graduate of Horace Mann, an elite private school in New York
City, Lowenstein had his pick of colleges. Yet he chose to enter the University
of North Carolina in 1945 -- a decision that brought his family to tears. Why
would a liberal Jewish New Yorker go to Chapel Hill, a sleepy Christian town
known to its residents as "the southern side of heaven"?  Lowenstein's
explanation was simple: he went there, he said, to fight racial segregation at
its source.

There was some truth to this. As a 16-year-old freshman, Lowenstein caught the
eye of U.N.C.'s president, Frank Porter Graham, a prominent Southern liberal,
who quickly became his role model and his friend. With Graham's quiet
encouragement, Lowen stein led a crusade to integrate the university a full
decade before civil rights became a consuming national cause. His successes were
modest; the roots of Jim Crow ran deep. But even then, a classmate observed, he
"was able to move people with a power that is all but earthly."

Lowenstein also went South to escape his ethnic roots. Short and stocky, with
thick glasses, thinning hair and a large nose, he felt a powerful sense of
inferiority about his looks and his Jewish identity. At Chapel Hill, he sang in
a Presbyterian church, dated only Christian women and tried without success to
pledge a fraternity that openly excluded Jews. Years later, Lowenstein told a
friend that he had chosen North Carolina in order to erase "any aspect of
Jewishness that would keep
other people from getting close to him." He wanted, more than anything else, to
be a "normal American." He eventually married Jennifer Lyman, an upper-class
Protestant Bostonian, in 1966.

As Mr. Chafe makes clear, however, Lowenstein was incapable of closeness on any
serious level. His ethnic insecurities were compounded by a sexual ambivalence
that he never fully resolved. Deeply attracted to young men -- mostly "blond,
blue-eyed, 6 foot 3 inch" types, a friend recalled -- Lowenstein spent a
lifetime acting on the margin of his desires. He dared not acknowledge his
homosexual feelings in an era when same-sex relationships were taboo. "One of
the only solutions to this dilemma was to avoid intimacy," Mr. Chafe writes. "It
was for that reason that Al had so many acquaintances, and for the most part
insisted on being with them in groups."

By the time he left Chapel Hill in 1949, Lowenstein's social patterns were
deeply ingrained. As a founder of the National Student Association, a liberal,
anti-Communist group that would later be exposed as a re cipient of secret
financing from the C.I.A., he aggressively courted older public figures like
Eleanor Roosevelt, who added luster to his reputation as a man with impeccable
connections. (Lowenstein denied any knowledge of the C.I.A. financing, and no
hard evidence has been produced to undermine his claim.) At the same time, he
became a mentor to dozens of student leaders he met on his cross-country jaunts
for the organization. What was missing -- what always seemed to be missing in
Lowenstein's life -- were meaningful relationships with men and women his own
age, those most likely to demand an intimacy he could not easily provide.

Lowenstein never had a "real" career. His modest needs and substantial
inheritance allowed him to operate, in Mr. Chafe's apt description, as an
"itinerant director of various crusades for freedom." After earning a law degree
at Yale, and receiving a mock award as "the student who graduated . . . having
attended the fewest classes," Lowenstein took a series of teaching and
administrative jobs at elite universities like Stanford, where he rallied young
disciples to his side.

It was Allard Lowenstein, more than anyone else, who awakened white college
students to the evils of South African apartheid and recruited hundreds of them
for the civil rights struggle in Mississippi in the early 1960's. And it was
Lowenstein who later channeled their seething antiwar sentiments into a
political movement that unseated a President. But it was also Lowenstein who
grabbed full credit for everything he touched, regardless of the contributions
of others. "He was sort of what Alice Roosevelt Longworth said about her father,
Teddy," a friend of Lowenstein's recalled. "He wanted to be the bride at every
wedding, and the corpse at every funeral."

During the Mississippi campaign, he seemed to be everywhere at once, rushing
madly from a voter registration drive in Jackson, Miss., to a liberal
fund-raiser on Central Park West. Arrested late one night in the Mississippi
Delta -- a civil rights worker's worst nightmare -- Lowenstein identified
himself as a lawyer, demanded a telephone and loudly placed a collect call to
Franklin D. Roosevelt 3d, spelling out the name letter by letter. "Although
Roosevelt was barely awake," Mr. Chafe notes, "Lowenstein acted as though he
were intensely engaged, telling him, 'No, don't call President Kennedy tonight,
wait until tomorrow.' " The police quickly let him go.

Lowenstein's recruits did not fare nearly as well. Their own lives of privilege
and security had not prepared them for the overwhelming violence and poverty of
everyday black life in Mississippi. Some were traumatized by the experience;
others were radicalized. And many grew tired of Lowenstein's claim to
leadership, his love of the spotlight and, above all, his philosophy of working
within a political system that seemed hopelessly repressive and corrupt.

Lowenstein felt betrayed by his young recruits. He lashed back, charging that
the civil rights movement had been captured by left-wing radicals who preached
violence and revolutionary change. There was an element of truth to these
allegations, though the larger issue seemed to be Lowenstein's loss of stature
and control. His relationship with students had always been a one-way street. He
expected them to serve, not to question; to follow, not to doubt. When that
relationship eroded, he sadly walked away.

But not for long. If the lessons of Mississippi were lost on Lowenstein, his
thirst for mainstream politics remained very much alive. A new protest was
stirring in the mid-1960's against American military involvement in Vietnam. As
it engulfed one college campus after another, Lowenstein answered the call. His
goal, as always, was to make liberal democracy work by directing the enormous
energy and idealism of the young within the political system. And his plan was
to "dump" President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1968 by mobilizing college students to
campaign against his re-election in key primary states. "No one wants him out
there," Lowenstein claimed, "and all that we have to do is have someone say it.
Like, 'the emperor has no clothes.' "

THE problem, as Mr. Chafe makes clear, is that the someone who said it first,
Senator Eugene J. McCarthy of Minnesota, did not seem up to the job. Lowenstein
came to view Mr. McCarthy as lazy, erratic and uninspiring. He supported him
only because his personal choice, Senator Robert F. Kennedy of New York, a man
he truly admired, wavered for months before entering the Presidential race. In
the meantime, Lowenstein returned to his old haunts -- the college campuses --
to recruit an army of well-scrubbed volunteers ("be clean for Gene") for Mr.
McCarthy's New Hampshire primary campaign. "We were there because Al had brought
us there," a student recalled. "He had asked an awful lot of kids to . . .
abandon the craziness and fringe stuff and jump into electoral politics."

Mr. McCarthy's strong showing against long odds in New Hampshire led to the
President's retirement. Mr. Chafe is largely correct in describing Lowenstein as
the "genius" behind "one of the most remarkable political achievements of
contemporary American history." But Lowenstein soiled that achievement, in the
eyes of many antiwar Democrats, by continuing to support Gene McCarthy in public
while working behind the scenes to secure the Presidential nomination for Bobby
Kennedy, a more electable candidate. Even worse, perhaps, was the "almost
ghoulish" attempt by Lowenstein to draft Senator Edward M. Kennedy for President
following Robert Kennedy's assassination in June 1968. ("Uh, uh," fumed the
civil rights leader Charles Evers, "you're not going to do it to that family a
third time.") Once again, Mr. Chafe maintains, a Lowenstein crusade had combined
"principled advocacy" with "manipulation."

Lowenstein eventually endorsed the Democratic nominee, Vice President Hubert H.
Humphrey, despite an earlier vow to oppose Humphrey at all costs. As a political
pragmatist, Lowenstein clearly viewed the Vice President as the lesser of two
evils in a campaign where the Republican candidate was Richard Nixon. And more
important, he needed the support of a united Democratic Party in his own bid for
a Congressional seat in a largely Republican district on Long Island. When
Lowenstein won that race, he became an elected public official for the first and
only time in his life.

It proved a difficult fit. The House of Representatives has its own folkways
based on courtesy, compromise, deference and team play. These were not the
strong suits of a brash, fast-talking individualist like Lowenstein, who thrived
on quick action and the glow of center stage. As hard as he tried, the new
Congressman had trouble focusing on the immediate needs of his district. What
mattered more to humanity, the jet noise at Kennedy International Airport or the
famine in Biafra? Why waste time on the garbage problem in Great Neck when the
war was still raging in Vietnam?

Lowenstein was defeated for re-election after one term, partly because the
Republican-controlled New York State Legislature had gerrymandered his district
away from him. He responded, almost reflexively, by promising another crusade to
register the millions of young people recently enfranchised under the 26th
Amendment, which lowered the voting age to 18. If properly mobilized, said
Lowenstein, their ballots could forge a progressive landslide that would end the
Vietnam War, bring social justice to minorities and force Richard Nixon from the
White House in 1972.

The crusade flopped. As he traveled about the country, Lowenstein discovered a
painful truth: most young people did not resemble the well-bred, idealistic
students he had sent to do battle in Mississippi and New Hampshire. They had
little interest in politics, even less in a decidedly liberal agenda. What
concerned them was the deteriorating economy, the explosion of violent crime and
the "unfairness" of affirmative action programs designed to aid minorities. As a
result, the young people who registered to vote were more likely to cast a
ballot for Richard Nixon than for his liberal opponent. Dumping this President
would require far more than Allard Lowenstein could ever deliver, as the 1972
Nixon landslide victory over George McGovern made embarrassingly clear.

The 1970's were a nightmare for him. His repeated campaigns for Congress -- five
successive defeats in three different districts -- made him look like Harold
Stassen in liberal garb. His wife left him in 1976, unable to take the endless
political grind. Worst of all, perhaps, was the demise of Lowenstein's once
optimistic vision of the United States, a vision now clouded by notions of
conspiracy and foul play.

Convinced that the truth behind Robert Kennedy's assassination had been covered
up by sinister forces, he linked that killing, in his less lucid moments, to a
larger plot involving the murders of John F. Kennedy and the Rev. Martin Luther
King Jr. And the more he brooded over his own election defeats, the more he
began to see himself as a victim of the same conspiracy to rob the country of
its liberal dreams. It became an obsession with Lowenstein, a friend recalled,
and "people who had known him for a long period of time sort of shook their
heads."

By 1980, Lowenstein seemed as marginal as the liberalism he had so passionately
espoused. He drifted from one job to another, working at the United Nations, at
a law firm in Manhattan and as a consultant to the moribund Presidential
campaign of Edward Kennedy. Though Mr. Chafe says that Lowenstein finally had
begun to face his personal demons -- "he may have been almost ready to stop
running" -- the evidence is very thin. Indeed, Lowenstein's recurring fear at
this time was of a violent death at the hands of an assassin. He even began to
write out detailed instructions for his funeral.

As fate would have it, Lowenstein's last act on earth was a charitable one, an
attempt to help a troubled former disciple named Dennis Sweeney, who in 1963 had
left Stanford at Lowenstein's urging to join the civil rights struggle in
Mississippi. Like so many northern students, Mr. Sweeney had been badly scarred
by the experience. He returned home in a state of depressed exhaustion,
completely burned out.

"According to psychiatrists," Mr. Chafe writes, "Sweeney was the victim of
adult-onset schizophrenia, a disease that strikes an individual entering his
20's." He attached himself to political fringe groups, plunged deeply into the
drug culture and began hearing strange sounds and voices deep inside his head.
Convinced that a C.I.A. dentist had planted transmitters in his mouth, Mr.
Sweeney filed down his crowns and fillings to nubs. When the voices continued,
he blamed Lowenstein and begged him to stop.

On a bleak March afternoon in 1980, Dennis Sweeney came to Lowenstein's law
office in New York. Old movement people had already abandoned this frightening
man, but Lowenstein refused to turn him away. He felt compassion for Mr. Sweeney
-- and perhaps some responsibility for his awful plight. Their meeting lasted
less than two minutes. Then Mr. Sweeney pulled out a gun and fired seven shots
at the person whose voice kept echoing in his head. Allard Lowenstein died later
that day, at the age of 51. "He was killed," wrote his good friend and political
opposite William F. Buckley Jr., "by one of his children."

But the Lowenstein brood is very large. In Congress today, the list of his
disciples includes Senators Tom Harkin of Iowa, Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, Paul
Wellstone of Minnesota, Joe Lieberman of Connecticut and Bill Bradley of New
Jersey, and Representative Barney Frank of Massachusetts, to name a few. All of
them are helping to forge a new liberal agenda, and their debt to Allard
Lowenstein is truly immense. At his best, he taught them that injustice must be
confronted, that one person can make a difference, that meaningful reform
demands serious sacrifice and that the political process really does work.

"As you go along," Lowenstein said in 1966, "you build a life . . . in which you
do many different kinds of things. But it all has a common denominator that
gives it some sense, some direction -- the sense that your total activity is
going to make a better situation for people to live in. . . . The question
should be, is it worth trying to do, not can it be done? . . . You don't just
set goals and when you reach them, find that they equal happiness. . . . Within
the quest itself, much of the fullness of life exists."

NAME: Allard K. Lowenstein

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Allard K. Lowenstein in his Brooklyn election headquarters in
1972, during one of his five unsuccessful campaigns for Congress. (WILLIAM E.
SAURO/THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. 3); Allard K. Lowenstein in 1969. (GEORGE
TAMES/THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. 29)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: November 7, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1418 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  65   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 2          1   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 3      2   4   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                and a poem.

 4      3   6   LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) A sequel to "The Witching
                Hour."

 5      4  11   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 6      8   2   THE FIRES OF HEAVEN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $24.95.)
                The fifth volume of a fantasy saga.

 7     11   2   DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) An
                architect-engineer gets caught between the warring factions of
                a clan that owns an English racecourse.

 8      6   3   A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A
                young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in
                Victorian England's high society.

 9      7  30   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 10*    5   6   SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two
                Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics
                and murder.

 11     9   9   THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) A
                sequel to "Griffin & Sabine."

 12    10  34   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 13         3   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &
                Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates
                a child's mysterious death.

 14         1   FINNEGAN'S WEEK, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Morrow, $22.) A San Diego
                cop tracks a crime that results in horror and death south of
                the border.

 15    14  42   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                illustrated cards and letters.

 16*   13  13   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A New York
                couple's young son is abducted.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   3   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 2      2   9   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 3      3  26   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 4      4   5   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 5     11   5   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by
                Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of
                marriage.

 6      5  11   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 7      6   5   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 8      8   3   STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski.
                (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played
                Capt. James Tiberius Kirk.

 9      7  17   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A
                psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their
                effects on a person's self.

 10     9  65   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 11    12  22   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 12    13  12   MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays
                suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected
                ways and places.

 13*   10   6   THE FOUNTAIN OF AGE, by Betty Friedan. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                A call for men and women to regard life after age 60 as an
                exciting adventure.

 14    14   3   BLACK HOLES AND BABY UNIVERSES, by Stephen Hawking. (Bantam,
                $21.95.) The Cambridge physicist ruminates on his life and the
                cosmos.

 15        46   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A
                psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   4   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.

 2      2  25   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.

 3      4  19   EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.)
                Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.

 4      3  15   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 23, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
BEFORE NIGHT FALLS, by Reinaldo Arenas. (Viking, $25.) Arenas, a Cuban writer
and exile who suffered from AIDS, killed himself in New York in 1990. His
passionate autobiography turns the usual circumstances -- persecution, betrayal,
coerced confessions, forced labor, attempts to "reform" him -- into something
exalted.

THE BEGINNING OF THE JOURNEY: The Marriage of Diana and Lionel Trilling, by
Diana Trilling. (Harcourt Brace, $24.95.) A conversational, direct, dignified
memoir that perforates the hygienic Trilling package; the Trillings, once
revered for their reasonableness, also deserve high marks for coping with the
irrational.

BERTRAND RUSSELL: A Life, by Caroline Moorehead. (Viking, $30.) With the benefit
of newly available material -- including the diaries of Russell's wives and
lovers -- Ms. Moorehead plumbs the character, ideas and dubious morals of the
British philosopher.

THE COLUMBIA ENCYCLOPEDIA: Fifth Edition, edited by Barbara A. Chernow and
George A. Vallasi. (Columbia University/Houghton Mifflin, $125.) A 3,000-page
foot-high volume that gracefully succeeds the 1975 edition.

THE GIRL WHO TROD ON A LOAF, by Kathryn Davis. (Knopf, $23.) A heated, dramatic
novel narrated by Francie, an underachieving composer who finds redemption by
completing an inherited unfinished opera.

A HISTORY OF RUSSIAN ARCHITECTURE, by William Craft Brumfield. (Cambridge
University, $95.) A beautiful history, covering everything from the medievalism
of the 11th century to the functionalism of the 1980's.

KAFKA WAS THE RAGE: A Greenwich Village Memoir, by Anatole Broyard. (Carol
Southern/Crown, $18.) A nostalgic portrait of New York's bohemian life in 1946
and 1947, written by a book reviewer for The New York Times who died in 1990.

MARGUERITE YOURCENAR: Inventing a Life, by Josyane Savigneau. (University of
Chicago, $25.) Yourcenar (1903-87), author of "Memoirs of Hadrian," intense,
cerebral, fascinated by sexual ambiguity, has found a perfect biographer in the
patient, wise, industrious Ms. Savigneau.

OPERATION EPSILON: The Farm Hall Transcripts. Introduction by Sir Charles Frank.
(University of California, $30.) Eavesdropping on the private and unremorseful
conversations of 10 German scientists during their internment by the Allies in
1945.

PRESIDENT KENNEDY: Profile of Power, by Richard Reeves. (Simon & Schuster, $30.)
A journalist's judicious appraisal that casts Kennedy as a pragmatic cold-war
power broker and a manager of international confrontation.

THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $23.50.) Ms.
Atwood's funniest novel in years concerns three women who are friends and the
mini-skirted Iago who worms her way into their lives.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

From Smoky Saigon Bars To Stateside Concerts

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section 2; Page 33; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1291 words


When the folk singers who perform in the In Country Revue talk about unfriendly
theaters, take their word for it. They mean downright deadly.

Theirs was the theater of war in Southeast Asia; their songs were the lyrical
log of days spent slogging through rice paddies, nighttime bombing runs through
fierce flak and longing for home the rest of the time. They are the ultimate
60's survivors.

"This is the last undiscovered music of the 60's," said Chuck Rosenberg, a
member of the revue who served in the Special Forces, although an injury
prevented him from being sent into combat. (The revue is a collection of
veterans who perform together on occasion.) "You think we pretty much drained
every ounce of nostalgia from the 60's, but here is this untold folk music made
by Americans. By the time the war ended, it was so unpopular and a source of
discord that the phenomenon of the cultural expression of G.I.'s was the last
thing anybody wanted to hear about."

Unlike the electric rock or brassy soul music often associated with the war,
this style featured simple voices accompanied by acoustic guitars and harmonicas
that could change from playful to achingly haunting. The songs that were once
belted out in smoky Saigon bars and well-protected firebases have begun to reach
a wider stateside audience in recent years through the efforts of the revue and
Lydia Fish, a folklorist at Buffalo State College. Ms. Fish was doing research
on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in 1983 when she was told about a cache of
recorded folk songs in the Library of Congress. They had been donated by Major
General Edward Lansdale, an Air Force officer who ran the Senior Liaison Office
of the United States Mission in Saigon. He had collected the songs in the
mid-60's, thinking they could give American policymakers an insight into the
war.

"It was amazing quality and obviously an extraordinarily vital tradition," said
Ms. Fish, who began to root out other songs and their singers through the
Vietnam Veterans Oral History and Folklore Project, which she directs. "I'm
interested in Vietnam veterans, and this showed them as the incredibly creative
and sensitive people they are, very much against the stereotype of what veterans
are like."

She helped put together a collection titled "In Country: Folk Songs of Americans
in the Vietnam War" that was released two years ago on the Flying Fish label.
The revue performed in New York a few weeks ago and is playing a series of West
Coast dates this month.

While most people would not associate folk songs with fighters, Ms. Fish said
the tradition of military songs dated back centuries, with even foot soldiers
under Julius Caesar singing complaints about their leaders. She added that the
folk explosion of the 1950's and 60's influenced many of the men (and some
women) who went overseas.

Ms. Fish noted that some of the strongest music in the folk tradition came from
highly educated people who probably had heard it while in college -- a group
that included C.I.A. agents, some of whom formed the Cosmos Tabernacle Choir,
named after a Saigon bar near the American Embassy. In other cases, fighter
pilots had long used music to forge bonds among themselves with songs that
ranged from boasts of prowess to elegies for fallen comrades.

"This was something that fighter pilots did in fighter squadrons," said Chip
Dockery, a member of the revue who flew hundreds of missions during two tours of
duty. "What I wanted more than anything was to fly. If that's what they did,
that's what I'd do."

In time, Mr. Dockery took it one step further, composing a series of songs from
the perspective of the Viet Cong truck drivers he and his comrades bombed along
the Ho Chi Minh Trail. The songs were sung to the melodies of popular songs like
"King of the Road" and "(Sittin' on) The Dock of the Bay."

Toby Hughes, another revue member who was a pilot known as the "Balladeer of the
Air War," described his music as a diversion and a way of dealing with the
pressures of a job that few at home knew anything about. "You're 10,000 miles
from home, and missing all the things that are back there," he said. "You're
doing a job that's more different than anybody you know. You have no idea what a
pilot in a war theater does."

The music also allowed the singers to express fear or sadness in acceptable
ways. "Will There Be a Tomorrow?" lays out the pilot's fear of dying in a
strange land when he sings: "Will the dawn still arrive, will I still be alive/
Or will I sleep alone here forever?"

Some songs probed a psychic territory as dark as the skies the pilots zoomed
through, with exaggerated aggression that would make civilians blanch and titles
like "Strafe the Town and Kill Them All" or "Napalm Sticks to Kids."

"We'd say words in songs about things you wouldn't necessarily go out and do,"
explained Mr. Dockery, who is now a commercial airline pilot. "It was part of
being in an organization where you were highly trained to go out and perform a
mission that could result in somebody's destruction or your death. So we'd sing
about killing everything that gets in our way and dying in a heroic pile of
metal on the side of a mountain."

In other cases, the songs mocked the paper-pushers among the officer corps who
sat at headquarters and sent others into combat. Ms. Fish said a main function
of some of the songs was to question authority. "There's a lot of negotiation of
power between the powerful and the powerless," she said. "You get a licensed
grumbling that takes place in song."

ONE OF THE BEST examples of that style can be found in "Tchepone," which was
written by Mr. Hughes. The song was named for a Laotian town that was a major
staging area at the intersection of two roads along the Ho Chi Minh Trail. It
tells how a commander tricks a pilot into thinking a flight over the city would
be "an old-time milk run," only to find it more like a journey through hell.

The song ends with the pilot returning with his plane damaged and the commanding
officer nowhere to be found.

Before the concert, Mr. Dockery praised the song as "the definitive air war
song." Mr. Hughes simply joked that he's sung it "more times than Judy Garland
sang 'Over the Rainbow.' "

Although the circumstances that created this music were painful, the range of
songs from melancholy and serious to humorous and mocking makes the concerts
accessible to an audience beyond those who fought in the war. Mr. Dockery added
that the music could be a form of therapy for the veterans who sing along in the
audience, seeing themselves in the lyrics.

"It's about the triumph of the human spirit," said Mr. Rosenberg of the music he
and his comrades made. "You find people creating art under amazingly adverse
conditions. I'm sure in Bosnia today there are people doing watercolors.
Sometimes people need to create meaning and keep their center."



PILOT ERROR

One of the Vietnam folk songs, "Tchepone," describes a bombing mission over
heavily defended Laotion city named in the title. It was written by Toby Hughes.
a former pilot. Here are portions of the lyrics.

A black puff in front and then two off the right

Then six or eight more and I suck it up tight

There's small arms and tracers and heavy ack-ack

It's scattered-to-broken with all kinds of flak

I jink hard to left and head out for the blue

My wingman says "Lead! They're shooting at you!"

"No bull!" I cry as I point it toward home

Still comes the fire from the town of Tchepone

(Dirty, deadly Tchepone)

I make it back home with six holes in my bird

With the colonel who sent me I'd sure like a word

But he's nowhere around, though I look near and far

He's gone back to Saigon, to help run the war

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Bill Ellis, known as the "singing rifleman" of the First
Cavalry Division, moved from firebase to firebase with his guitar, playing for
fellow soldiers. (City Lore)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

LITTLE BIG PEOPLE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 12; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 110 words


As a historian, I study 15th-century Milan and cannot help noticing the age at
which people in that culture take on responsible positions in society. Young men
of 17 or 18 sit on the duke's advisory council; people marry at 15 and shoulder
family responsibilities; wisdom is exhibited, in those who have it, in late
adolescence. Mathematics and music, in other words, are not the only areas in
which precocity can play a role.

It looks as though, in a reactive way, the "Vietnam generation" is reinserting
reality into its children's lives, including even pain (i.e., involvement in
parents' affairs and divorces).

CYNTHIA M. PYLE
New York, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By Michael Lichtenstein

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20; Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 196 words



FOOTBALL
3RD DOWN AND FOREVER
Joe Don Looney and
the Rise and Fall of an American Hero.
By J. Brent Clark.
St. Martin's, $21.95.

Joe Don Looney was a star running back at the University of Oklahoma in the
early 1960's. He had a sprinter's speed and a herculean physique. His
professional career seemed assured, but his rebelliousness and deep-seated
disdain for authority sabotaged his football future. Looney was on five
professional teams in five seasons, his career ending memorably shortly after he
refused to take a play to the quarterback. "If you want a messenger boy, call
Western Union," Looney told the coach. In "3rd Down and Forever," J. Brent
Clark, an Oklahoma attorney, puts a human face on a man frequently dismissed as
a flake. Mr. Clark rounds out the portrait by detailing Looney's tour of
military duty in Vietnam and his increasingly esoteric quests for spiritual
fulfillment, which led him to live with a guru in India. "3rd Down and Forever"
is a compassionate, sensitive account of a frustrated life, which ended in 1988
when Looney was killed in a motorcycle accident in Texas. He was 45 years old.
    MICHAEL LICHTENSTEIN

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3; Column 5; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 66 words


A listing of cruises on Oct. 10 omitted the sailings of Pearl Cruises. The
company's liner Pearl will cruise to Thailand and Indonesia Dec. 30 and Feb. 8,
departing from and returning to Singapore; to Vietnam and Hong Kong from
Singapore on Jan. 13; to China, Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei and Singapore from
Hong Kong on Jan. 26; and to Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand from Singapore on
Feb. 22.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Veteran's Legacy: Garden of Heroes

BYLINE: By ROBERTA HERSHENSON

SECTION: Section 13WC; Page 1; Column 3; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1156 words

DATELINE: MONTROSE


THE small room is kept cool, so the crystalline wax of the sculptures stored
here will not melt. Against one wall, a life-size alcoholic with a bottle in his
hand comforts a young prostitute carrying a toy bunny. Nearby, a homeless man's
frightened eyes peek out from a cardboard-box shelter. A Rodin-like figure in
cape and hat huddles against the cold, while across the room, a fierce-looking
man sticks out his tongue at the passing world.

This is not a museum storeroom but a space in the Franklin Delano Roosevelt
Veterans Affairs Hospital, a mainly psychiatric institution spreading over 220
acres near the Hudson River here. How the sculptures got here is the story of
one World War II veteran who found solace at the hospital after decades of
mental torment. He died in August at age 67, but his artistry lives on, not only
in his figures of the homeless -- awaiting a benefactor with the money to have
them bronzed -- but also in the sculpture garden he created at the hospital
while he was an inpatient.

The artist, Nils Andersen, will be remembered along with other former service
men and women in a Veterans Day service at the hospital chapel on Friday at 11
A.M. Afterward Mr. Andersen's last work, a bronze bust of a Persian Gulf
veteran, will be dedicated at the sculpture garden, where his bronze busts of
soldiers from each of America's modern wars stand in a landscaped semicircle.
Gerry Culliton, a hospital spokesman, said the public is invited to attend the
service, at which Maj. Gen. Michael Hall, commander of the New York State Air
National Guard, will speak.

The six homeless figures were given to the hospital by his daughter, Karen
Efurd, after his death. They were made in Ossining, where the artist lived
during his later years.

Mr. Andersen was a boy of 17 when he joined the Marines in 1943, dropping out of
high school in Brooklyn to join in the action of World War II. He was stationed
in the Pacific and fought in the Battle of Okinawa, which took more than 207,000
civilian, Japanese and American lives during three months of fighting in the
spring of 1945. Although he was not among the physically wounded, Mr. Andersen
was to bear the emotional scars of the war for the rest of his life.

Back then, his anxiety attacks and nightmares were called shell shock or combat
fatigue. Today, his condition is recognized as post-traumatic stress disorder,
and the hospital here treats many veterans suffering its effects.

Ms. Efurd said she thought that because her father was "an artist and so
sensitive," the war took an especially high toll on him. But, she said, speaking
from her home in Ocala, Fla., her father, who made his living as a carpenter in
Manhattan before his move to Ossining, "thought it wasn't a macho thing to talk
about" and kept his feelings to himself until his last years.

He had "bouts when he couldn't breathe" and manic-depressive episodes, Ms. Efurd
said. Eventually he "just up and left" his wife and two daughters, she said, and
the marriage ended in divorce. Homeless at times and drinking heavily, he
attended Alcoholics Anonymous meetings, where he learned that his real problem
might not be alcoholism but his war memories, Ms. Efurd said.

In 1986, he entered the hospital here, which specializes in long-term
psychiatric care but also offers programs for drug and alcohol abusers,
geriatric patients and the chronically ill. After months of counseling, he sent
audio tapes to Ms. Efurd, the only family member who kept in touch with him,
telling her about some of his repressed war experiences.

A Special Wax Was Used

The healing process was helped by an unusual program run by a therapist,
Florence Quillinan, who now supervises creative arts therapy for the hospital's
recreation therapy service. Ms. Quillinan said she recognized Mr. Andersen's
native ability -- he was self-taught but had painted and drawn all his life --
and encouraged him to work through his memories in a series of clay masks.

On an unconscious level, the masks represented "the faces he saw and pushed away
over the years," Ms. Quillinan said, and led to the soldier series that brought
widespread recognition to him and the hospital. In creating his sculptures for
the garden, Mr. Andersen used a special wax that he poured over pre-built frames
and the clothes, authentic items obtained from flea markets and military-supply
stores.

The bust of the World War I soldier wears a doughboy's helmet; the Korean War
veteran has a blanket draped around his shoulders, and the World War II bust
wears Mr. Andersen's own dog tags. The Persian Gulf bust, which Mr. Culliton
said is the first such memorial in the Hudson Valley, wears a camouflage helmet
and the goggles that were used to protect soldiers from sand and wind.

The busts, which were cast in bronze with funds donated to the hospital (the
price for having all the busts bronzed excluding the one of the Persian Gulf
veteran was $15,000) are marked by a psychological realism that patients and
visitors alike find very moving, Mr. Culliton said. "These are the ordinary
people who came home," he said, referring to the soldiers portrayed by Mr.
Andersen. "They aren't like other sculptures that look like they would win every
battle. One of the reasons the sculpture garden is so special is that these are
the people you see in our hallway. These are our heroes, and we have to heal
them."

Mr. Andersen, who worked on his homeless figures in his Ossining studio while
attending hospital programs as an outpatient, completed the Persian Gulf bust
before re-entering the hospital last spring for complications of diabetes. By
the time he died at the age of 67 at the Bronx Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
his eyesight had nearly failed and his meticulously observed sculpture had lost
its symmetry. Mr. Culliton, who became close to the artist, said several staff
members of the hospital here helped him "see" what was needed to finish his last
work.

In Limbo, Awaiting Bronzing Funds

Mr. Andersen, who his daughter said became a born-again Christian late in life,
also created sculptures for several churches in Manhattan. But what is perhaps
his most impressive and universally appealing body of work languishes in the
hospital here. Because officials cannot seek contributions as employees of the
Department of Veterans Affairs, Mr. Culliton said the sculptures of the homeless
would remain in limbo until a benefactor steps forward to pay to cast them in
bronze. He said that having the figures bronzed would cost at least $50,000.

The poignantly remembered homeless figures were created from the artist's own
memories of living in a box, Mr. Culliton said, adding that according to
Government statistics, one-third of all homeless people are veterans. Ms. Efurd
said she brought the sculptures here from her father's studio, knowing that he
would have wanted the hospital to have them.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Nils Andersen in 1943 when he served in Marine Corps, and two
of his sculptures at Franklin Delano Roosevelt Veterans Affairs Hospital.
(Photographs by Roberta Hershenson for The New York Times) (pg. 1); Sculptures
by Nils Andersen, a World War II veteran, include a soldier in Vietnam, on
grounds of V.A. hospital in Montrose, above, and three homeless men.
(Photographs by Roberta Hershenson for The New York Times) (pg. 31)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Conversations;
A Firefighting Flyer Who Prefers Life on Updrafts to Life on Autopilot

BYLINE: By Bill McVicker By ROBERT REINHOLD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1140 words

DATELINE: LANCASTER, Calif.


THOSE whose homes were saved from the fearsome fires that swept Malibu and
Topanga Canyon last week owe thanks to Bill McVicker. None of them saw him, but
he was there, co-piloting Tanker One-Five, one of the silver-and-red tanker
planes that flew sortie after sortie over the towers of flame and smoke,
dropping 2,000-gallon loads of red fire retardant.

It was a routine working day for the 45-year-old pilot, whose place of work is a
war horse of a DC-4 that is older than he is. Each day at sunrise at Fox Field,
a remote airstrip in the high desert here 65 miles north of Los Angeles, he and
his pilot, Philip Broadfoot, start the four engines of the World War II-vintage
propeller plane, load its eight tanks and head wherever the latest fire flares.

There are days when it is frustrating, dangerous and futile. Like the day when
Mr. McVicker was the first on the scene of the wind-whipped fire that swept
through the Los Angeles suburb of Altadena two weeks ago.

"We were 500 feet above the canyon and the turbulence was hair-raising," he said
Thursday, preparing to help the mop-up in Malibu. "We were getting tossed
around. All the manuals and boxes of our equipment ended up on the floor. We got
over the fire, kept circling on approach. But at one point it was almost
uncontrollable. We were getting 1,000 feet-a-minute downdrafts and in 30 seconds
we'd be on the ground. So we elected to make a go-round and return. We could not
drop."

They returned later and dropped the retardant, but it was of little use in the
howling Santa Ana winds. "You could feel the heat, smell the smoke," he said.
"You could see debris the size of your arm flying up."

Mr. McVicker is one of a small fraternity of airborne firefighters, some working
for the military, others civilians. He and Mr. Broadfoot are civilians who work
for Aero Union, a company based in Chico, Calif., that contracts annually with
the United States Forest Service to go wherever the flames go. It is usually
some remote forest, seldom celebrity estates like Malibu. The pilots are on
standby for the entire fire season, from July 1 to Nov. 15. During those months,
Mr. McVicker seldom sees his wife, Donna, son and daughter at home in
Porterville in central California.

Not for the Queasy

Many are Vietnam-era Air Force veterans, like Mr. McVicker, who was in the
military police. Though he did not learn to fly until after he left the service
in 1970, he took a license as an aircraft mechanic and later as a pilot, finding
a nomadic niche in the fire game. Mr. Broadfoot got his start as a civilian,
starting his own crop-dusting company in Central California and then turning to
fires when that got slow. "This is a special type of flying," Mr. McVicker said.
"It's not military or airline. It's all seat of the pants."

Mr. McVicker finds the fire work more rewarding than conventional flying. "Most
flying is just going from point A to point B and back," he said. "It gets
monotonous. Those guys who fly commercial airliners are button pushers, like
computer operators. They take off, punch on the auto pilot, then turn it off and
land. But with this work, no two flights are the same. It's very exciting
because we always run into different conditions. And it's rewarding, because
we've helped someone."

Their DC-4, built in 1945 by the Douglas Aircraft Company, is like the airborne
equivalent of a hippie's old Volkswagen bus. The interior is thick with layers
of old paint. Strapped to the bulkheads are three bicycles, a rack full of
clothes, spare tires, parts and tools, just about everything needed for the
unpredictable.

"We could get dispatched and not come back," Mr. McVicker said. The pilots'
uniform is casual, jeans and T-shirts, and they share a camaraderie and perverse
humor bred of long hard days and danger. One of the other tankers at Fox Field
carries a hand-lettered sign: "Will Fly for Food."

This is not work for the queasy. The rising heat often tosses the planes around
mercilessly. And there is little room for error, inasmuch as a crash landing on
a burning hillside while carrying 1,000 gallons of airplane fuel is likely to be
the last job. There is one side benefit to this occupation, though; Mr. McVicker
is seldom hounded by life-insurance salesmen.

Some of the planes and helicopters seen over the fires drop water to extinguish
active blazes. Mr. McVicker's mission is different, to put down a fireproof line
in front of advancing fires to halt them. The plane's underbelly tanks are
filled with Phos-Chek, a brand of fire retardant. It comes as a powder and mixes
with water and a bright red dye so that the pilots and firefighters on the line
below can see it. It is thick and gooey, about the consistency of whipped eggs.
At the direction of the fire boss below, the pilot pushes one or more of eight
yellow buttons in the cockpit that each release 250 gallons of red retardant.

Fire Politics

"Our job, like the firefighters', is to drop a wet line," he said. "The fire is
supposed to drive up to this line and stop."

But he concedes, in the worst out-of-control fires, some of the efforts are more
to show the public that something is being done even if it is hopeless. He can
look down in spots and see a red line in the middle of scorched earth at Malibu,
demarcations that show the futility of trying to halt the blaze in the high
winds.

"Fires like this are political," he said. "When the Santa Ana winds are blowing,
people want to see we are making an active effort. But Mother Nature has 80
percent control in putting out fires like this. When homes and lives are being
consumed, it doesn't look good if we are sitting on the ground. So we are doing
our best. But ideally we work best when there is little or no wind and the fuel
is light." For firefighters, "fuel" is the common term for the brush and other
tinder-dry combustibles in the path of a fire that keep feeding it.

That was the case Wednesday, after the winds died down and firefighters were
finally able to slow, if not stop, the fire. Tanker 15 made six runs, helping
establish a safety zone, covering certain areas where the fire tacticians
expected to make their stand. "It was a beautiful day to fly," Mr. McVicker
said. "We were dropping a line. There was still a lot of smoke and fire, but we
accomplished a lot. It was a good day."

The crew also worked the Thousands Oaks fire several days ago over Ventura
County. "The tankers did some good," Mr. Broadfoot said. "We kept it on a
ridge."

Mr. McVicker has seen many a bad fire, but nothing like the Southern California
ones. "This is the worst I've seen, all the homes destroyed. I saw homes burning
down to the foundations. It's horrible. I'd like to see them catch the arsonist
who started this. But it makes me feel good that I'm accomplishing something."


NAME: Bill McVicker

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bill McVicker with the World War II-vintage tanker plane he
co-pilots. (Scott Robinson for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Give Presidents Benefit of a Doubt

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 297 words


To the Editor:

Many of those in Congress, along with pundits in the press and on the weekly
television talk programs, seem to agree:

Whether President Clinton's policies are right or wrong, he must be firm, stick
to his guns and carry his policies through with determination.

I submit that this type of certainty about complicated and ambiguous situations
is exactly the sort of firm hand that has resulted in our worst foreign policy
disasters. The Presidents who got us into Vietnam, for example, exuded certainty
and firmness while pursuing very bad policy.

Here is a radical idea for post-cold-war foreign policy in the United States: It
is all right for American Presidents, in the absence of a superpower enemy, to
be uncertain about which policies to follow in complex and difficult situations.
Why should our President be certain, or even appear to be certain, of the right
thing to do in Bosnia, Somalia or Haiti?

Post-cold-war foreign policy requires a President and Secretary of State who are
flexible and able to change their policies with changing circumstances,
including subtle changes, as events unfold.

When we were threatened by a superpower enemy, there may have been justification
for United States Presidents to appear to be absolutely sure on all foreign
policy matters, even when they harbored doubts. But in today's new world, in
situations that are inherently ambiguous, uncertainty suggests thoughtfulness
and intelligence.

Therefore, let's give Mr. Clinton and Secretary of State Warren Christopher the
latitude to be unsure about what to do in these situations. Do we really want a
firm hand, when intelligent analysis, reasonable ambivalence and willingness to
change are called for?

PHILIP D. HARVEY
Washington, Nov. 1, 1993

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words



International    A3-14

MEXICANS' FREE TRADE WORRIES
As Mexicans watch Americans debate the North American Free Trade Agreement,
which may affect Mexico far more than either the U.S. or Canada, many express a
similar mix of uncertainty and fear.  A1


CLINTON'S FOREIGN POLICY TRIO
Anthony Lake, Les Aspin and Warren Christopher are struggling to improve the
Clinton Administration's foreign policy performance in the aftermath of setbacks
in Somalia and Haiti and the prospect of a worsening war in Bosnia.  A1

G.I.'s were warned not to return to the streets of Mogadishu.  A13

POLISH LESSONS FOR GERBER
The American baby-food giant has spent two years overcoming hurdles and
headaches at its first plant in Eastern Europe.  A1

ISRAELI-JORDAN 'UNDERSTANDINGS'
King Hussein of Jordan and Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres signed a pact
for cooperation at a secret meeting in Amman, Israeli press reports said. But it
falls short of a peace treaty.  A3

MORE ARAB-ISRAELI VIOLENCE
Palestinian gunmen shot and wounded a rabbi who is a leading advocate of Jewish
settlement in the occupied territories and killed his driver. The attack set off
another wave of rioting by Jewish settlers.  A3

U.S. WARNS NORTH KOREA ON ARMS
President Clinton issued a stern warning to North Korea not to develop a nuclear
weapon as it continues to block international inspections of its nuclear sites.
A6

SERBS FREE 3 U.N. SOLDIERS
Serbian militiamen took three U.N. soldiers hostage in central Bosnia, then
released them unharmed after a standoff during which peacekeepers fired warning
shots.  A12

GEORGIANS ENTER REBEL TOWN
President Eduard A. Shevardnadze of Georgia entered Zugdidi, marking the end of
an uprising by backers of Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia, the country's former President.
But Abkhazian secessionists are still holding out against Georgian troops.  A14

HANOI RIGHTS ABUSES REPORTED
Vietnam is mistreating its most prominent political prisoner, a doctor who has
spent years in jail for criticizing Hanoi and for his effort to organize a
democracy movement, rights groups say.  A8

A.T.& T.'S ALLIANCES ABROAD
A.T.& T. may be close to forming alliances with state-owned phone companies in
France and Germany to offer companies a way to link offices on both sides of the
Atlantic.  D1

JAPAN'S UNHAPPY INVESTORS
As Japan's stock market has fallen sharply in the past two weeks, criticisms
have grown about the Tokyo Stock Exchange's policies.  D1

Delhi Journal: The Guinness Book of Records is India's Holy Grail.  A4

National    A16, B9-10

SUPPORT FOR BALANCED BUDGET
Conservatives and liberals have joined to bring the Senate to within a handful
of votes of passing a constitutional amendment to require a balanced budget.  A1


CLINTON ATTACKS UNIONS ON TRADE
The President accused labor unions who oppose the North American Free Trade
Agreement of applying "naked pressure" to kill the pact in Congress.  A1

Ross Perot tuned up for his trade debate with the Vice President.  D9

WHEN TWO-EARNERS RETIRE
If the issue of the 80's was how two-career couples would handle child-rearing,
the issue of the 90's may be how two-career couples will handle retirement.  A1

CRUCIAL VOTE FOR PUERTO RICO
After decades of debate, voters in Puerto Rico are about to decide whether the
island should become a state, remain a commonwealth or proclaim independence.
A16

DRUG SENTENCES UNDER FIRE
In the view of a growing number of judges, prosecutors and wardens, the
consequences of mandatory sentencing laws for LSD and other drugs have been
disastrous.  A16

More than 2,000 Grateful Dead fans are serving time in prisons.  A16

DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
Groups concerned about domestic violence are using as a rallying point the trial
of a Virginia man whose wife sliced off his penis after what she said was years
of abuse.  A16

MUSLIM WOMEN UNITE
Driven by desire to support each other and anger at the bias they encounter,
Muslim women across the nation have begun to form small community groups and
large national associations.  B9

CONFLICTING RULES ON RESEARCH
The Federal standards for judging scientific misconduct were recently changed,
and officials of a Federal fraud-hunting office say the move threatens to undo
years of work by investigators.  B10

STUDY QUESTIONS HEART DRUGS
Two drugs commonly used to treat heart attacks show little or no benefit in
preventing death, and a third shows only a small benefit, a new study found.
B10

A youth was arrested in California firebombings.  B10

Metro Digest    B1

NOW, TO WIN IN ALBANY
In the looking-glass world of Albany politics, when Rudolph W. Giuliani seeks
help on city problems from the Legislature and the Governor, he is likely to
find that his best friends are the Democrats while his toughest opponents are
Republicans.  A1

Business Digest    D1

Arts/Entertainment    C11-18

France's Culture Minister.  C11

Hunter's playhouse is back.  C11

Theater: "Johnny Pye and the Foolkiller." C14

Music: The St. Petersburg Philharmonic at Carnegie Hall.  C11

Bobby Short's anniversary year.  C14

Dance: Boston Ballet's "Sleeping Beauty." C11

Kazuo and Yoshito Ohno.  C13

Books: "Exit Into History." C15

New York Review of Books at 30.  C18

Obituaries    D10

Ely Landau, producer.

Sports    C1-9

Boxing: A bout beyond belief.  C1

Basketball: Knicks win in overtime.  C3

Nets rout Spurs.  C3

Columns: Araton on Pro Basketball.  C3

Anderson on the Giants.  C4

Rhoden on Shula.  C7

Football: Cowboys push away Giants.  C1

Jets thwart Dolphins and Shula.  C1

Editorials/Op-Ed    A18-19

Editorials

Welfare reform, done harshly.

The hammer that failed on Cuba.

A start on overhauling Congress.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: Merchants of hate.

William Safire: Anatomy of a coverup.

Zalmay M. Khalilzad: North Korea -- a deadline on diplomacy.

Dave McCurdy: Sanctions won't work.

Phillip A. Sharp: The test tube wars.

Chronicle    B10

Bridge    C13

Crossword    C14

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

HANOI IS ACCUSED OF ABUSING CRITIC

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 378 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 4


Human rights groups and foreign diplomats have received reports that Vietnam is
mistreating its most prominent political prisoner, a doctor who has spent most
of the last 15 years in jail because of his harsh criticism of the Government
and his efforts to organize a democracy movement.

The prisoner, Nguyen Dan Que, has a history of poor health. Human rights groups
and Dr. Que's family in the United States say they have received reliable
information in recent weeks that the 51-year-old radiologist is being held in
solitary confinement in a prison camp in southern Vietnam, and that he has been
forced to resume hard labor.

Concerns about Dr. Que increased in August, when Vietnamese officials canceled a
meeting between Dr. Que and Senator Charles S. Robb, a Virginia Democrat who was
visiting Vietnam.

The State Department and Senator Robb have raised Dr. Que's plight in recent
meetings with Vietnamese officials, suggesting that mistreatment of Dr. Que
could slow progress toward normal relations between the United States and
Vietnam.

Letter Smuggled Out

In a letter dated Aug. 29 and said by Dr. Que's family to have been smuggled out
of the prison camp, Dr. Que wrote that the Hanoi Government was trying to take
"revenge" on him, apparently as a result of the unfavorable publicity that
followed the cancellation of the meeting with Mr. Robb.

The Hanoi Government has denied that the doctor was being mistreated. In a
statement this week, the Foreign Ministry said Dr. Que "is in very good
condition, normal condition, and he is not being forced to do labor."

Senator Robb met last month with the Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Minister, Le Mai,
"and reiterated my deep concern about Dr. Que's health and well-being," the
Senator said in a statement. He said the authorities had "forced him to resume
hard labor," which was "undoubtedly contributing to a deterioration of his
health."

After forming a pro-democracy group called the National Front for Progress, Dr.
Que was arrested in 1978 on charges of "rebellion" and imprisoned without trial
for 10 years. After his release in 1988, he formed a new group and was arrested
in 1990. He was tried on charges of trying to overthrow the Government and is
now serving a 20-year sentence.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Thailand in Oil Talks

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 3; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 89 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 7


Thailand, eager to gain a foothold in the energy trade with Asian neighbors, is
holding informal talks with China on oil product exports. It is also eager to
establish gasoline stations in Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam, state oil company
officials said last week. Charan Achalabhuti, deputy governor of the Petroleum
Authority of Thailand, said it was in discussions with the Chinese state oil
company "on the possibility of joint ventures, exports of refined products from
Thailand to southern China and petrol stations in China."

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The High-Minded Road As the Path to Success

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GRIMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1267 words


Does it mean anything to call William Hogarth a "critical deist"? Richard
Dorment, the art critic for The London Daily Telegraph, would really like to
know. And Ronald Paulson, who used the phrase and whose three-volume biography
of Hogarth was scathingly reviewed in The New York Review of Books, would like
to know how Mr. Dorment can fail to see that Hogarth's art created a counter
discourse to Shaftsburyian civic humanism.

The debate rages on, six months after the review originally appeared, with no
end in sight. Eventually, Robert B. Silvers, the co-editor of The New York
Review, will call a halt to it and make space for a slanging match over Bosnia
or the Federal deficit. But for the moment Hogarth boils furiously on the front
burner.

For 30 years The Review has survived, and even prospered, on the assumption that
educated readers would buy a fortnightly journal devoted to relentlessly
high-minded discussion, often at great length, of politics, international
relations, literature, science and the arts.

It does virtually nothing to promote itself. It has ignored realities of the
marketplace like focus groups and reader surveys. The very mention of such
things causes Mr. Silvers, a natty dresser in the British style, to raise an
eyebrow in wonder. "No, we've never done anything like that," he said in an
interview at The Review's offices on West 57th Street. "I wouldn't even know how
to go about it."

A Loyal Following

The finances of The Review, a privately held company, can only be guessed at. In
1984, Rea S. Hederman, a former newspaper editor from Jackson, Miss., bought it
for $5 million, a price that put more than half a million dollars in the pockets
of its five principal owners: Mr. Silvers, Barbara Epstein, Jason Epstein, who
was once married to Ms. Epstein and is now the editorial director of the Random
House adult trade division; the novelist and critic Elizabeth Hardwick and A.
Whitney Ellsworth, who for many years served as publisher of The Review. Today,
The Review has a paid circulation of 125,000, up about 10,000 over last year's
figure, and an unusually high renewal rate of 73 percent. Mr. Hederman, The
Review's owner and publisher, declined to discuss revenues, saying only that the
journal "pays its way."

Recently, The Review, which has a sizable European readership, started an
Italian edition in partnership with Rizzoli. It also owns a small percentage of
The London Review of Books and it distributes the British periodical Granta in
the United States.

In most respects, Mr. Silvers, who is 63, and his co-editor, Ms. Epstein, who is
64, have stuck to the approach that they used to create the first issue of The
Review in the fall of 1963 during a lengthy New York newspaper strike: cheap
paper, minimal staff, low wages, big-name contributors and long workdays. The
audience they sought to please was, essentially, themselves.

"We felt that people would have the same admirations and the same interests that
we did," Mr. Silvers said. "We admired writers and we still do."

That admiration is expressed not in monetary form, since The Review is
notoriously stingy, but in the famous Silvers treatment, equal parts seduction
and tutorial, that most writers find irresistible.

A Meticulous Editor

Mr. Silvers devotes long hours to the editing of each article, consulting with
the author on even minuscule changes. All the while, his three assistants, who
work in shifts, send authors a steady stream of faxes and overnight packages
filled with supporting information on the topic at hand.

"They sent me a tiny little book on birds, and they wanted, I think, 600 words,"
George Plimpton said. "Well, I got interested in the Endangered Species Act and
a couple of other books and pretty soon I was up to 12,000 words. I called Bob
and said: 'I've gotten deranged here. I'm off the deep end.' He said, 'Don't
worry; send it in.' "

The Review is one of the few nonspecialist journals left in the United States
that would make space for an extended essay on birds. This is at once its
strength and cause for complaint. Over the years, its critics say, The Review
has evolved from a hard-hitting journal of opinion, earning its spurs with
adversarial journalism during the Vietnam War, to a middle-aged, rather
Establishment voice.

The journal that Tom Wolfe once called "the chief theoretical organ of radical
chic," the natural home for writers like I. F. Stone, Andrew Kopkind and Noam
Chomsky, now occupies a position that's a discreet half step to the left of
center, and devotes its pages to highly analytical, somewhat fastidious
ruminations on fiscal policy, the deficit, Social Security and foreign policy by
the likes of Felix G. Rohatyn and Peter G. Peterson.

"I learned a lot about writing and editing from its writers and editors," said
Leon Wieseltier, the literary editor of The New Republic and a former writer for
The Review, "but it has come to have a rather official spirit now, which is
ironic, since it was started in an admirably anti-official spirit."

Health Care vs. Vietnam

Victor Navasky, the editor of The Nation and an admirer of The Review's cultural
coverage, said, "They're less political than they used to be, and less
politically relevant, but I don't think that's their function in life these
days."

Mr. Silvers counters that Vietnam and the antiwar movement made for a level of
intensity in debate that does not prevail today. "I agree the issue of health
care is quite different than whether young men should go into battle and die,"
he said. "But I feel that homelessness, health care, the achievement of blacks,
which may be the central American problem -- these are tremendous issues."

Critics of The Review also complain that the roster of contributors, however
distinguished, suggests a publication in need of a transfusion, that a typical
issue often seems as close to self-parody as the high-toned personal ads in the
back. Theodore Draper on Iran Contra. Stephen Jay Gould on dinosaurs, or on
baseball. Joan Didion on California. Garry Wills on a Founding Father.

In rare instances The Review has developed younger writers from within, like
Darryl Pinckney, Luc Sante and Prudence Crowther, all of them proteges of Ms.
Epstein. And Mr. Silvers has shown an uncanny ability to sign up top-notch
journalists, usually British, to report from developing hot spots: Misha Glenny,
who has been filing stories from Bosnia, or Timothy Garton Ash, who roamed
Eastern Europe as the Communist bloc disintegrated. But in general The Review
favors an established reputation over youthful promise.

A Debate Postponed

The match-ups of writer to subject can seem inevitable rather than inspired. And
The Review can seem not so much high-minded as out of touch and slow. The heated
cultural debate over Allan Bloom's "Closing of the American Mind" did not find
its way into the pages of The Review, for example, until more than six months
after the book was published.

"It's a favorite punching bag for young academics, but they'd still like to
write for it," said Judith Shulevitz, the editor of Lingua Franca, a journal
that covers academia. "It's dismissed what's interesting in new academic
disciplines out of hand, so it's seen as right wing, not politically but with
respect to intellectual currents."

For The Review's faithful readers, however, $2.95 is a small price to pay for a
publication committed to the old-fashioned virtues of diligence, intellectual
rigor and clarity.

"The child is middle-aged now," Ms. Epstein said. "But it's a good child."

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert B. Silvers, the co-editor of The New York Review of
Books, and Barbara Epstein, one of the owners, at the offices on West 57th
Street. (Don Hogan Charles/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 9, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Resort Project

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 16; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 67 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 8


Work has begun on a $97 million beach resort in southern Vietnam. The resort, at
Vung Tau on the South China Sea, 40 miles southeast of Ho Chi Minh City, is to
include three luxury hotels, a cultural center, a golf course and other
recreational services, the Voice of Vietnam radio said today, in a broadcast
monitored here. The resort is a joint venture with a Taiwan company, the
broadcast said.

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

New Home Option: Surviving Flames

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WEBB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 1; Home Desk; Consumer's World Page

LENGTH: 1029 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Nov. 10


Watching the television images of brush fires engulfing the canyons of Southern
California, most viewers probably had mixed emotions: awe at the scale of
destruction, and relief that they were safe from risk.

But natural fires can occur almost anywhere, especially in forested areas and
during droughts. In 1992, there were 439,000 reported brush and grass fires,
according to the National Fire Protection Association.

Richard Bukowski, senior research engineer with the Building and Fire Research
Laboratory at the National Institute of Standards and Technology in
Gaithersburg, Md., cited current risks in Texas and in the Southeast, where pine
forests have been devastated by beetles. "If I were living in a wooded area,
even in the Northeast, and it were time to replace a shingled roof, I would look
for one that was highly fire-resistant," he said.

But the degree of risk varies greatly. "California is the only state with an
insurance designation for brush-fire zones," said Chris Guidette of the
Insurance Services Office, an organization in New York that prepares statistics
for property insurers."

Fire is part of the ecology in the arid West, nature's way of clearing old
growth and regenerating the landscape. But well-protected houses in high-risk
areas can survive the flames. Creative architects and builders have developed
fire-resistant alternatives to the rustic cottages and wooden chalets that have
regularly succumbed to conflagrations.

To Bui-Bender, a Vietnam-born civil engineer and builder, anticipated the need
for protection when he constructed his family house in Laguna Beach with stucco
walls, a concrete-tiled roof and double-glazed windows. For four hours before
the fire reached the house on Wednesday, he hosed down the stucco and
surrounding vegetation. Later that evening, he appeared on television beside his
house, which had survived amid the devastation of the neighborhood.

But most people are not as sensible as Mr. Bui-Bender.

"Very few of my clients put a premium on fire protection, even when they get
involved in every other aspect of the design," said Ron Goldman, an architect in
Malibu. "People who live close to nature want to build in natural materials --
wood stands for comfort and tradition."

Another Malibu architect, David Lawrence Gray, built a wood-shingle house for
himself when he arrived in Los Angeles from the Northwest, via the University of
California at Berkeley. "As soon as I saw my first fire, I realized that was a
dumb thing to do," he confessed, "and for the last five years, I've used only
steel and concrete. If you must use wood as a facing, you should back it with a
fire-resistant 5/8-inch drywall."

Fire officials and building experts agree that the first priority, wherever you
live, is to cut back dried vegetation from around the house and create a green
belt of fire-resistant grasses, ice plants, salvias or whatever varieties a
nursery recommends for the climate and site. Citrus trees make an effective fire
block; eucalyptus and pine are highly flammable. When renewing scorched slopes,
they recommend planting deep-rooted plants to check erosion.

Chief John Montenero of the Santa Monica Fire Department, said he becomes
frustrated and angry when he sees homeowners neglecting their responsibilities.
"I've even heard careless people say, 'That's what I carry insurance for,' " he
said.

To be safe, he added, you should set the house back 100 feet from dry vegetation
on an average slope, and up to 500 feet on sheer slopes, which can accelerate
updrafts. "And you need a pump that will put out 250 gallons a minute through a
one-and-a-half-inch hose from your pool or a water tank," he continued. "You
don't have a chance in a Santa Ana with a garden hose."

Even with such clearings and plantings and abundant water, a house can be
ignited by radiant heat or flying embers. Dick Davis of Factory Mutual Engineers
in Boston, an expert on building materials, recommends brick, stucco or concrete
for walls, and clay or concrete tiles for the roof. The eaves should be sealed
to exclude wind-borne sparks.

Buzz Yudell, an architect, and his wife, Tina Beebe, a color consultant,
incorporated these lessons in the house they built in Malibu. A tin roof fits
snugly atop the stucco walls, with no overhang. The house is set well back from
vegetation on every side, and the interiors have sprinklers.

As an economy, they chose not to use double-glazed windows, which retard the
transfer of radiant heat and are less likely to break. "Someone should market
the painted metal shutters or roll-up metal blinds that are common in France and
Italy," he said.

Often, people neglect the simplest precautions. Mr. Gray noted that a neighbor's
roof has been piled high with driftwood and an old boat for more than three
years. And Mr. Goldman pointed out that houses are built of the same materials
used centuries ago. He said he hoped that the rising cost of wood would
encourage the use of innovative industrial products. In a house he designed for
himself on the Malibu beach, Mr. Goldman used translucent fiberglass for a large
skylight, and last week it survived a flurry of burning embers.

Expense is a factor. Ceramic glass will withstand a high level of radiant heat
without cracking, but its high cost -- four to eight times that of conventional
glass -- restricts its use.

Steven Ehrlich, a Santa Monica architect whose outlook was shaped by his Peace
Corps experience in Africa, says he sees a need to live in harmony with nature.

"A house in Malibu should not be like one in New England," he said. "What we
need here are porous fortresses -- to withstand human and natural assaults, and
to open up to the benign climate."

He recalled the thick-walled courtyard houses he explored in the Sahara and the
Sahel, simple shelters that stayed cool for most of the day. "Here, you can use
poured concrete or concrete block for the walls, open up courtyards on one side
to the ocean or a view, and protect the wide openings with sliding steel doors."

These safeguards can be considered the price of living -- perhaps of surviving
-- in an earthly paradise.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: House of To Bui-Bender survived Laguna Beach fire. (Jan
Sonnenmair for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

GULF TROOPS' ILLS BEWILDER DOCTORS

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 697 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 10


The Pentagon said today that there was no connection between low levels of
chemicals reportedly detected by allied forces in the Persian Gulf war and
mysterious illnesses now afflicting many veterans.

Since the war ended in February 1991, several thousand American troops who
served in the region have complained of memory loss, heart problems, fatigue and
unusual rashes -- symptoms that have baffled doctors.

Veterans' groups and some lawmakers have seized on the theory that the troops
were exposed to toxic chemicals, despite repeated Pentagon denials that Iraq
ever used nerve gas or other chemical weapons in the war.

In the Government's most detailed attempt to explain the problem and its
response, Defense Secretary Les Aspin said today that experts had found no
reason to dispute the reported detection of a nerve gas, Sarin, and mustard gas
by Czech chemical-warfare experts in Saudi Arabia in the week after the air war
started in January 1991.

No Independent Corroboration

But Mr. Aspin said the Czech reports could not be independently corroborated.
Even if the chemicals had been present, Mr. Aspin said, they were not detected
at levels high enough to cause the symptoms that the American troops are
experiencing.

Maj. Gen. Ronald R. Blanck, commander of Walter Reed Army Medical Center here,
suggested that most of the veterans were suffering from exposure to a toxic mix
of airborne chemicals from oil-well fires and accidental spills of ammonia and
chlorine near Saudi seaports. General Blanck identified the two units that have
been heavily affected by the symptoms as a Navy Seabee reserve unit from
Columbus, Ga., and an Army ordinance company from Birmingham, Ala.

Mr. Aspin said today that he was appointing experts to investigate the Czech
findings. The Veterans Affairs Department also plans to start a pilot program
this week in Birmingham to re-examine veterans whose symptoms might be related
to toxic chemicals.

Mr. Aspin and top Pentagon officials are treading carefully to avoid a repeat of
the Agent Orange debacle, in which the Government for years denied that the
defoliant used in Southeast Asia caused serious medical problems for Vietnam War
veterans.

Lawmakers Criticize Pentagon

But some lawmakers have interpreted the Defense Department's caution as inaction
or worse, and have criticized the Pentagon for failing to provide a copy of the
Czech report and for not responding to veterans' complaints more quickly.

One critic is Representative Glen Browder, an Alabama Democrat whose district
includes Fort McClellan, which trains troops against chemical weapons and has
been a target for closing. Another detractor is Representative Lane Evans, an
Illinois Democrat, who has been a prominent critic of the Government's inaction
in the Agent Orange cases.

At today's news conference, Mr. Aspin said the Czech specialists had twice
detected low levels of Sarin in northern Saudi Arabia on Jan. 19, 1992. Sarin
can cause runny noses at low levels and death at high levels. No one in the
Czech unit complained of any immediate symptoms, he added.

Iraqi Chemical-Weapons Sites

On Jan. 24, the Czech unit was summoned to investigate what they determined to
be a small patch of liquid mustard, which causes blisters.

Mr. Aspin said the Czechs had found no Scud missiles, artillery shells or any
missiles that could have carried the agents. The Czech report suggested that the
chemicals found might have blown south after allied air strikes on Iraqi
chemical-weapons depots.

But Mr. Aspin said the prevailing winds were blowing northwest, away from Saudi
Arabia. To get even low levels of Sarin in Saudi Arabia would have required a
large release near the depots, which would have resulted in heavy civilian
casualties there. Mr. Aspin said that did not happen.

"If the detections were valid, we don't know where the agent came from," said
Mr. Aspin, who emphasized that the findings were preliminary and that
investigators were continuing to pursue the issue.

He said Washington would soon asked the Saudi Government and other coalition
members if they had kept any chemical stockpiles in the region.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Different Wars, the Same Sadness

BYLINE: LORI GRINKER, author of the forthcoming "When the War's Not Over."

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 372 words


While I was researching a story in Israel and the occupied territories in 1986,
I began photographing disabled veterans from Middle Eastern conflicts. Since
then I have documented the stories of former soldiers in 11 countries around the
world.

Among these veterans have been Americans who fought in Korea, Dogon tribesmen in
Mali who were conscripted by the French in World Wars I and II, Eritrean women
who fought against the Ethiopians, Vietnamese who fought against the French,
Americans and Chinese.

When I heard men in remote villages in Africa or women in North Vietnam talk
about war with the same sort of poetry and wisdom that I had heard in Europe and
America, I became increasingly devoted to seeking out more of these ex-soldiers'
tales.

For most of us, once the news stories are over and the yellow ribbons are packed
away, the war is relegated to history. But for these veterans, the war never
ends: it becomes a part of their daily lives. It is in their dreams, it affects
their families, their jobs, the way they relate to the world. In some ways they
seem forever stranded in that place and time. Their spirits as well as their
bodies were wounded and defiled.

The lingering effects of combat and the conflicting emotions it instills in
soldiers were illustrated by a veteran of the French-Algerian war, Arouna
Adamou, who lives in Niger. "When we go to war it is because of an ideal: we
want to defend and protect our land; legitimately that is why people go to war,
that is why people risk their lives," he said. "After war, these people are
proud. Not because they were happy to go to war -- the human part of man should
be ashamed that he went to war. Man was not created to fight. That part of him
which feels pride is the vain part of man, the empty part of man. The human part
has the shame."

Recently I heard the author Michael Herr quoted as having said: "Every soldier
has the same story. Put yourself in their place . . . The repercussions of
committing yourself to combat are horrific." With conflicts in Somalia, Bosnia
and other places, new veterans are being created all the time. Who better
represents the preciousness of life, the need for peace and the human cost of
making war?

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Vietnam War veteran on a "healing walk" to raise awareness of
veterans' issues, South Dakota, 1991.; Eritrean soldier in her former cell at
what was an Ethiopian prison, Asmara, Eritrea, 1992.; Former Vietcong soldier
and wife in a village for disabled veterans near Ho Chi Minh City, 1989.; Gulf
war veteran sufering from multiple chemical sensitivity in an environmentally
controlled room, Waco, Tex., 1993. (Photographs by Lori Grinker/Contact Press
Images)

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 947 words



International A3-12

CLINTON SEEKS TO BOLSTER RABIN
President Clinton plans to present Yitzhak Rabin with military and economic aid
in a bid to bolster his political standing in Israel as it deals with Syria.  A1


U.N. ADDS PENALTIES ON LIBYA
The Security Council voted to tighten sanctions on Libya because it has failed
to surrender two Libyans accused in the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am airliner over
Scotland.  A10


U.S.-CHINA HIGH-TECH TRADE
Washington and Beijing are negotiating over curbs on high-technology exports to
China as the U.S. tries to gain Beijing's agreement to limit missile technology
exports.  A10

IN HAITI, THE ARMY RULES
The Haitian Army, which has almost no combat capability and few defense
functions, operates a sprawling and violent nationwide enterprise that many call
criminal.  A12

OLIVETTI CHIEF IS RELEASED
The head of the Olivetti company was released from house arrest but remained
under investigation in Italy's corruption scandal, accused of trading
million-dollar bribes for Government contracts.  A12

SRI LANKA REBELS KILL 200 TROOPS
Tamil rebels overran a military base in northern Sri Lanka, killing more than
200 soldiers and sailors, the military said. More than 50 rebels were reported
killed.  A12

In Brazil, the states are the fiefs of wealthy families.  A3

The German Chancellor sees no alternative to European unity.  A5

Ethnic Russians made political gains in Estonia's capital.  A6

The U.S. rejected a visa for the leader of the I.R.A.'s political wing.  A9

Takatsuki Journal: Studying the art of being a family man.  A4

National A14-29

ARSENAL OF DOLLARS IN CRIME WAR
News analysis: While there is a lot of political grandstanding on the anti-crime
bill, the heart of the package is $22.3 billion for programs that might well
have an impact.  A1

A TRIBUTE TO WOMEN VETERANS
In civilian dress or combat fatigues, wearing their medals and ribbons, women
who served in Vietnam gathered by the thousands on the Capitol Mall for a
dedication of a new memorial to women who served in the Vietnam War.  A1

BUSINESS LOBBY'S BIG PUSH
Businesses have been lobbying hard for the North American Free Trade Agreement,
but it is far from certain that their efforts will affect the outcome in
Congress.  A1

President Clinton warned against economic isolationism.  A28

The White House declined a deal with tobacco states on Nafta.  A28

LONG SHOT GAMBLE ON MOTOR CITY
In Detroit's troubled downtown, thousands of people, mostly black, lined up in
the cold for jobs in a casino that may never exist.  A1

ILLUSION COLLIDES WITH HISTORY
Tourists not fulfilled by the Manassas National Battlefield Park, a sanctuary of
Civil War history, will be able to drive five miles to Disney's America for the
Civil War "experience," under a plan announced by the Disney Company.  A14

RENO IS NUDGED ON PORNOGRAPHY
President Clinton made public a letter directing Attorney General Janet Reno
quickly to prepare legislation to expand the reach of child pornography laws.
A14

A SETBACK FOR BATTERED WOMEN?
Legal Memo: In the din of wisecracks surrounding the violent, broken marriage of
John and Lorena Babbitt, lawyers and counselors for battered women worried about
the effect of Mr. Bobbitt's acquittal.  A16

TRUCKERS AND RADAR DETECTORS
The Transportation Department is recommending rules to prohibit radar detectors
in 2.5 million big commercial trucks.  A18

FABRICATED CRIME EVIDENCE
Hundreds of blood tests that West Virginia prosecutors have used to link
defendants to crime scenes were ruled invalid after many were found to have been
fabricated.  A20

A tiny coil improves using balloons to clear blocked arteries.  A24

A new survey shows that misconduct in science is not rare.  A22

About 500 corpses disturbed by summer floods were reburied.  A14

Law Page B20

An automated fingerprint tracking system is solving old crimes.

A secretive sect is testing judicial authority over religion.

If a computer does the work, why the big legal fee? a court asks.

Metro Digest B1

CORTINES PLANS TO SHUT SCHOOLS
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said that he plans to close two failing New
York City high schools to try to improve instruction and hold educators more
accountable for the success of their students.  A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-33

A film series on Naples.  C1
An Irish hotel in Manhattan.  C1
A child's-eye view of art.  C1
City Opera and Keene in accord.  C3
Theater: On Stage, and Off C2
"Desdemona." C20
Performance Art: John Kelly's "Light Shall Lift Them." C3
Cabaret: "Forbidden Broadway 1994." C33
Film: "The Three Musketeers." C10
"The Piano." C12
Music: Garth Brooks.  C3
 Singing toward the sacred.  C25
Restaurants C26
Television: TV Weekend D19

Obituaries A31

Dr. Nicholas A. Rango; built New York's AIDS program.

Sports B6-13

Basketball: Pacers defeat Nets.  B7
Columns: Rhoden on the Wards.  B7
Lipsyte on marathon.B12
Football: Gulf grows between Taylor and Reeves.  B7
Marathon: Floridian tries to end U.S. drought.  B7

Editorials/Op-Ed A32-33

Editorials

The limits of ad hockery.
Hope for a crime bill.
Philippine revival.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Female genital torture.
Anthony Lewis: Devil in the details.
Franklin L. Lavin: Big thunder, little rain.
Timothy Ferris: The future is coming.
Claire Douglas: Malibu, my Malibu.

Chronicle B4

Crossword C29

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A Belated Salute to the Women Who Served

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 951 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11


Marion Birkhimer had been waiting 25 years for this day, ever since she returned
from a two-year tour as head surgical nurse on the hospital ship Repose off the
Vietnam coast.

In 1968, Americans did not want to hear about the pains soldiers were suffering
in an unpopular war, Ms. Birkhimer said. And they especially did not want to
hear from the women who served in Vietnam and later became a forgotten part of
the conflict's forgotten corps.

But today, Veterans Day, those women finally heard from the nation. In civilian
dress or combat fatigues, wearing their medals and ribbons, female veterans
gathered by the thousands on the Mall for a dedication of a new memorial to
honor women who served during the Vietnam War.

'We Never Listened'

"It's long overdue," said Ms. Birkhimer, a 26-year Navy veteran from Ocala,
Fla., daubing tears from her eyes during an interview. "We were supposed to be
the brave ones and not have emotions. Military nurses have repressed so much."

Nearly 20 years after the war ended, Vice President Al Gore dedicated the bronze
sculpture of three women helping a wounded male G.I., a symbol of healing set in
a grove of trees 300 feet from the low black wall that is the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial.

"In the tense, sometimes confusing peace that followed, we never listened to
their story," Mr. Gore said of the women. "And we never properly thanked them.
Dedicating this memorial gives us occasion to do both."

Mr. Gore, who was an Army journalist in Vietnam, was the White House's natural
choice to speak at today's ceremony. President Clinton, who has had a strained
relationship with the military partly because he avoided the draft during the
Vietnam War, was heckled during a Memorial Day speech at the Vietnam memorial.
Mr. Clinton today attended a wreath-laying at the Tomb of the Unknowns and spoke
at Arlington National Cemetery.

Feeling of Vindication

After years of neglect, the women said they felt vindicated by the belated
recognition. "There are just no words for what I'm feeling," said Mae Jones of
Baltimore, a 20-year Army veteran who served in Vietnam as a communications
specialist for two years. "It's just wonderful."

The statue honors 11,500 women who served in Vietnam -- as nurses, intelligence
analysts, air traffic controllers and many other roles -- as well as 265,000
other women who served in the military during the Vietnam era.

Three-quarters of the women in Vietnam were exposed to hostile fire. Eight of
them died in the fighting, and many others were wounded. About 58,000 of the
nearly three million men who served in Vietnam were killed.

The Vietnam Veterans Memorial includes the names of the eight military women who
were killed there. Ten years ago, Diane Carlson Evans, a former Army nurse in
Vietnam, began what turned out to be a $4 million project to commemorate the
surviving women.

The sculpture itself, designed by Glenna Goodacre of Santa Fe, N.M., has drawn
flak from some architects, who protest that another statue will detract from the
emotional power and artistic integrity of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. A third
memorial in the vicinity, a sculpture of three servicemen, honors combat troops.

Today, though, it was hard to find any dissenters. Female veterans said their
country only now was recognizing their contribution. "Welcome home, ladies,
welcome home!" bellowed one bearded male veteran in combat fatigues, as
thousands of female veterans marched down to the new memorial this morning.
"Stand tall! Stand tall!"

Old friends and comrades embraced in tearful reunions on the Mall and at
gatherings Wednesday night.

Too Painful to Forget

Doris I. Allen, a former Army intelligence analyst from Oakland, Calif., and
Kathy Poole, a former Army personnel clerk from Dallas, last saw each other in
1970 in Vietnam. They reminisced about huddling in bunkers while Vietcong
rockets exploded overhead.

"I don't think most people want to remember the bad times," said Ms. Allen, a
retired psychologist who served three tours in Saigon and Long Binh.

But some of those memories were too painful to forget. Ms. Birkhimer recalled:
"I remember one patient who was brought in with a head injury. His brains were
oozing out onto the gurney, and I tried to wrap his head with Ace bandages. He
kept asking me: 'Am I going to be all right? Am I going to be all right?' I knew
he was going to die. It was all so pitiful."

The women also recalled the slights of a male-dominated military. Ms. Allen said
her commanding officer had recommended she receive the Legion of Merit medal,
but that higher superiors denied her the award "because I was a woman."

Priscilla Miller, a 72-year-old former Navy anesthetist from Williamsburg, Va.,
who served in World War II and in Korea as well as Vietnam, said it took the
Persian Gulf war, and its popular support, to force Americans to re-examine the
conflict in Southeast Asia, and how the country had treated its veterans.

"The gulf war was brought home to Americans every night on television, just as
we lived it every day in Vietnam," said Ms. Miller, who attended today's
ceremony with two old friends who also served as Navy anesthetists at the first
American hospital in Saigon, Owedia Searcy, 70, of Annapolis, Md., and Charlotte
Clark, 70, of Chincoteague, Va.

While the memorial served to salute the deeds of Vietnam-era veterans, it also
served as an inspiration to the hundreds of active-duty troops and reservists
who turned out today.

"Each and every one of these women deserve this statue," said Sgt. First Class
Joanne Frazier, 38, who has served in a Virginia National Guard infantry unit
for 11 years. "It's about time."


LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Washington: Veterans embracing near the memorial to women who
served during the Vietnam War. (Associated Press); Fort Mitchell, Ala.: Connie
McArthur sat near the grave of her husband, Jerome Douglas McArthur, a Vietnam
veteran, after Veterans Day ceremonies yesterday at the national cemetery.
(Associated Press) (pg. A1); "I don't think most people want to remember the bad
times," said Doris I. Allen, center, a retired psychologist who served three
tours in Saigon and Long Binh. Standing behind her at the dedication of a
memorial to honor women who served during the Vietnam War was her friend Bernice
Boyd. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times) (pg. A29)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 41 words


"It's long overdue. We were supposed to be the brave ones and not have emotions.
Military nurses have repressed so much." -- MARION BIRKHIMER, a veteran Navy
nurse, at the dedication of the memorial to women who served in Vietnam. [A1:2.]

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Mindful of Trade Fight, Clinton Warns of Isolationism

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 28; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 867 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11


President Clinton used the 75th anniversary today of the armistice ending World
War I to warn against a return to the economic isolationism that he said once
again poses a threat to American security.

Mr. Clinton referred only obliquely to the North American Free Trade Agreement
in his Veterans Day remarks. But his words added gravity to an Administration
attempt to elevate its fight for passage of the accord to one seen as
representing a momentous choice in the nation's history.

"Once again, history is about to take the measure of our wisdom," Mr. Clinton
declared in an address to hundreds of veterans in an amphitheater adjoining the
Tomb of the Unknowns at Arlington National Cemetery. He said Americans would
choose "whether we will swell the global tide of freedom by promoting democracy
and open world markets or neglect the duty of our leadership, and in the process
and in the withdrawal diminish hope and prosperity not only for our own people,
but for billions of others throughout the world."

Mr. Clinton, who was born 28 years after the First World War ended, offered the
predominantly older veterans a history-book style reprisal of an American
descent after 1918 into isolation, protectionism and more war. As Vice President
Al Gore did on Tuesday night in his televised debate with Ross Perot, he held up
the high tariffs of the 1930's as the dangerous alternative to the controversial
slashing of tariffs with Mexico and Canada that he has proposed.

'Siren Song of Protectionism'

"We neglected during a careless peace what had been so dearly won in a
relentless war," the President said. "We turned our backs on the rest of the
world. We ignored new signs of danger. We let our troops and arms fall out of
readiness. We neglected opportunities for collective security in our own
national interests. We succumbed to the siren song of protectionism and erected
walls against peaceful commerce with other nations. Soon, we had a Great
Depression and soon that depression led to aggression and then to another world
war, one that would claim a half-million American lives."

He added, "Let us today resolve we will not shrink from the responsibilities
necessary to keep our nation secure and our people prosperous."

Mr. Clinton's appearance was not marked by the kind of hostility he has
sometimes encountered from military groups disdainful of his decision to evade
military service during the Vietnam War. But on his first Veterans Day since
taking office, Mr. Clinton went out of his way to praise Army Rangers for their
valor in the Oct. 3 battle in Somalia. They suffered heavy casualties in the
incident, which forced a reappraisal of American policy there.

By inviting 17 of the Rangers and Delta Force soldiers involved in that
firefight to visit him in the Oval Office and join him at the ceremony, aides
said, Mr. Clinton hoped to send a message that their conduct had been heroic and
not the fiasco that some published accounts have described.

Mending Military's Image

In a larger sense, the gesture served as a first step by the President to repair
the damage to the military's image from the Somalia mission, which has
contributed to the isolationist impulses he was warning against.

"We owe it to them and to their colleagues to insure that our forces remain the
best trained, the best equipped, the best prepared in the world," Mr. Clinton
said. He said the aftermath to victory in the cold war was testing once again
"whether we will preserve freedom's gains and learn freedom's lessons."

The President arrived hatless and coatless at the cemetery on a bright but
chilly autumn day, and he moved with a touch of awkwardness as he laid a wreath
at the unknown soldiers' tomb and was honored with a 21-gun salute.  Military
leaders and veterans of battlefields from France to Mogadishu greeted him with
polite applause.

In a week in which the House of Representatives only grudgingly approved his
request to keep American troops in Somalia until March 31, Mr. Clinton seemed
determined to drive home his message that the United States must remain engaged
with the rest of the world. He began the day by congratulating the American
Legion for its support of the trade agreement, and he met privately with the
Rangers so that he could recount "the real story" of their ordeal.

Although 18 Americans died and more than 70 were wounded in that fight, Mr.
Clinton noted that most of the casualties were suffered because the elite unit
chose to stay behind to protect the body of a fallen comrade. He said the
Rangers exacted a "terrible toll" on their adversaries. "I want you to let them
know that they did their mission well and that we are proud of them," he said.

Later in the day, the President traveled to Martinsburg, W.Va., where he toured
a Veterans Administration hospital, awarded medals to four World War I veterans
and made a brief pitch for the universal health coverage program that he has
proposed.

"I'm very proud of the fact that the health care reform plan proposed by our
Administration is the only one that embraces the V.A. as a real resource for
high quality, affordable health care for our people," he said.


LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton leaving Arlington Cemetery yesterday after
addressing hundreds of veterans during ceremonies for Veterans Day. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: November 14, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 70; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1430 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2   2   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 2      1  66   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 3      3   5   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                and a poem.

 4      4   7   LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues
                the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour."

 5      8   4   A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A
                young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in
                Victorian England's high society.

 6*     6   3   THE FIRES OF HEAVEN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $24.95.)
                The fifth volume of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.

 7      5  12   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 8          1   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery
                writer's happy family life is threatened by a madman determined
                to kill him and take his place.

 9      7   3   DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) An
                architect-engineer gets caught between the warring factions of
                a clan that owns an English racecourse.

 10     9  31   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 11    10   7   SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two
                Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics
                and murder.

 12    11  10   THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                Concluding the "Griffin & Sabine" trilogy.

 13    12  35   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 14    15  43   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                illustrated cards and letters.

 15    16  14   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction
                of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and
                woman and for the woman's first lover.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   4   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 2      6  12   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior by a novelist and anthropologist.

 3      3  27   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 4      2  10   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 5      4   6   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 6      8   4   STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski.
                (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played
                Capt. James Tiberius Kirk.

 7      5   6   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by
                Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of
                marriage.

 8     10  66   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 9      7   6   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 10         1   SECRETS OF A SPARROW, by Diana Ross. (Villard, $22.) The
                memoirs of the pop star.

 11     9  18   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A
                psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their
                effects on a person's self.

 12    11  23   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 13    12  13   MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays
                suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected
                ways and places.

 14         1   THE DOWNING STREET YEARS, by Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins,
                $30.) The former British Prime Minister recalls her 11 1/2
                years in power.

 15*   13   7   THE FOUNTAIN OF AGE, by Betty Friedan. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                A call for men and women to regard life after age 60 as an
                exciting adventure.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   5   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.

 2      2  26   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.

 3      4  16   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 4      3  20   EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.)
                Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 30, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
BEFORE NIGHT FALLS, by Reinaldo Arenas. (Viking, $25.) Arenas, a Cuban writer
and exile who suffered from AIDS, killed himself in New York in 1990. His
passionate autobiography turns the usual circumstances -- persecution, betrayal,
coerced confessions, forced labor, attempts to "reform" him -- into something
exalted.

THE COLUMBIA ENCYCLOPEDIA: Fifth Edition, edited by Barbara A. Chernow and
George A. Vallasi. (Columbia University/Houghton Mifflin, $125.) A 3,000-page
foot-high volume that gracefully succeeds the 1975 edition.

GENET: A Biography, by Edmund White. (Knopf, $35.) A monumental biography,
meticulously researched, that places Genet's literary vision squarely in his
homosexuality and confronts the mystery of how a man who left school at 12
became a great master of the French language.

HONEY: Stories, by Elizabeth Tallent. (Knopf, $22.) In her third fine
collection, set mainly in New Mexico, Ms. Tallent's characters are tempered in
the crucible of marriage while their creator revels in comely language and
summons accurately the sensations of daily life.

KAFKA WAS THE RAGE: A Greenwich Village Memoir, by Anatole Broyard. (Carol
Southern/Crown, $18.) A nostalgic portrait of New York's bohemian life in 1946
and 1947, written by a book reviewer for The New York Times who died in 1990.

NEVER STOP RUNNING: Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American
Liberalism, by William H. Chafe. (Basic Books, $28.) A historian captures the
rootlessness and personal insecurity of an aggressive reform politician from New
York who could accomplish almost anything except getting himself elected.

OPERATION EPSILON: The Farm Hall Transcripts. Introduction by Sir Charles Frank.
(University of California, $30.) Eavesdropping on the private and unremorseful
conversations of 10 German scientists during their internment by the Allies
after World War II.

PRESIDENT KENNEDY: Profile of Power, by Richard Reeves. (Simon & Schuster, $30.)
A journalist's judicious appraisal that casts Kennedy as a pragmatic cold-war
power broker and a manager of international confrontation.

THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $23.50.) Ms.
Atwood's funniest novel in years concerns three women who are friends and the
mini-skirted Iago who worms her way into their lives.

STRANGE PILGRIMS: Twelve Stories, by Gabriel Garcia Marquez. (Knopf, $21.) Some
nearly 20 years old, all these stories were rewritten before publication; their
overall mood is celebratory, relishing the oddness and incongruity of life.

WHAT IS FOUND THERE: Notebooks on Poetry and Politics, by Adrienne Rich.
(Norton, $20.) A distinguished poet's reflections on the work of poetry, its
social and cultural authority, its power to help us "invent what we desire."

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By Laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7; Page 72; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 956 words


THE DIAMOND LANE
By Karen Karbo. Tusk/Overlook, $13.95.
In this hilarious sendup of Hollywood, a documentary film maker is drawn into a
plan to turn her own wedding into a commercial blockbuster. In 1991 our
reviewer, Robert Ward, said, "Not only is the plot ingenious, but the writing
remains deft all the way through."
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE . . . AND YOUNG
Ia Drang: The Battle That Changed the War in Vietnam
By Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway.
Harper Perennial, $13.
This book chronicles four days and nights in November 1965, when American
soldiers in the central highlands of Vietnam endured what proved to be the
bloodiest campaign of the war. It was also an experience that was emblematic of
the entire conflict: the United States used new technological weaponry, only to
be overwhelmed by the sheer numbers and persistence of the enemy. Written by a
retired officer and a journalist who were there, the book reveals "equal rations
of pride and anguish, and it goes as far as any book yet written toward
answering the hoary question of what combat is really like," Nicholas Proffitt
said here last year. Also reissued is THE TRAGEDY OF CAMBODIAN HISTORY:
Politics, War, and Revolution Since 1945, by David P. Chandler (Yale University,
$17), which shows how Vietnam's neighbor has been exploited by foreign powers
and by its own leaders. Last year our reviewer, Henry Kamm, called it "as
complete a historical narrative as has ever been compiled."


PLAN B FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS: Stories
By Ron Carlson. Penguin, $10.
Many of the characters in this collection are accommodating themselves to a
reality they hadn't wanted but must accept. Forced at midlife to downsize their
dreams, they embark on "Plan B." The result is a "wildly humorous but truthful
look at how much we can bend without breaking," Maxine Chernoff said here last
year. Similar themes are to be found in BOOMFELL, by Douglas Hobbie (Owl/Holt,
$10.95), a novel about a man who is just coming to terms with his limitations
when his life is invaded by a former colleague who has mistakenly tried to
ignore his own. In 1991 our reviewer, Lisa Zeidner, said, "Mr. Hobbie expresses
well the tension between passion and comfort."
OPEN DOORS: And Three Novellas
By Leonardo Sciascia. Translated by Marie Evans, Joseph Farrell and Sacha
Rabinovitch.
Vintage International, $12.
These four works illustrate the preoccupation of their Sicilian author with
power and its abuses. Often turning historic events into fiction, he shows how
the state can be as corrupt as the criminal forces it tries to control. "In its
blend of succinctness, coherence of tone and richness of layering, 'Open Doors'
is a miniature masterpiece," Christopher Duggan said here last year.
HENRY MILLER: A Life
By Robert Ferguson. Norton, $12.95.
The author analyzes the contradictions in Miller's universe between the need for
money and the professed desire for pure art, between his repressed background
and his explicit style. In 1991 our reviewer, Perry Meisel, said, "Mr. Ferguson
is especially good at filling in the historical context of Miller's boyhood."
Also reissued is MOLOCH: Or, This Gentile World (Grove/ Atlantic, $12), Miller's
first surviving novel, written in 1927 and originally published last year. In
this story of a man uneasy in his job and his marriage, Miller "begins to
develop an avant-garde genre," one critic said.
FEARFUL SYMMETRY: Is God a Geometer?
By Ian Stewart and Martin Golubitsky. Penguin, $12.50.
Well, is He? The authors can't be sure, but they do give impressive evidence for
the ubiquity of symmetry, from the corresponding sides of the human body to the
patterns in ocean waves. They also show how important symmetry-breaking is to
abstract mathematics. Last year our reviewer, John Allen Paulos, said, "It's a
tribute to the authors' expository gifts that much of the book reads like a
captivating travelogue." For more on the mysteries of math, there is PI IN THE
SKY: Counting, Thinking, and Being, by John D. Barrow (Back Bay/ Little, Brown,
$14.95). This book tackles the question whether numbers are real or imaginary
constructs, universal truth or uncanny invention. It exhibits both "Mr. Barrow's
intense intellectuality and heady philosophical reflection," Mr. Paulos said
here last year.
NIGHT PEOPLE
By Barry Gifford. Grove/Atlantic, $11.
David Lynch is a fan of Barry Gifford's work, which says something about it.
(Imagine if "Twin Peaks" had been a Southern Gothic.) These four novellas, set
in the Gulf Coast area, brim with matters like incest, insanity and deformity.
But the stories are "so stylishly and humorously told that it doesn't seem to
matter," Jon Elsen said here last year. Also available is Mr. Gifford's 1980
novel, LANDSCAPE WITH TRAVELER: The Pillow Book of Francis Reeves (Vintage
Contemporaries, $10), a series of ruminations by a gay man on his life and
sexuality. One critic called it "always intriguing, elegantly written and often
hysterically funny."
CASTRO'S FINAL HOUR: The Secret Story Behind the Coming Downfall of Communist
Cuba
By Andres Oppenheimer.
Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $13.
Fidel Castro's hold on power appears ever more tenuous without its longstanding
Soviet support. Recently updated, this book investigates the factors that may
bring about his demise. This is done "with insight and wit," Clifford Krauss
said here last year. Mr. Castro's entire life and philosophy, including his
reported admiration for Hitler, are examined in GUERRILLA PRINCE: The Untold
Story of Fidel Castro, by Georgie Anne Geyer (Andrews & McMeel, $12.95). In 1991
our reviewer, Mr. Krauss, said, "Much of her account is new and surprising."
    LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE DEBATE: An Alternative Plan;
Insurance Financed by Taxes

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1082 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


They are the guerrilla fighters of the health-care debate: outfinanced by the
industry groups, outmuscled by the policy gurus in the White House, viewed by
most of the pundits as hopeless idealists.

But advocates of installing a Canadian-style health-care system in this country
have a simple message: They are not dead yet. The only true reform in health
care, they argue, is a system of national insurance financed by taxes.

Contrary to conventional wisdom, in which this "single payer" concept is
considered too radical for American politics to digest, they believe that the
public, over the long run, will rally to their side.

In the meantime, they are presenting a withering critique of the health-care
approach that President Clinton favors, the blend of market forces and
government regulation known as "managed competition." And like any good
guerrillas, they are organizing the provinces. As a result, the single-payer
advocates are a force to be reckoned with in the coming struggle on Capitol
Hill; they are Mr. Clinton's restive left flank.

In the view of many analysts, the Clinton forces cannot afford to ignore them.
The battle to overhaul the health care system will be hard enough without losing
a constituency committed to reform.

"If I were worried about who I was going to have to compromise with, I think I'd
play to my strength," said Representative Pete Stark, the California Democrat
who heads the Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health, and a longtime advocate of
single-payer systems. (In the tortured language of health policy, single payer
means there is one entity -- the Government -- paying the bills for health
care.)

Scrapping for Small Gains

Right now, in the tradition of lobbying, the single-payer advocates are pushing
for what they can get, like a guarantee that any health-care revamping will
extend coverage to all Americans, as quickly as possible. The willingness to
compromise varies widely within the single-payer movement, but many say they
hope to be able to support Mr. Clinton's final package.

It is an eclectic group, with much more of an edge than the dryly intellectual
defenders of the Clinton planners. There is David Himmelstein, a 42-year-old
associate professor at Harvard, a doctor, a former Vietnam War protester and a
spokesman for Physicians for a National Health Program.

In a speech, Dr. Himmelstein noted that just 3 percent of the Canadians in one
poll said they would prefer a health care system like that in the United States.
"To put that in perspective, 16 percent of Canadians believe that Elvis Presley
is still alive," he said.

There is Senator Paul Wellstone, the Minnesota Democrat who is a chief sponsor
of single-payer legislation in the Senate and a former professor of political
science, reflecting on the theory of managed competition: "It always seemed to
me to be an A-plus discussion paper in an advanced public policy class. But go
out and try to explain it to people."

There is Citizen Action, an advocacy group, earnestly organizing "900" telephone
numbers and petition drives on behalf of a Canadian-style system. And Mother
Jones magazine, which included in the May issue preaddressed postcards to
Congress endorsing a single-payer system, and labor unions, like the
Communication Workers of America.

And there is Representative Jim McDermott, Democrat of Washington, a
psychiatrist and chief sponsor of a single-payer bill in the House, warning his
colleagues that the votes they cast on health care might be the most important
in their careers -- and that they had better be able to explain them.

The single-payer movement is hardly monolithic. But its advocates strike a few
basic themes. They argue that the Canadian system is a largely successful way of
delivering quality care to all. They argue that taxpayers will be willing to pay
for such a system once they understand that it replaces all other health
insurance costs. Or, as Dr. Himmelstein puts it, "Instead of writing a check to
the insurance companies, you write a check to the Government."

And they assert that the Clinton concept of relying on insurance companies but
in a more heavily regulated marketplace, while presented as a less radical
alternative, would in fact prove far more burdensome to consumers. Mr. McDermott
presents that argument in a nutshell: "You think the insurance industry is going
to do right by you?" he asks.

Unlike a single-payer system, which in many versions would largely replace the
private health insurance industry, the Clinton approach would preserve the role
of insurance companies in health care. It would almost certainly further the
trend toward "managed care," in which insurance companies or other
administrators play an important role in monitoring the treatment given to
patients, with an eye toward preventing unnecessary services and holding down
costs.

Many single-payer advocates present this as extremely ominous, asserting that it
pushes the insurance companies further into the doctor-patient relationship and
erodes patients' rights to choose their doctors. Spokesmen for the Clinton
Administration have said they intend to preserve this freedom of choice, but
their assurances have not deterred the argument, which is widely seen as one of
the most potent lines of attack against the Clinton plan.

The Tax Deterrent

If the advocates of a Canadian-style system seem combative, there are reasons:
Most of the savants in Washington tend to write them off, arguing that their
proposals are utterly unrealistic, particularly at a time when public distrust
of Government is high.

"In focus groups, they don't trust insurance companies, but they don't trust the
Government either," said Robert Blendon, an expert on public opinion and health
care at Harvard.

Adding to the argument against a single-payer system is the enormous new taxes
it would require, and what critics assert are flaws inherent in the Canadian
system, like long waits for some procedures, less technological innovation and
the system's own difficulty in controlling costs. Supporters dismiss those
charges and note that national health insurance would pay off in administrative
savings and efficiency.

In general, single-payer supporters assert that the public is more open to this
idea than the political professionals think it is. "At the very moment that the
public is in a bold mood, calling for sweeping change, everyone here has turned
incremental," Mr. Wellstone said.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: "People Without Health Insurance: A Snapshot" gives a breakdown
of Americans without health insurance and the job groups with higher than
average percentage of uninsured employees. (Source: Employee Benefit Research
Institute)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Uncool For School

BYLINE: By MICHEL MARRIOTT

SECTION: Section 9; Page 1; Column 1; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 2090 words


Every weekday morning, Jermaine Smith, a boyishly handsome East New York
teen-ager, awakens shortly after dawn to the street beats of his alarm
clock-radio. Like countless other American high school students, Jermaine
sleepwalks through his routine of washing and dressing and heading for class.

But for Jermaine, who is known among his friends as "Killer Miller" (he formerly
lived in the Linden Houses on Miller Street), the time-honed ritual of
adolescent preening includes an unusual variation. As he nears Thomas Jefferson
High School, where, he says, he is a better-than-average student, he plunges his
fingers into his mouth and plucks out $400 worth of gold dental caps from his
teeth -- a bridge of six on the top and eight on the bottom that are inscribed
with the letters K-I-L-L-E-R.

At Jefferson High School in Brooklyn, decorative gold caps are banned, as well
as a number of other inner-city fashion points that have acquired, in recent
years, a prickly reputation for causing trouble. To avoid running afoul of
school authorities, Jermaine also removes a rope-thick gold chain from which
dangles a medallion in the shape of a marijuana leaf about the size of his palm.

"I think the rules are good," Jermaine said, as he stuffed his beloved teeth,
his $180 chain and golden cannabis into the oversize pockets of his oversize
jeans. "A lot of people get robbed around here of their coats and chains and
earrings."

But not everyone is as accepting of the fact that, over the last 10 years,
school administrators in urban, rural and suburban public schools have
increasingly moved to sharply restrict what students may wear and display on
school grounds.

A virtual laundry list of items have been banned, from the seemingly arcane to
the profane, including ripped jeans, sneakers with lights in their heels,
"excessive" jewelry, some professional sports team jackets and caps, and baggy
pants -- because they can be used to conceal weapons or drugs. Multi-fingered
rings, which can actually be weapons, are also forbidden in many schools.

And some administrators, like Frank Mickens, principal of Boys and Girls High
School in Brooklyn, have not only made clear what cannot be worn in school, but
have also mandated what should be worn.

For instance, on Mondays and Tuesdays the school's 2,000 boys are required to
"dress for success," meaning that they must wear a shirt and necktie to class.
If students cannot afford them, Mr. Mickens provides them -- free of charge.

"I think they just look great," he said, adding that the school's 2,500 girls
are similarly required on Mondays to dress for succeeding in the mainstream
world of business suits and power tones.

Despite what would seem to be the best of intentions, dress codes have become a
wobbly high wire for many students, parents and educators to walk, one that is
suspended between respecting a student's constitutional rights to free speech
and self-expression and the need to provide a safe and disciplined environment
conducive to learning. And some, particularly regarding schools that have
predominantly black and Hispanic students, question whether it is entirely
helpful to tell children that to succeed among whites they must dress as much
like successful whites as they can.

Sometimes, dress codes are themselves becoming sources of disruption, say some
educators and civil libertarians.

Last month, a 14-year-old girl was required by teachers at her elementary school
in Manteca, Calif., to turn inside out a T-shirt that bore the words: "Real
women love Jesus." School authorities said the T-shirt could be seen as
containing a veiled sexual message, and was potentially disruptive.

And just weeks ago, administrators of a Dallas-Fort Worth suburban high school
banned combat-style boots, including Doc Martens, a popular brand among
teen-agers and young adults. School officials said the aim was to remove the
symbols of gangs and hate groups like "skinheads" operating in the Grapevine,
Tex., school.

Dozens of students, who wore Doc Martens and said they neither belonged to nor
supported gangs or hate groups, faced suspension. Some students protested, and
the ban was rescinded.

"There have been a lot of dress codes coming to our attention," said Alan
Schlosser, staff counsel for the Northern California Civil Liberties Union in
San Francisco. "We are getting complaints from parents and students who feel
that their liberties are being restricted." Officials with the American Civil
Liberties Union said last week that they are investigating the Manteca case.

In most instances, Mr. Schlosser said, when the Civil Liberties Union
intervenes, public school officials voluntarily adjust their policies, for
example, encouraging rather than requiring uniforms.

In three recent cases, Mr. Schlosser said, the union has looked to the courts to
rule on the validity of individual dress codes.

Mr. Schlosser acknowledged that many California school districts are plagued
with violent gangs, most of which identify themselves with a particular style of
dress or accessory, like Los Angeles Raiders jackets or red bandanas. "What we
question is the fact that school administrators make the assumption that somehow
comprehensive dress codes are going to deal with the problem," he said.

Legal precedent holds that how a person, including a student, dresses is a
fundamental form of personal expression, said Norman Siegel, executive director
of the New York Civil Liberties Union, and should therefore be protected by
constitutional guarantees of privacy and free speech. As long as a student's
dress "does not in fact disrupt the educational process or constitute a threat
to safety, it should be of no concern to the school," he said.

But often, administrators say, a straight line can be drawn from a school safety
hazard and an item that gets slapped on the no-no list.

Carol Beck, Jefferson's principal from 1987 until she retired in June, recalled
that last year she was puzzled by a rash of dangerously darkened hallways and
stairways in her school. Upon closer examination, she said, she discovered the
culprits: students were breaking the lights so they could better appreciate the
burst of red light emanating from the heels of their L.A. Gear sneakers, the
current fad.

"You'd never seen so much winking and blinking going on," Ms. Beck said about
the sneaker heels that flashed like grounded lightning bugs. "They had to go."

Laurence Steinberg, professor of psychology at Temple University in
Philadelphia, said there was little if any evidence of a direct correlation
between dress codes and educational attainment.

He said of dress codes in general: "It seems awfully silly. If the problem is
getting kids immersed in the academic business of school, I see no reason to
believe that how they are dressed is going to help in any manner."

Besides, Dr. Steinberg said, school officials trying to enforce dress codes as a
means to focus student attention on education are "fighting a losing battle." He
said students would always find a way, perhaps subtle, to assert their
individual and group identities through what they wear and how they chose to
wear it. Students, he added, "will always be one step ahead."

Dr. Steinberg, co-author of "You and Your Adolescent" (HarperCollins, 1991),
said that unless safety issues are involved, how a student dresses for school
should be a family matter. He said, for example, that he did not allow his
9-year-old son to wear a Bart Simpson T-shirt, which the father considered rude,
to his elementary school last year.

Parents overwhelmingly favor school dress codes, said Judson Wood, ombudsman for
Baltimore's public schools, noting that more than 90 percent of the city's
grade-school students now voluntarily wear school uniforms, closely resembling
the uniforms that have been a traditional hallmark of Catholic and private
schools. He emphasized that the high rate of compliance represented the parent's
choice, not the child's.

This year, a similar uniform policy was introduced in a Baltimore public middle
school for the first time.

For high school students, who are much more likely to decide how they dress for
class, however, the concept of school uniforms has been met with great
resistance, Mr. Wood said. "They just won't go for it," he said.

But Baltimore's high school students are not exempt from a strictly enforced
dress code that, among other things, prohibits the wearing of garments made of
leather or having fur; athletic wear with elastic gathers at the ankles (where
students can conceal objects); jewelry (except for wedding rings upon proof of
marriage); T-shirts with messages that promote drugs, sex or violence, and
bedtime apparel, as well as hair rollers or curlers, underwear worn as
outerwear, skirts or shorts above the knee (when standing) and tank tops, muscle
shirts, halters or see-through blouses.

"We think the dress code helps to promote self-respect and eliminate conflict,"
Mr. Wood said. "We have enough conflict in our community. We don't need to have
our kids fighting over clothes and being obsessed over clothes."

Some dress codes, including the one that prevails in all Los Angeles public
schools, are the work of many minds and are imposed system-wide. But more often,
Mr. Siegel of the Civil Liberties Union said, dress codes are the decision of a
single administrator. "It very often goes to the personal preference of the
principal or school administrator who doesn't think it is appropriate," he
added.

As well they should be, said Frank Mickens, who said he began instituting dress
codes at Boys and Girls High partly because he was weary of attending funerals
of students slain for their clothing.

Mr. Mickens said he had only three words for critics of his dress code: "Mind
your business."

DRESS BLUES:
HISTORY IN THE MAKING

The war over what teen-agers should wear to public schools has raged since at
least 1955, when girls at an Elizabeth, N.J., junior high school were sent to
see the principal for wearing sheer see-through blouses without a camisole or
slip underneath.

Students seemed to have won the clothing war in 1969, when the United States
Supreme Court interpreted dress as a protected form of expression and decreed
that students "do not shed their constitutional rights to freedom of speech or
expression at the schoolhouse gate."

But school boards and principals have continued to fight back. Following are
some of the major style battles waged in schools over the last 30 years.

1963: Sandals are banned at Bloomfield Junior High School in New Jersey. Though
they were good enough for Moses, the school cites them as a safety hazard.

1966: A high school student in New Milford, N.J., is expelled for not trimming
his forbidden Beatle haircut.

Also: the private Fieldston School in the Riverdale section of the Bronx
discourages boys from wearing ties and jackets, in the name of "progressive"
education.

1968: Slacks on girls and corduroy pants and jeans for both sexes are banned in
Boston.

Also: a junior high school teacher in Arlington, Va., objects to students
wearing Navy peacoats; he says it is disrespectful to veterans. This conflict is
set against the background of the Vietnam War and the nearby Pentagon. Students
are allowed to bring the peacoats to their lockers, but not wear them in school.


1969: Tinker v. Des Moines becomes the bench mark of high school dress
decisions. The Supreme Court rules that John F. Tinker, a 15-year-old Iowan, has
a constitutional right to wear a black armband to class in protest of the
Vietnam War. Students are declared " 'persons' under our Constitution and are
possessed of fundamental rights which the state must respect."

1971: Too-big Afro haircuts are forbidden in a Louisville, Ky., high school on
grounds that students sitting behind them could not see the blackboard.
Angel-food cake cutters, long-toothed utensils considered the best Afro combs,
are banned as potential weapons.

1972: The United States District Court of Missoula, Mont., refuses to interfere
with the expulsion of a high school student for wearing his hair too long.
School administrators successfully argue that the dress code expresses community
standards and is necessary for "student safety."

1974: Security guards in some junior high schools in Manhattan begin searching
students for knives. School administrators begin to look back with nostalgia at
dress-code violations.   ERIC P. NASH

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "BAGGY JEANS" -- Oversize jeans were banned from schools because
of fears that students could conceal weapons in them. The ring, above left,
could be considered a weapon in itself. (Photographs by Naum Kazhdan/The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE FREE TRADE ACCORD;
Workers on Free Trade: A Split Along Class Lines

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1392 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Nov. 13


Huffing and puffing to catch the 6 o'clock train bound for the woodsy North
Shore suburbs, a lawyer with a briefcase slowed her pace long enough to praise
the virtues of free trade. "We've got to keep up with the world," Leslie
Sammarco said cheerfully, as she stepped on board. "It's just smart economic
policy."

For the lawyers and stockbrokers and accountants rushing from Loop offices to
the Northwestern Station one recent evening, support for the proposed North
American Free Trade Agreement comes easily, or, as one pipe smoker in tweed
said, it is "a no-brainer."

But from behind the safety glasses of Sharon Torian Jones, a 36-year-old union
worker who cleans these train cars for $8 an hour, the issue looks starkly
different.

Praise and Criticism

"It's going to take our jobs away," said Ms. Jones, frowning under a yellow hard
hat. "I know the rich people say it won't. But what do they care about working
people? The only ones looking to protect people like us is the A.F.L.-C.I.O. And
if the union says it's bad, I trust them. Got no reason to trust those other
folks."

Perhaps no place more than Chicago offers so striking a relief map for the
financial, intellectual and emotional currents swirling around the trade accord.
This is a city of gleaming headquarters of Fortune 500 giants and graveyards of
hollowed, shuttered factories, the home to so many Nobel economists and to so
many graduates of the school of hard knocks.

As much as any issue in generations, the trade accord has prompted sentiments
that seem to break along class lines throughout the country. And on the streets
of Chicago, a city renowned for both its orchestra and its bare-wire blues, the
debate boils down to the oldest division of all: the haves versus the have-nots,
or more precisely, those who have only a little.

The pact has been heralded from the editorial offices of the neo-Gothic tower
that houses The Chicago Tribune, from the ivy-walled halls of the University of
Chicago, from the corporate boardrooms of Quaker Oats and United Airlines and
Sara Lee.

But inside the bungalows and the two-flats and the shot-and-a-beer taverns of
working-class Chicago, the trade agreement is being greeted with suspicion and
outright disdain.

'It Doesn't Take a Genius'

"It stinks," said Mike Burke, a bearish 42-year-old truck driver who sipped a
beer under a picture of Rocky Marciano. "I work hard for a living. I didn't go
to Oxford. I studied in Vietnam, if you know what I mean. Clinton doesn't know
what it's like for a working man. I make 18 bucks an hour, and I'm just
surviving. Now they're going to let these Mexican truckers come up here? You
know what they make? Hey, it doesn't take a genius to figure out why these
companies want this thing to go through."

He sat next to another trucker, Dennis McGue, who shook his head at what he
called the "fancy-pants elites" who support the pact. "I guess when you live up
on a hill," Mr. McGue said, "you just don't see the people in the valley."

A host of economic and foreign policy experts, meanwhile, have written position
papers, delivered speeches and appeared on televised forums to insist that the
agreement does not threaten the jobs of working people.

"I don't know of any serious economist who doesn't support Nafta," said Merton
Miller, a Nobel economist at the University of Chicago, who recently appeared at
the White House to promote the measure.

"Workers have to understand that nothing is going to happen with Nafta that
wouldn't happen without Nafta," he said from his office on the Hyde Park campus.
"Companies that want to go to Mexico are going to Mexico -- have already gone to
Mexico. A lot of people are worried about keeping high wages for low-skilled
jobs. And they should worry. In the modern world, those two things don't go
together. But it's got nothing to do with Nafta. The jobs in the steel mills and
the slaughterhouses didn't go away because of international trade. They
disappeared because of technology. It's not Mexico. It's the machine."

For generations, the smokestacks that billowed soot over Lake Michigan
symbolized the promise of prosperity to people without diplomas or special
skills but with strong backs and a hard-nosed work ethic -- the impoverished
refugees from Appalachian hollows and Mississippi cotton fields and villages of
Europe.

The brawny Chicago of Carl Sandburg, "hog butcher for the world, tool maker,
stacker of wheat," has been gone, of course, since before many of the young
professionals now riding to work on the screeching El trains were even born.
With its glittering Magnificent Mile shopping district and the high-technology
companies sprouting beyond O'Hare Airport, the region today looks more like a
city tuned to the rhythms of faxes and modems than a lunch-box factory town
listening for the noon whistle.

The working-class anger over the trade agreement, in some ways, seems to
represent a lament for those old days, when Chicago was known as "The City That
Works," and almost anybody with a pair of steel-toed boots and some gumption
could land a job with a decent wage. Just since 1980, Chicago has lost more than
200,000 factory jobs, and those who still have work have seen wages and benefits
cut sharply. Companies negotiating for concessions from workers have routinely
threatened to send jobs to Mexico, and in plenty of cases, they have.

The photograph that Ross Perot held up in his debate with Vice President Al Gore
on Tuesday, showing an American factory near a shanty town in Mexico, showed a
Zenith plant, union leaders here say, a company that once employed 14,000
workers in Chicago, and now has fewer than 300 union workers here.

But proponents of the trade pact say the example only proves their point:
American companies do not need the agreement to send jobs across the border.
Indeed, they say the pact would increase jobs in the United States, because
goods produced here would no longer face such a stiff tariff.

"We'll be hiring a lot more Chicago workers with Nafta," said Jeff Victor, a
29-year-old vice president of a car wax company on the West Side. "We're selling
in Mexico now. But the tariff is a killer. Get it removed, and bang, more trade,
more money, more jobs right here at home."

What Jobs Next?

But the workers cannot help but wonder: If so many jobs have already gone to
Mexico, wouldn't an open border make it even easier to ship them away? Won't
$3-an-hour Mexican workers start flooding the hiring offices of American
companies? And what goes next after factory jobs? Claims processors? Data
keypunch operators? File clerks?

American workers today are insecure. And they are bitter, especially since the
shakeout in the 1980's, when companies seemed to sneer at unions.

"To tell you the truth, I can't make heads or tails out of this Nafta," said
Jesse Diaz, freshly unemployed at 55, who still rises at 5 o'clock every morning
to pull on a flannel work shirt and heat coffee for his thermos, a hard habit to
break after 28 years as a factory worker. "All I know is this: I worked almost
30 years for the company, gave them everything I had. And then all of a sudden,
my job is gone."

The politics of the agreement have turned familiar allegiances upside down.
Usual foes like the Rev. Jesse Jackson and Pat Buchanan have joined sides in
opposing the pact, while suburban Republicans are supporting the Democratic
President. Some Chicagoans said they thought they would never see the day when a
Mayor named Daley opposed the unions. Mayor Richard M. Daley, whose brother,
William, directs the push for the pact for President Clinton, recently came out
in favor of the accord.

"It's a strange mix, for certain," said Dennis Glynn, who sipped a white wine in
the gentrifying Bucktown neighborhood, where taverns with signs that read
Cerveza Fria and Zimne Piwo (Spanish and Polish for "cold beer") are being
replaced with yuppie places like Cafe du Midi. "I'm a left-leaning lawyer from a
working-class, Irish-Catholic background, and I'm gay, so my inclination is
certainly to support the unions. But not this time. I'm for Nafta. I just don't
think we can put up a wall around the country. But Chicago is running scared,
just like every other city. People want to know: 'Where have the jobs gone? And
how can we get them back?' "

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "I don't know of any serious economist who doesn't support
Nafta," said Merton Miller, a Nobel economist at the University of Chicago, who
recently appeared at the White House to promote the pact.; "It's going to take
our jobs away," said Sharon Torian Jones, left, a union worker who cleans train
cars at the Northwestern Station in Chicago for $8 an hour. "To tell you the
truth, I can't make heads or tails out of this Nafta," said Jesse Diaz, recently
unemployed after 28 years as a factory worker. (Photographs by Cynthia Howe for
The New York Times) (pg. 16)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton's Goals for Pacific Trade Are Seen as a Hard Sell at Summit

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1789 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Nov. 13


When President Clinton earlier this year invited the leaders of Asia to Seattle
for an economic summit meeting, he was already talking about a "new Pacific
community." Now he is hoping to show that the meeting, the first ever, can
create jobs and wealth for America by linking it to economies that together
control nearly half the world's output.

But if fusing the economic superstars of the Pacific Rim in a tight economic
power bloc were that simple, it would have happened long ago, many officials
from Tokyo to Jakarta argue.

Just beneath the veneer of cooperation among the 15 economies that make up the
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum are conflicting interests and
competition so intense that no Asian equivalent of the European Community will
be possible for years, if ever, the officials say.

Moving Too Fast

Cabinet ministers will begin to arrive on Wednesday, the day the House of
Representatives votes on the North American Free Trade Agreement, and top
leaders of the member nations will gather on Friday for bilateral meetings in
preparation for their session on Saturday. The ministers will meet under the
auspices of the forum, known as APEC, a four-year-old group that established a
formal office only a year ago.

Even before the gathering begins on Wednesday, officials from all around Asia
say they are increasingly suspicious about Washington's enthusiasm for turning
the forum into an ambitious Asia-Pacific economic organization, intended to lead
the way in trade liberalization.

Japan, which fought to make sure that the United States was not excluded from
any Asian economic group, is now nervous that Washington is moving too fast,
proposing free-trade rules and investment guidelines that could scare off
smaller countries in Southeast Asia -- where Japan has a $30 billion investment.

China, the only socialist economy participating, is angling for regional trade
rules that would prevent the Americans from holding its trade status hostage to
its human rights and arms sales record. And countries are racing into Vietnam
with the exception of the United States, whose continued economic restrictions
on doing business there are clearing the way for major investors who see the
country as the next great Asian economic miracle.

The Prime Minister of Malaysia, one of Asia's newest success stories, is
boycotting the meeting planned for an island off Seattle. Mohamad Mahathir is
refusing to attend, apparently out of pique over the treatment of his own plan
for an Asian trade organization that would exclude Western nations.

Mr. Clinton faces a major challenge trying to turn the Seattle conference into a
political success. Every issue about jobs and the flow of wealth raised in the
debate over the North American Free Trade Agreement looms even larger in the
Pacific. Without scaring off his Asian guests, who already fear American
domination, he will have to establish that a region that has traditionally
viewed America as its best marketplace is now ready to buy far more American
goods.

A senior Japanese official compared Clinton's concerns about North American
trade to "worrying about a penny-ante card game" while the big money is being
bet in the next room.

Fear of Exploitation

But over the last few weeks, Asian officials have expressed alarm at the speed
at which the United States appears to be seeking changes to achieve its goal.
Some of the hesitations arerooted in memories of Western colonialism. Others
fear that Mr. Clinton's enthusiasm is really an effort to extend its "results
oriented" trade policies beyond Japan's shores.

"If there is any reservation, it is that Asians don't want to see Asia used as a
means for American ambition," Kazuo Ogura, the director general of economic
affairs at Japan's Foreign Ministry, said the other day. "Asia has been
exploited before. And there is a contradiction in the American attitude that
still disturbs people."

"It is fine that Americans want to get involved in this part of the world," said
Mr. Ogura, who is known for his sometimes nationalistic-sounding views. "But on
the other hand, there are some in America who still view economic progress in
East Asia as a threat, and how to deal with that ambivalence is a problem we
must deal with."

That concern has only been heightened by the fight over the North American Free
Trade Agreement. Mr. Clinton repeatedly suggested that if the United States
failed to approve the North American agreement, Japan would swoop in and steal
Mexico away as an economic ally.

"Some of these remarks were very distasteful to us," one of the most senior
officials in Japan's Foreign Ministry said here this week. "We have no such
intentions."

Trade Within Region Booms

Most of Japan's intentions, and Asia's, are closer to home. For the last two
years, trade within the region has outstripped trade across the Pacific. With
the United States now the ultimate market for only about a quarter of the area's
goods, Asia is becoming economically more important to America just as America
is becoming economically less critical to Asia.

That has not dampened the debate, however, over a report now circulating called
"A Vision for APEC -- Toward an Asia Pacific Economic Community." The foreign
and trade ministers themselves commissioned the study last year, and it was
prepared by economists from around the region, headed by C. Fred Bergsten, the
director of the Institute for International Economics in Washington and a former
Treasury Department official in the Carter Administration.

Though it is vaguely worded on some controversial points, it recommends setting
a target date for creating a sprawling free-trade zone throughout the Pacific,
one member said recently, and explicitly uses the term "community" -- with a
lower-case "c." Mr. Bergsten says the ultimate goal is to transform the
organization "from a purely consultative forum to an action-oriented,
substantive group."

Over time, the report suggests, the group would adjudicate trade disputes and
set standards for everything from telecommunications equipment to environmental
protection. It could also adopt trade liberalizations before they are adopted in
worldwide forums like the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, thus forcing
action on a broader scale.

That would be a huge change for the loosely organized group. Officially the
United States has not said how much it would press the goals stated in the
report. But it is not alone in seeking a more formal, action-oriented
organization. Australia, which takes credit for getting APEC started, Singapore
and South Korea are among those talking about moving relatively quickly.

"What we need to do," said Han Sung Joo, South Korea's Foreign Minister, "is to
bring the Eastern Pacific and the Western Pacific together, to get America more
committed to Asia, and to get Asia together."

But the other nations of the three-decade old Association of South-East Asian
Nations -- especially Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia -- are more cautious. And
Japan, careful about upsetting its new economic partners, has joined them.

"Both Indonesia and Thailand have recently reduced barriers to direct
investment, and that was quite voluntary," said Ippei Yamazawa, a Japanese
economist who served on the committee with Mr. Bergsten. "They are acting not
because of pressure, but to make their goods competitive. We should let much of
this happen by consensus, an Asian way."

None of the countries openly disagree with the goals in the report, as long as
they are kept in the sufficiently distant future. But many Southeast Asian
nations are already feeling overwhelmed by the crushing competition with Japan
and the emergence of "Greater China" -- that is, the combination of Chinese
labor and Taiwanese, Singaporean and Hong Kong capital.

Many of the poorer nations say it would be suicidal to drop all barriers to
their markets now. They compare themselves to Japan in the 1950's, and say they
want to follow a similar strategy of protection and industrial planning.

Thus, there is a growing fear that APEC will be hijacked by the United States
and other Western powers, and turned into an organization that will be used to
force open their markets prematurely.

The most vociferous in exploiting these fears is Dr. Mahathir, the Malaysian
leader, who is little known in the West but whose voice is increasingly powerful
in Asia. He has argued that the best economic organization for Asia would be one
that excludes the United States, Canada, Australia and others that would impose
Anglo-Saxon rules on the region. Inevitably, he argues, Western trading styles
would give way to demands for Western-style governance -- stressing individual
liberty to the detriment of economic development.

"They want us to practice the kind of democracy that brings about instability,
economic decline and poverty," he complained recently in a speech to the
country. "With this, they can threaten and control us."

While some dismiss his views as extreme, the Japanese and others say he reflects
an undercurrent of thought that runs throughout the region.

Meeting Itself a Feat

As a result, perhaps the most remarkable thing about what Mr. Clinton's aides
are calling a leaders' meeting -- they have steered clear of the word summit for
fear it would suggest formal decision-making -- is that it is happening at all.
Though Asia often seems like a coherent geographic and economic entity from
afar, to Asians themselves it has always defied a unity -- even when Japan
controlled huge swaths of the region half a century ago.

That has only begun to change in the last decade or so, as the market has begun
to accomplish what governments could not. The European Community was created by
government agreement. But the modern unifiers of Asia are companies like Toyota
and Matsushita, as is evident to anyone who has witnessed Malaysian workers
singing their Japanese company songs at daybreak on the outskirts of Kuala
Lumpur. They have begun to organize different countries to supply different
products, either back to Japan or for export to the West.

Now much the same is happening with Greater China, the term being used to
describe the combination of mainland Chinese labor and capital and technology
from Taiwan and Hong Kong. By some estimates Taiwan has already invested between
$5 billion and $9 billion in the mainland, despite all the official legal
barriers. The power of Chinese money, and the family relationships that link
them together, has so alarmed Japan that Tokyo is suddenly pouring billions of
dollars into China even while investment in factories in Japan and the United
States has dropped off dramatically.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Clinton has invited officials of 14 other world
economic powers to Seattle this week to discuss Pacific Rim economic
cooperation. (pg. 10)

Map of the Pacific Ocean (pg. 10)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 35 words


The contents page in The Times Magazine last Sunday carried an erroneous credit
for the cover illustration, of an Army Nurse Corps advertisement. It was created
by the N. W. Ayer agency, not Young & Rubicam.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Pentagon's New Somalia Bill Is $300 Million

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 394 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 13


The Pentagon plans to ask Congress for an additional $300 million to pay for the
military operation in Somalia through next March, when American forces are to
withdraw, a senior Defense Department official said on Friday.

The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the extra money was
needed because the Somalia operation was being paid for with money earmarked for
other activities, like routine training, in the 1994 fiscal year.

The request, which still needs White House approval, is in addition to the $261
billion 1994 military budget approved on Wednesday and signed by President
Clinton on Thursday. That budget sets aside no money for the Somalia mission.

The Pentagon has historically paid for military operations -- war-fighting as
well as peacekeeping -- through an account called operations and maintenance.
The Pentagon sometimes recoups the costs of specific military missions through a
supplemental appropriation.

Last year, for example, Congress approved $750 million to help offset the $981.5
million in incremental costs the military incurred in Somalia from December
1992, when the operation started, to September 1993.

The senior official said that if Congress did not approve the extra spending for
this year, the Pentagon might be forced to reduce routine training and combat
exercises, a step that Congress has vigorously opposed.

"The services are paying for Somalia by borrowing money they planned to spend in
the third and fourth quarters of this fiscal year," the official said.

For that reason, Pentagon and Congressional officials say lawmakers would
probably approve the extra financing. The United States now has about 7,450
troops in Somalia and 8,600 on ships offshore.

Combat readiness has become an increasingly important concern, both at the
Pentagon and on Capitol Hill. Senior commanders recall with anguish that the
military reductions after the Vietnam War in the late 1970's drastically cut
training time and resulted in combat units fielded at levels well below full
strength.

The Army, in particular, has complained that the Pentagon's long-term budget
plan does not include enough money to execute the kind of missions that civilian
policy makers envision.

The senior Pentagon official criticized the Army for not paring its costs in the
same way the Navy and Air Force have.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 15, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Taiwan Bank in Hanoi

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 9; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 109 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Nov. 14


The Cathay Investment Trust Company has opened a banking branch in Hanoi,
becoming the first Taiwan company to do so since the end of the Vietnam War. The
company, an affiliate of Taiwan's Ching Fong Group, is the third foreign bank to
open a branch in the capital and the ninth to do so in the country. About 30
foreign banks, including Taiwan's private International Commercial Bank of
China, have representative offices in Hanoi or Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam's main
business center. Taiwan is eager to expand trade links with the Communist
country and has become one of the biggest foreign investors here, committing
more than $1 billion to date.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 16, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

122 Die in Vietnam Floods

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 30 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Nov. 15


Heavy rains and flooding last month in three central provinces of Vietnam killed
122 people and caused $50 million in damages, the army newspaper, Quan Doi Nhan
Dan, said today.

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 16, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

In a Remote Southern Marsh, Iraq Is Strangling the Shiites

BYLINE: By CHRIS HEDGES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1848 words

DATELINE: HUWAIZAH MARSH, Iraq, Nov. 12


Government forces in Iraq have stepped up a campaign to empty wide sections of
the country's southern marshlands. The campaign has included what some witnesses
describe as chemical-weapons attacks against opposition Shiite Muslims.

Residents and Shiite guerrillas say Iraqi engineers have diverted water from the
Tigris and Euphrates rivers, drying up more than half the vast wetlands and
pushing thousands of people deeper into the marshes and into Iran. The operation
has also forced an unknown number to surrender to Iraqi troops, who have
interned families in barren detention centers in Basra, Nasiriya and Amara,
residents said.

Although the draining began in August 1992, guerrillas say the crackdown has
been stepped up. The Government's campaign has also included random shelling,
the burning of villages and summary executions.

Dry Roads for Tanks

The diversion of the water has enabled Iraq to send infantry and armored
personnel carriers over the dried marsh bed to attack and gut scores of southern
villages in recent weeks, the residents and guerrillas say.

And six people interviewed along the border with Iran said they had witnessed a
chemical-weapons attack by Iraqi forces. A copy of what appeared to be Iraqi
military documents buttressed their account.

[United Nations investigators arrived on Nov. 14 in Teheran, Iran, to
investigate allegations of chemical-weapons attacks. They interviewed two
refugees who said they had witnessed such Iraqi attacks, Reuters reported,
quoting a spokesman for the Shiite rebels, Abu Hassan.]

The overall aim of the Iraqi Army seems to be to wipe out the scattered villages
and farms that sustain the rebels. Rebel commanders and survivors estimate that
50,000 Shiites have been killed since an abortive uprising after the gulf war,
and that as many as one-third of the estimated 200,000 residents have fled the
marshes in the last five months.

The Iraqi Government, whose leadership is predominantly Sunni Muslim, maintains
that it is only hunting down deserters and criminals, and that its extensive
diversion of water is aimed at reclaiming 150 million acres of land for
agricultural use.

The marshes cover about a third of Iraq's southern provinces. United States
satellite photographs in March showed that one-third of the Amara marsh is dry,
as are large patches of the Huwaizah marsh. The marshes, which cover 6,000
square miles, include vast banks of reeds, lagoons and rice paddies, and the
residents of the island villages have been self-sufficient for thousand of
years.

The effects of the Iraqi campaign were evident during a two-day trip with Shiite
rebels.

Water levels in the Huwaizah marsh have sunk by several feet, often forcing
guerrillas out of their skiffs to wade knee-deep through the muck and weeds. The
rebels are often unable to find fish; they subsist on bread and tea.

Families are occasionally seen paddling toward Iran, nursing sick and emaciated
children. Fresh water is so precious that it sells for $1 a bucket. The
diversion of rivers has also killed off the lumbering water buffalo that were a
part of most households.

The Iranian Government says 60,000 Iraqis have fled to Iran since 1991, when
uprisings by the Kurds in the north of Iraq and the Shiites in the south were
crushed by President Saddam Hussein. Over the last three months, refugees have
been arriving at a rate of 20 to 30 a day.

One refugee, Sadriya Ali, held her year-old son as she sat on the dirt floor of
a small reed hut that she and her husband hastily constructed a few days ago
just inside Iran. A fire of reed tips sent shadows dancing across their weary
faces.

The couple said they had spent 10 days trying to reach Iran, hiding from Iraqi
troops and sprinting past army checkpoints at night.

"Our village was shelled and burned to the ground three weeks ago," Mrs. Ali
said. "The marsh is dry. We can no longer fish or grow rice. Our animals are
dead. The children are sick. To remain in the marsh is suicide."

But the effort to flee has become especially difficult since the construction of
a double embankment, wide enough to support tanks, that slices through the
Huwaizah marsh. The embankment encircles most of the Amara marsh's residents.

Shiites represent 60 percent of Iraq's 20 million people and have long resented
the domination of the Government and businesses by Sunni Muslims. Most rebels
belong to a group known as the Supreme Council of the Islamic Revolution in Iraq
and have been battling the Government for a decade.

The Shiites, supported by Iran, rose up against the Hussein Government after
Iraq's defeat in the gulf war, but their rebellion was crushed and thousands of
dissidents and hundreds of army deserters fled to the marshes and to Iran.

The rebel bands, armed with light weapons and a few grenade launchers, carry out
ambushes and other attacks. Some 10,000 operate out of small camps in Iran,
though many camps have been rendered uninhabitable by the drop in the water
level.

Rebel commanders worry that because they are strict Muslims allied with Iran,
the outside world will be reluctant to offer the kind of protection extended to
Kurdish guerrillas.

Ban on Planes, not Tanks

In August 1992 the United States and some gulf allies declared a ban on Iraqi
flights south of the 32d parallel after receiving reports that Baghdad was
attacking Shiites by air. But the planes patrolling the zone can take no action
to deter ground attacks.

People who live in the zone say the flight ban prompted the Government to step
up the ground campaign.

"Saddam Hussein took the establishment of this zone very seriously, more
seriously than perhaps the West," said Ali Ali al-Abhadh, the Geneva
representative of the Supreme Council. "He decided that he would have to finish
off the Shiites in the marshland as quickly as possible."

Shortly after the flight ban was established, Iraqi engineers began building
dikes and canals to divert water from the marshes. Army units keep out all food
and medicine. The burning of the small clusters of reed huts has become
commonplace.

In some ways, the counterinsurgency operation resembles President Hussein's
crackdown on the Kurds in 1988, which included the use of chemical weapons. The
offensive drove Kurdish rebels into Turkey and Iran and left large tracts of the
north uninhabited. The Government evacuated and then destroyed 4,000 villages,
and tens of thousands of Kurds disappeared, Kurdish leaders say.

But after Baghdad crushed a Kurdish uprising in March 1991, the gulf allies set
up a security zone to convince the Kurds who had fled that it would be safe to
return.

The apparent use of chemical weapons has profoundly shaken the morale of the
Shiite leaders.

Asadullah Haidar al-Mohammedawi, 24, a former university student from Basra, sat
late one afternoon on the floor of a guerrilla outpost in Iran. He left the
marshland three weeks ago after being wounded in a fight with Iraqi troops.

On the morning of Sept. 26, he said, he and several other guerrillas were eating
a breakfast of tea and bread outside a village, Kariet Eloui, about 15 miles
northeast of Basra, when they saw armored personnel carriers advancing. Most of
the 1,000 families in the village had already fled.

The White Cloud

After an hour of shelling, they heard artillery shells land, but with a dull
thud, not the usual explosion.

"These shells sent up a white cloud," said Nasruddin Mohammed Taki
al-Mohammedawi, 27, who also witnessed the attack. "We did not know what it was.
It rose above the village and then settled over the houses."

The guerrillas said that they were then attacked by Iraqi troops but that they
were able to overpower them.

"We noticed that the soldiers were equipped with gas masks," said Mr. Haidar
al-Mohammedawi. "This was new. Then when we went inside one of the armored
personnel carriers, we saw that the battle orders for the company called for a
chemical assault."

Rebel leaders provided a copy of what they said were the captured documents,
which were written in a notebook in Arabic and dated Sept. 26. The battle
orders, numbered 1 to 15, state that chemical weapons are to be used to retake
the village and that "each soldier must be instructed on how to respond during
the chemical attack."

Villagers who returned three days after the attack to search for belongings said
the area had been devastated.

"Trees and plants were withered and yellow," said one villager, Hussein Kamel,
who has now fled to Iran. "The cats, the dogs, the birds and even the water
snakes had died. But for some reason the victims had been removed by the troops.
We saw no bodies."

Although the Shiites have produced witnesses to the attack, they have failed to
produce any victims. But chemical weapons experts said the reported effects,
including the deaths of animals, matched the effects of nerve gas.

"With low-level concentrations of nerve gas, the first thing it does is paralyze
the lungs," said Steven P. T. Rose, a professor of biology at the Open
University in London and a specialist in chemical weapons. "If they found dead
animals, this also fits with nerve gas. The point that does not fit is the
report of dead plants. I don't understand that, but the teams that went in to
investigate the chemical attack against the Kurds in Halabja also said the
plants had died.

"Animals are killed by nerve gas, but plants are not," Professor Rose said. "I
suspect the Iraqis may use some kind of a mixture that includes a defoliant,
such as that which the Americans used in Vietnam. What is interesting is that
the reports now from the south and the north are consistent."

A Culture Also Dries Up

It is not just the Iraqi offensive that makes life intolerable for the Shiites.

The draining of the marshes is decimating the ancient culture of the marsh
Arabs, known as the Maadan, which stretches back 5,000 years. While the reports
of the chemical attack have sowed fear among many families, it is the dwindling
supply of water that is driving them to flee.

Kharia Hamid, 20, sat with her infant child on a bed of reed husks just inside
Iran. She and 11 relatives had spent three days fleeing, usually at night.

"We, who used to live surrounded by water, now dig wells in the dry river beds
to get something to drink," she said. "And more and more this water is salty, or
makes us sick. We tried to live without fish, without rice and without our water
buffalos, but who can live without water?"

She stopped and stared in the direction of the marsh. Five children clustered
around her sat dazed and silent.

"We gave them pills to make them sleep," she said quickly to explain. "We do it
when we hear gunfire, or when we have to flee the troops. If the little ones
make noise, we will be killed."

As she paused, the rumble of artillery fire was heard in the distance.

Mrs. Hamid tried to remember the names of the drugs she had given the children,
but she could not, saying: "Blue pills, red pills, white pills. It is the only
way they sleep."

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 23, 1993, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, a front-page article last Tuesday about Iraqi
Government moves against opposition Shiite Muslims in southern Iraq misspelled
the name of the Geneva representative of the Supreme Council of Islamic
Revolution in Iraq, an opposition group. He is Ali Ali al-Adhadh.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Residents of the southern Iraqi marshes traveling last January
to the funeral of a relative killed by Iraqi mortar fire. Baghdad's campaign to
drain the marshes and drive out the residents has included random shelling, the
burning of villages and summary executions. (Shyam Bhatia/The Observer) (pg.
A10)

Map of Iraq showing location of the Southern marsh area. (pg. A1)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 919 words



International A3-12

SHIFT IN CHINA POLICY
News analysis: The Clinton Administration's decision to meet with China
represents a shift to a friendlier policy toward Beijing, in the hope that it
will work better than it did for the Bush Administration.  A1

JAPAN VOTE BACKS CHANGE
The Japanese Government won a key vote in a Parliamentary committee on a package
of bills to redesign its corruption-tainted electoral system, setting the course
for sweeping political change.  A1


EUROPE CHANGE NO AID TO GYPSIES
The transition in Eastern Europe has increased hardships for Gypsies in many
places, increasing open persecution and removing economic and social
protections.  A12

ISRAEL WARNS SETTLERS
Israel warned settlers who have gone on rampages against Palestinians over a
series of recent killings that further disturbances will not be tolerated. It
did not halt a new demonstration, however.  A6

PROGRESS IN MIDEAST TALKS
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators reported progress and said they are likely
to overcome stumbling blocks before the Dec. 13 deadline for limited Palestinian
self-rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho.  A7

SOUTH AFRICANS FEAR FOR YOUTH
A South African mother tried to save her son from violent gang life in a town
near Johannesburg by sending him away to live, but he came back and took up life
on the streets. Eventually, it led to his death.  A3

U.N. REVERSES SOMALI STANCE
The United Nations called off its search for the leader of a Somali faction that
it had blamed for an attack on peacekeepers and asked a commission to
investigate who was responsible for the attack.  A3

Monks who defied the Vietnamese Government were sentenced.  A11

Officials said a fuel delivery in Haiti could prolong its political crisis.  A9

Germany's opposition party met to plan a new national strategy.  A5

London Journal: A new look for a historic tower.  A4

National A16-25

CLINTON GAINS ON TRADE
The White House won more pledges of support for the North American Free Trade
Agreement, signaling the first time that the number of Representatives who have
declared their support for the treaty rose above the number of opponents.  A1

THE IMPACT BACK HOME
Representative Tom Sawyer of Ohio pledged to back the trade pact, which the
large number of factory workers in his district despise.  A1

Mexico's President needs the pact to assure his place in history.  A20

White House memo: The trade debate buoys the President.  A20

The dealmaking on the trade pact sounds a lot like a grocery list.  A21

COURT STRIKES MILITARY GAY BAN
A Federal appeals panel in Washington struck down the Pentagon's old ban on
homosexuals, which had been used to remove a midshipman from the Naval Academy.
A1

MISTAKES IN JOBLESS RATE
The Government said it had substantially underestimated unemployment for at
least a decade, particularly among women, because of bias in its monthly survey.
A1

UNCLEAR ROLE FOR DRUG CENTER
The National Drug Intelligence Center in Johnstown, Pa., the Government's newest
agency for combating drug traffickers, opened recently without a clear mission.
A16

SENATE BACKS ABORTION BILL
The Senate voted for a law to prohibit bombings, arson and blockades at abortion
clinics and shootings and threats of violence against doctors who perform
abortions.  A16

FREEDOM OF WORSHIP LAW
The President signed a bill requiring the Federal Government to meet stringent
standards before instituting measures that might interfere with religious
practices.  A18

MANY VOICES ON WELFARE
Administration representatives got plenty of input at public hearings on
reforming welfare. But there was little support for the President's plan to
limit benefits.  A24

POLL FINDS DOUBT ON HEALTH PLAN
The American public doubts that Congress can pass health care legislation, the
latest New York Times/CBS News Poll showed.  A22

SETBACK FOR GORE PLAN
The Congressional Budget Office estimated that the Vice President's plan to trim
the Government would save only a portion of the amount the Administration
predicted.  A22

CALIFORNIA LOOMS IN '96
Political memo: California's beleaguered economy presents heavy political
implications for 1996 for President Clinton.  A25

Education Page B7

In School: Students take a field trip from Harlem to Vassar.

Programs in international affairs regroup for the post-cold war world.

Metro Digest B1

ACCORD ON MENTAL HEALTH
The New York Legislature and Gov. Mario M. Cuomo reached agreement on a landmark
mental health bill that would dedicate money that is saved by closing state
psychiatric hospitals to care for mentally ill people living in communities
throughout the state.  A1

Health Page C17

Personal Health: An engineered hormone and the milk we drink.

Arts/Entertainment C19-26

Berlin rocks as musical walls come down.  C19
Theater: "Any Given Day." C19

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-15

Sports B10-16

Obituaries B8-9

Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27

Editorials

Nafta and the national interest.
Mr. Clinton's promising speech.
Parks are for people, not planes.
The Pacific summit.

Letters

Bob Herbert: Pretty words on Nafta.
Robert E. Pollack: Beyond cloning.
Mark Leyner: The (illustrated) body politic.

Bridge C24

Chronicle B4

Crossword C26

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

4 Buddhist Monks in Vietnam Get Prison Terms

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 539 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 16


Four dissident Buddhist monks accused of inciting the largest public
demonstration in Vietnam since the Vietnam War have been convicted and sentenced
to prison sentences of three and four years, Vietnamese officials and foreign
diplomats said today.

The monks, whose supporters have accused the Hanoi Government of a campaign of
persecution against Buddhists, received their sentences Monday after a trial in
Hue, the central Vietnamese city where the demonstration took place in May.

Witnesses said that during the protest, hundreds if not thousands of people
gathered at a central intersection in the city, blocking traffic for hours along
Vietnam's major north-south road. During the event, a small group of men
overturned a Government car, which erupted in flames -- a rare act of
anti-Government violence in Vietnam.

The protest began with a sit-down strike at the intersection by monks who
suspected that their abbot, Thich Tri Tuu, had been arrested. A huge crowd of
supporters and gawkers then gathered around them, witnesses said.

Although he was in fact not under arrest at the time, the abbot was later taken
into custody on charges of inciting the May 24 demonstration and, on Monday,
received a prison sentence of four years. One of his colleagues, Thich Hai Tang,
also received a four-year sentence. The two other monks, Thich Hai Thinh and
Tich Hai Chanh, were sentenced to three-year terms.

The dissident monks have received public expressions of support from a variety
of human rights groups and from members of the United States Congress, who have
warned that the criminal proceedings against the monks could delay the
establishment of normal diplomatic and trade relations between Vietnam and the
United States.

Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, said in a letter to Secretary of
State Warren Christopher last week that the monks were being tried "solely for
the nonviolent expression of their religious beliefs." He said that "as the
United States and Vietnam move toward normalization of relations, it is
important that respect for human rights be an integral part of the U.S.-Vietnam
dialogue."

The May 24 demonstration in Hue has been the subject of intense speculation
among diplomats in Hanoi since there is no other recent example of large-scale
anti-Government defiance by the public.

The monks sentenced on Monday are associated with the Unified Buddhist Church of
Vietnam, a dissident sect that has long resisted efforts by the Government to
integrate it into the state-sponsored Vietnam Buddhist Church, which was created
after North Vietnam overran the south in 1975.

The chain of events that led to the May 24 demonstration began several days
earlier, with a suicide by self-immolation in Hue in the Linh Mu Pagoda, one of
the most hallowed Buddhist shrines in Vietnam. The reasons for the suicide
remain unclear.

When Trich Tri Tuu, the abbot of the pagoda, tried to organize a Buddhist
funeral for the man, local authorities protested, saying there was no proof that
he was a devout Buddhist. They called the abbot in for questioning about the
suicide, leading his followers in the pagoda to believe he had been arrested.
They then organized the sit-down protest.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film: The Saint of Fort Washington;
Homeless, Helpless and Holy, in One Kind of Hell

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 880 words


Matthew (Matt Dillon), a gentle soul, has lived quietly until circumstances
force him out on the street. A wrecking crane appears at the start of "The Saint
of Fort Washington" to smash a condemned building, and inadvertently shatter
Matthew's life. Fragile and bewildered, Matthew is ill-equipped to fend for
himself, so he has no hope of finding a new place to stay. With no address for
receiving his public assistance checks, he is left homeless, indigent and alone.

Matthew is not literally alone when he is sent to the Fort Washington Armory, an
enormous city-operated shelter where he must sleep on a cot alongside hundreds
of other homeless men. And "The Saint of Fort Washington," Tim Hunter's
heartfelt new film about homeless characters, is most disturbing in presenting
straightforward images of this hellish, impersonal place. With a documentarian's
eye for detail, Mr. Hunter (the director of "Tex" and "River's Edge") shows how
to keep shoes and valuables from being stolen overnight, and why it's best never
to visit the bathroom without an escort. This film has no trouble communicating
how devastating it can be to spend time in such a place.

But "The Saint of Fort Washington" is no documentary; it's a drama in which
saintliness plays an oversized role. As written by Lyle Kessler, it shows how a
friendship develops between Matthew and Jerry (Danny Glover), a kindly Vietnam
veteran who is well versed in the ways of street survival. Once a middle-class
husband and father, Jerry has been homeless for so long that he can help teach
Matthew certain basic tricks, like how to linger for hours in a fast-food
restaurant over a salvaged newspaper and a single cup of coffee.  If Matthew, as
Jerry suggests, is the de facto saint of the homeless community, then Jerry is
surely its mayor.

The film watches attentively as Jerry takes Matthew under his wing.  Ever
cheerful (either despite or because of painkillers prescribed to him him by V.A.
doctors), Jerry tries to teach Matthew how to clean automobile windshields with
only an occasional burst of sarcasm. ("Hey, thanks a lot," Jerry says to one
driver. "This is your world; we just live in it.") Then he finds that even this
job is too much for the childlike, distracted Matthew to handle. Once Jerry
grasps the extent of Matthew's helplessness, he does his best to become the
younger man's protector. But the characters in "The Saint of Fort Washington"
need a lot more than one another's kindness. In his tacit, thoughtful way, Mr.
Hunter makes that inescapably clear.

"The Saint of Fort Washington" is a movingly acted and often bleakly believable
film, but it does not strengthen its story by draping a cloak of nobility over
its characters. Jerry and Matthew would be sympathetic under any circumstances,
thanks to Mr. Glover's warm, sturdy presence and Mr. Dillon's way of suggesting
that Matthew truly does enjoy a state of grace. But the film's spirit of
compassion can be dangerously pat, as with the homeless lovers (Rick Aviles and
Nina Siemaszko) whose eager anticipation of a new baby sets up the screenplay's
most mawkish, predictable development.  It does not help that the story allows
for exactly one bully (Ving Rhames), plus his henchman, within its not always
three-dimensional world.

The film's visual backdrop often supplies what its dialogue lacks, as Mr. Hunter
-- and the cinematographer Frederick Elmes, creating vivid urban landcapes --
convey a strong sense of the characters' restrictive domain. The locations are
especially well chosen, from the real shelters seen here to the drab government
office where Matthew runs afoul of red tape. Potter's field, on Hart Island, is
a seldom-seen location that lends real sorrow to the film's closing moments,
especially when Mr. Hunter quietly depicts the procedures by which the homeless
are buried there.  Whatever its shortcomings, "The Saint of Fort Washington"
takes its subject very seriously, in ways that no audience can fail to find
wrenchingly sad.

Mr. Dillon, who goes back a long way with this director (having made his screen
debut in the 1979 "Over the Edge," which Mr. Hunter co-wrote), again finds
surprising ways to play a troubled, affecting loner. With a disheveled look and
an expression that is both dazed and somehow watchful, he makes Matthew's
extreme sensitivity a riveting quality, even if the screenplay takes it a step
too far.  Matthew is often seen snapping pictures with a camera, which is
revealed to have no film. "The Saint of Fort Washington" works best when it
avoids even a hint of the metaphorical and sticks to the plain, hard facts.

"The Saint of Fort Washington" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent
or adult guardian). It includes profanity and violence.

The Saint of
Fort Washington

Directed by Tim Hunter; written by Lyle Kessler; director of photography,
Frederick Elmes; edited by Howard Smith; music by John Barnes; production
designer, Stuart Wurtzel; produced by David V. Picker and Nessa Hyams; released
by Warner Brothers. Running time: 102 minutes. This film is rated R.

Jerry . . . Danny Glover
Matthew . . . Matt Dillon
Rosario . . . Rick Aviles
Tamsen . . . Nina Siemaszko
Little Leroy . . . Ving Rhames
Spits . . . Joe Seneca

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Danny Glover, left, and Matt Dillon in "The Saint of Fort
Washington." (Bob Greene/Warner Brothers)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE FREE TRADE ACCORD: The Overview;
HOUSE BACKS FREE TRADE PACT IN MAJOR VICTORY FOR CLINTON AFTER A LONG HUNT FOR
VOTES

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1697 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 17


President Clinton scored one of the biggest triumphs of his Presidency tonight
when the House of Representatives voted to expand trade with Mexico and turn
North America into the world's largest free trade zone.

Legislation to put the North American Free Trade Agreement into effect starting
Jan. 1 and to gradually abolish nearly all trade barriers between the United
States, Mexico and Canada was adopted by a vote of 234 to 200, with three-fifths
of the Democrats voting against the President and most Republicans supporting
him.

The surprisingly large margin of victory, 16 votes more than needed to approve
the legislation, could not have been imagined as recently as last weekend. As
late as this afternoon, the Administration's head-counters, while expressing
confidence, said victory was not a certainty.

'We Chose to Compete'

Senate approval in the next week is certain, leaders of both parties said.

In the tally tonight, 102 of the 258 Democrats voted for the measure and to
support their President. They were joined by 132 Republicans. On the other side,
156 Democrats, 43 Republicans and one independent voted against the bill.
[Roll-call, page A20.]

Other than the budget votes in August, when Mr. Clinton prevailed by two votes
in the House and one vote in the Senate, tonight's vote was the most important
politically for the President and for Congress.

At the White House tonight, Mr. Clinton proclaimed the victory "a defining
moment for our nation."

"At a time when many of our people are hurting from the strains of this tough
global economy," he said, "we chose to compete, not retreat. Tonight I am proud
to say, we have not flinched."

In an odd reversal, Representative Robert H. Michel of Illinois, the Republican
leader, gave a spirited defense of the President and the trade agreement in the
final moments of the daylong debate. And Representative David E. Bonior of
Michigan, the Democratic whip and usually a Clinton loyalist, gave an emotional
closing speech against the measure.

With almost every representative on the floor and every seat in the visitors'
gallery filled as the vote neared, Mr. Michel declared that the opponents of
expanded trade with Mexico wanted "to define our time as the age of anxiety, in
which our only response to the challenges of global competition is to retreat,
whine and whimper."

He implored his colleagues, "Do not sacrifice the jobs of tomorrow to the fears
of today."

A Standing Ovation

Mr. Bonior brought the Democratic side of the chamber to its feet with a
standing ovation, and some legislators appeared to be in tears.

"The working people who stand against this treaty don't have degrees from
Harvard," he declared. "They don't study economic models. And most of them have
never heard of Adam Smith. But they know when the deck is stacked against them.
They know it's not fair to ask American workers to compete gainst Mexican
workers who earn $1 an hour.

"The work of America is still done by people who pack a lunch, punch a clock and
pour their heart and soul into every paycheck. And we can't afford to leave them
behind."

In the debate, Republicans made a point of the fact that they were supporting
Mr. Clinton as he prepares to go to Seattle for a meeting with leaders from
Asian countries. Democrats did not appeal for loyalty to their party's
President, a recognition that the heart of the party lay elsewhere.

Thank You to Republicans

Appearing before television cameras in the Grand Foyer of the White House, just
after 11 P.M., Mr. Clinton reached out to the fellow Democrats and labor leaders
with whom he had fiercely battled. He portrayed them as "passionate defenders of
the working people."

But even before his public remarks, Mr. Clinton telephoned Mr. Michel and
Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the Republican whip, to thank them for
the Republican assistance that proved decisive in winning passage of the trade
accord.

Vice President Al Gore is likely to travel to Mexico next week to discuss
implementation of the accord with President Carlos Salinas Gortari, White House
officials said tonight.

Mr. Clinton depicted the vote as a decisive moment in his Presidency, and spent
the bulk of the last several weeks rounding up support. In Congress, some
members saw the occasion as a rare vote on which their political futures could
hang.

Symbol of Change

The agreement, negotiated by the Bush Administration, creates a free trade zone
from the Yukon to Yucatan. Since the United States and Canada are already bound
by a free trade agreement, and since commerce between Canada and Mexico is
relatively meager, the main question involved trade expansion between the United
States and Mexico, its third-largest trading partner.

The substantive arguments seemed almost mundane, not worthy of the high
political stakes riding on the outcome. Proponents said the agreement would
generate a few hundred thousand additional jobs in the United States; opponents
said it would cost a few hundred thousand. In an economy where about 120 million
people go to work every day, the difference is no more than a statistical
asterisk.

But the accord had become a symbol of the economic changes in the United States,
of the promise for those who stand to benefit from an economy dominated by high
technology and an educated work force, and of the anxiety for those who see a
future in which there are ever-fewer high-paying assembly-line jobs for
Americans without a college education or a skilled craft.

Labor unions ferociously opposed the agreement. Businesses generally supported
it. Economists and foreign policy experts were almost unanimously in favor of
it. So was every living past President, from Richard M. Nixon through George
Bush.

Many political strategists advised their clients to vote against the agreement.
In part, the reason was that opponents seemed to feel so much more strongly
about the accord than those who favored it. In part, it was that legislators who
voted for the agreement could expect to be blamed for every factory that closes
in their districts, regardless of the real reason for the shutdown.

Equally Divided Time

Partisan loyalties went by the boards, in striking contrast to the budget
battle, which was decided on party-line votes. Within the Democratic and
Republican parties, the divisions on trade were sharper than they had been over
any other issue since the Vietnam War. Representatives mostly voted on the basis
of what they saw as the interest of their own districts.

Usually, the debate time in the House is divided equally between proponents of
an issue and opponents. This time, the eight hours of debate were allotted in
fourths. Democratic supporters and opponents and Republican supporters and
opponents each got two hours. No amendments were allowed.

The opposition outside the Capitol had strange bedfellows: Ross Perot and Ralph
Nader, the Rev. Jesse Jackson and Patrick J. Buchanan.

Both sides presented the vote as one on which America's future was in the
balance.

Representative Dan Rostenkowski, a Chicago Democrat who heads the Ways and Means
Committee and backed the agreement, put the matter this way:

"Our vote today will help determine what kind of American economy our children
will inherit. We are debating whether America is a confident country, eager to
face the future, ready to take on all competitors, or a nation in decline
clinging to memories of our past.

"In this debate, we are telling the world how we view ourselves, whether we
welcome change and challenge or whether we fear it."

But the agreement's opponents were equally passionate.

"This agreement before us is deficient and flawed," declared Representative
Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the majority leader.

Mr. Gephardt complained that the accord did too little to raise wages in Mexico
to a point where American companies would not be induced to close their plants
here and move south of the border.

"This country's greatness," he shouted, "was not built on cheap labor."

A Novel Experience

Occasionally during the Reagan and Bush years, when Democrats controlled the
House, as they have since the early 1950's, significant tax and budget measures
strongly supported by the White House were approved with Democratic support over
the opposition of a majority of House Republicans. That was the case in 1985 on
legislation overhauling the income tax system and in 1990 on a deficit-reduction
package.

But students of Congress said they could not recall an occasion when the White
House and the House of Representatives were controlled by the same party and
major legislation was approved with the majority party in the House voting
against it.

The House was not literally voting on the trade agreement itself tonight.
Rather, it was considering legislation that would make the necessary changes in
American law so the agreement could go into effect.

As recently as last weekend, Mr. Bonior and others on his side said they had the
votes locked up to defeat the pact. But that underestimated the hole cards in
the White House's hand.

Alone and in groups, representatives were called to the White House to be worked
over by the President. Those on the fence received 10, 20, 30 calls a day from
Cabinet members and influential constituents rounded up by proponents of the
accord. Mr. Clinton himself was still on the phone most of today.

To win support from particular lawmakers, deals were struck to restrain imports
of orange juice, winter vegetables, sugar, peanut butter and wheat. A
development bank was promised, to provide seed money for environmental
development projects in the United States and Mexico.

As far as could be learned, all the deals involved trade and border projects. If
bridges, judgeships or other more tangible prizes were offered in return for
votes, the arrangements remained secret.

Opponents of the accord complained that votes were being bought and sold. But
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said today that the late arrangements
represented "a strengthening of the agreement" and were "very important from the
American point of view."

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Clinton being congratulated after the House passed
the trade agreement. With him were, from left, Vice President Al Gore, Treasury
Secretary Lloyd Bentsen and Mickey Kantor, Trade Representative. (Associated
Press) (pg. A1); George Stephanopoulos, right, advisor to President Clinton,
leaving the House after the vote. (Michael Geissinger for The New York Times)
(pg. A20)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Boat People Say U.S. Mail Put Lives in Danger

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 684 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Nov. 17


More than three dozen Vietnamese boat people have asked the authorities to grant
them refugee status, insisting that because of a mistake by the United States
Postal Service, their lives are in danger if they return to Vietnam.

The case began two years ago, after the men, along with thousands of other boat
people who came to Hong Kong seeking asylum, had been placed in a detention
camp, awaiting decisions on whether they would be deported or granted refugee
status and resettled.

Officials say 39 detainees organized an anti-Communist society and wanted to
work with an organization outside the camp. The men said photographs of their
group's initiation ceremony, names of its members and detailed plans of how they
planned to discredit the Government of Vietnam were mailed to an anti-Communist
Vietnamese group in California.

But apparently the United States Postal Service, unable to read the California
address, returned the letter -- not to the ddress in Hong Kong printed on the
envelope, but to Vietnam.

Three months later, the letter came back to the detention center. It was stamped
with an American "return to sender" mark, along with a "Missent to Ho Chi Minh
City" stamp.

The men said that the letter had been opened and resealed, and that the list of
anti-Communists and their plans were missing. Only the photos remained.

The letter arrived back in Hong Kong in November 1991, and officials of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees were notified. While the Hong Kong
Government screens the boat people, the United Nations agency can mandate that a
Vietnamese be declared a refugee.

But throughout 1992, the agency maintained that the Vietnamese stamp and
postmark were forgeries, and that the group did not qualify as refugees.

At the request of the detainees, the Hong Kong authorities wrote Hanoi this
year, and in April Vietnamese officials replied that the postmark was authentic.
But Jahanshah Assadi, the High Commissioner's representative, said the agency
was not convinced that the men have reason to fear reprisals.

"Even giving these men all the benefit of the doubt -- they sent the letter
innocently, there was a mistake by the U.S. Post Office, and the Vietnamese
stamp is authentic -- there is still the wider question of whether they have a
well-founded fear of persecution if they are sent home," Mr. Assadi said. "It is
a fact that 35,000 Vietnamese have returned from Hong Kong to Vietnam, and we
have no record of any of them being persecuted."

Most of the 39 Vietnamese -- mechanics, carpenters, tailors and laborers from
the north -- had been screened out and marked for return before the letter
incident. But refugee advocates argue that the men now have a solid claim to
refugee status.

"The key to refugee status is 'a well-founded fear of persecution,' " said
Michael Darwyne, a Hong Kong lawyer. "Even if screening originally found these
men didn't have a well-founded fear, they do now."

"These men did not try to call attention to themselves," Mr. Darwyne said. "They
sent a letter, their only way of contacting the outside world, and were innocent
victims of a postal mix-up. They did not engineer this affair. They did not act
in bad faith."

Even as aid organizations were pressing the High Commissioner to reopen the
cases, two of the group have already been deported by Hong Kong.

Pam Baker, chairwoman of Refugee Concern Hong Kong, said the High Commissioner
was "charged with protecting asylum seekers, but they did nothing to stop these
deportations, even though there were serious questions about their safety."

Mr. Assadi said that since the two were returned, representatives of the High
Commissioner had visited them and reported no problems.

While human rights groups have asked the High Commissioner to reconsider the
cases of the 37 remaining, Mr. Assadi said there was "no rush" because no forced
repatriations were scheduled for the next few months.

"We have plenty of time to watch these two in Vietnam," he continued, "to see
how they are treated, and to see if any new information comes to light."

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Time to Warm Up to New Zealand

SECTION: Section A; Page 32; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 367 words


President Clinton's meeting with Pacific heads of government today gives him a
superb opportunity to end one of the oddest and most painful diplomatic
anomalies of the cold war: the 10-year chill between the U.S. and New Zealand,
two countries that by all rights should be the warmest of friends.

Until yesterday, it was unclear who Mr. Clinton's opposite number from New
Zealand would be. But with the final counting in a very close parliamentary
election now complete, Prime Minister Jim Bolger has emerged as the winner. Mr.
Bolger will represent his country at the APEC conference and presumably Mr.
Clinton will shake his hand.  But Mr. Clinton should go further, by offering to
begin discussions aimed at ending the impasse.

The chill began in 1984, when New Zealand's Labor Party campaigned on a promise
to bar nuclear vessels from New Zealand ports. Labor won that election, and in
1986 Parliament, with broad public support, passed legislation barring
nuclear-armed and nuclear-powered ships. That provoked outrage in Washington --
and criticism on this page -- partly because it was felt that New Zealand's
action would encourage anti-nuclear protests in West Germany, Japan and Britain,
and weaken allied resolve. The result is that since the mid-80's no New Zealand
prime minister has been officially invited to Washington, and very little
serious business has been transacted between the Secretary of State and New
Zealand's foreign minister.

Such pique seems badly misplaced in a world in which nuclear "resolve" is no
longer a big priority. Furthermore, it's time Washington paid attention to what
unites the two countries. New Zealand is an exemplary democracy whose soldiers
served beside Americans in Korea and Vietnam. Its nuclear allergy is bipartisan
and stems in large part from its special cultural and historic ties to the small
Pacific islands where the West has conducted many of its nuclear tests.

New Zealand may someday be prepared to modify its nuclear-free-zone legislation.
But Mr. Clinton and his Secretary of State, Warren Christopher, should not make
that a condition for ending an anachronistic quarrel and bringing an old friend
in from the cold.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Pacific Summit Should Take Up Taiwan Issue

SECTION: Section A; Page 32; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 344 words


To the Editor:

"Nationalist China or Nationalist Taiwan?" (Editorial Notebook, Nov. 9) by David
C. Unger is timely, if not overdue. China and Taiwan are not the same thing. The
Taiwanese are Chinese in the same way that we are English, though Chinese
immigration to Taiwan preceded English immigration to North America.

It is true that the Taiwanese welcomed the Chinese who liberated them from the
Japanese Empire in 1945. But then fearing the native Taiwanese leadership on
Feb. 28, 1947, the Chinese Nationalist Government rounded up 10,000
intellectual, religious and local leaders, most of whom were never heard from
again.

In 1949 the Nationalist armies defeated on the mainland came to Taiwan as an
oppressive occupying power. Legislators from China's old provinces sat and
legislated in Taiwan. By now, most of them have died. The Taiwanese language,
akin to that spoken in Fukien, was outlawed.

In the late 40's, with a Yale degree in East Asian studies, I was a teacher on
the mainland in Changsha, Hunan, with Yale/China. In the early and mid-60's,
when I was at Kansas State University, the Taiwanese students, fearing Chiang
Kai-shek's secret police, met regularly in my living room.

Korea and Tonkin (the northern part of North Vietnam) were once part of the
Chinese empire, but now no one talks of them as though they were an integral
part of China. It was only the unusual events at the end of World War II
coinciding with the demise of the Nationalist forces on the mainland that
created today's situation. What an anomaly that Taipei, Beijing and Washington
all declare Taiwan to be a part of China. The Taiwanese people have not said so.

Politically and diplomatically, as Mr. Unger says, this is an inconvenient
issue. But now is a good time for the Unites States to take preliminary steps
toward recognizing both China and Taiwan. This month's Asia Pacific economic
summit meeting in Seattle, where both Taipei and Beijing will be represented, is
a natural place to begin.

DAVID J. MC GOWN
Santa Fe, N.M., Nov. 15, 1993

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 843 words



International   3-6

CLINTON TELLS OF CHINA DIALOGUE

After President Clinton met with President Jiang Zemin, little tangible progress
was cited in the most important U.S.-Chinese contact since the Tiananmen
massacre in 1989.  1


President Clinton urged the nation to look toward Asia for jobs.  6

Pacific Rim officials voiced flexibility on tariffs to aid world trade.  6

C.I.A. DRUG EFFORT BACKFIRED

A C.I.A. anti-drug program in Venezuela in 1990 shipped a ton of nearly pure
cocaine to to the United States, where it wound up being sold, Government
officials said.  1

U.S. TO GIVE SOMALIA $100 MILLION

Washington said it would offer Somalia $100 million in aid at a conference on
economic reconstruction opening this month if its warring factions agree to make
peace.  3

MORE TURMOIL FEARED IN NIGERIA

With the generals ruling Nigeria again, it faces the prospect of economic chaos,
political upheaval and perhaps even conflict between its two major tribes.  5

TOY FACTORY FIRE KILLS 81

A fire in a toy factory kills 81 people near the city of Shenzhen in
southeastern China. A city spokesman said most of the victims died from inhaling
thick smoke.  5

MOB BOSS ENCOUNTERS TURNCOAT

The reputed "boss of all bosses" of the Sicilian Mafia met in court with a
former comrade, probably the most important of the Mafia bosses to have informed
on the mob.  3

Bad Liebenwerda Journal: A populist Minister for Social Affairs.  4

National   7-10

CRIME BILL PASSES

The Senate has passed a broad and expensive anticrime bill that would add
100,000 police officers to the nation's streets, build a network of
high-security regional prisons and create more boot camps for young offenders.
1

AMERICAN PILOTS STAY ON JOB

Pilots at American Airlines announced that they would not walk off their jobs,
saying they could better support striking flight attendants by continuing to fly
empty jets.  1

BITTER PILL FOR AMERICAN

American Airlines stands to lose almost as much as it made all year, and this is
the first year in several that a profit appeared likely.  7

OTHER CARRIERS WEIGH IN

With American Airlines crippled by the walkout of its flight attendants, other
carriers are re-routing planes, putting bigger aircraft on routes they share
with American, and adding flights.  7

AN APPOINTEE'S DEFENSE

An anti-Vietnam War activist and civil libertarian defended himself publicly for
the first time against conservative senators who said that his cold war
liberalism made him unfit for a new Pentagon job.  1

PACKWOOD MAY RESIGN

Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon, his career clouded by an inquiry into sexual
harassment charges, faces a new criminal investigation by the Justice Department
and is considering resigning, his lawyer said.  1

DEFICIT PLAN UP FOR HOUSE VOTE

A proposal to cut an additional $90 billion from the Federal budget by 1998 is
scheduled to go to a vote in the House.  8

END OF COAL STRIKE IN SIGHT

An agreement may soon be reached in a strike that has closed many of the
nation's coal mines.  10

WIFE TIED TO G.I. SLAYING

Prosecutors say a woman suspected of killing her husband hours after he returned
from serving in the Persian Gulf war has admitted her role to undercover drug
agents.  10

Religion Notes: Recycling Christmas cards.  10

The Kennedy family is selling its Palm Beach estate.  9

Metro Digest   23

ROLLINS SAYS HE LIED

Edward J. Rollins Jr. spent nearly seven hours under intense interrogation from
Democratic Party lawyers, telling them under oath that his assertions about
efforts to suppress the urban black vote in the recent governor's race in New
Jersey were lies spun to rankle a rival political strategist, James Carville.  1


Business Digest   37

Sports   29-33

Baseball: Howard Johnson signs with Rockies.  29

Yankees getting nowhere fast in pitching search.  33

Basketball: Ewing is day to day.  30

Column: Rhoden on Sam Huff's Mountaineers.  29

Football: Elliott will probably miss Eagles game.  29

Linebacker Marvin Jones looks ahead to next year.  31

Hockey: Rangers win to extend unbeaten streak to 12.  29

Arts/Entertainment   11-17

Dorothy Dehner, sculptor, still conquering metal at 91.  11

Theater: Thoughts on Albee.  11

Film: "Man's Best Friend."17

Music: Dutoit conducts.  14

Concert Royal.  14

Dance: Garth Fagan.11

From Indonesia.  14

Obituaries   28

Charles N. Feidelson Jr., literature professor at Yale.

Editorials/Op-Ed   20-21

Editorials

Showdown in the House.

Democracy wins in South Africa.

Back to the generals in Nigeria.

Topics: Smooth Talker.

Letters

Russell Baker: Easy on that cucumber.

Luke Janusz: Captive writers.

Douglas W. Payne: Mexico, bound.

Daniel Bell: One man, 500 votes.

Flora Lewis: Still tuned in.

Bridge   17

Chronicle   22

Crossword   15

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Pentagon Nominee Defends Views As Ideologies Collide at a Hearing

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1239 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 19


A civil libertarian and opponent of the Vietnam War today defended himself
publicly for the first time against attacks by conservative senators who said
that his cold war liberalism made him unfit for a new Pentagon job.

In testy exchanges that reawakened ideological animosities dating back 30 years,
President Clinton's choice for the post, Morton H. Halperin, responded with
controlled anger to senators who challenged his judgment and patriotism.

The senators said Mr. Halperin should not be confirmed to a sensitive Defense
Department position responsible for defining American military policy in places
like Bosnia and Somalia.

Actions Are Defended

Mr. Halperin's nomination to be Assistant Secretary of Defense for Democracy and
Peacekeeping has stirred up a passionate dispute that is unusual for a mid-level
position. He has become a target of conservative anger because he reversed his
initial support of the Vietnam war, fought with the Nixon Administration during
the Watergate scandals, criticized many American spying operations abroad and
was a leader of the American Civil Liberties Union.

The conservatives said today that his articles criticizing the use of American
troops abroad made him especially unsuitable for the new job, which involves
decisions about whether American troops should be put under United Nations
control.

Mr. Halperin said today that his writings and deeds had never undermined
America's national security, and that many of his views had been blatantly
misrepresented or taken out of context.

"If the charge against me is espousing pointed and provocative views, I have no
quarrel with that description," said Mr. Halperin, an expert on military affairs
who has served in Democratic and Republican administrations since the 1960's.
"But I resist any suggestion that I have done anything which compromises our
nation's security or weakens our defenses."

Mr. Halperin's prospects for approval by the Senate Armed Services Committee are
unclear, partly because Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who is the committee's
chairman, has not said how he will vote.

Conservative criticism against Mr. Halperin has grown since the White House
nominated him in August. At the hearing today, several Republicans on the panel
cast Mr. Halperin, a former director of the Washington office of the American
Civil Liberties Union, as an enemy of American soldiers and a national security
risk.

"Since we are convinced he already has and will in the future put American lives
and interests in jeopardy, we have a constitutional and moral obligation to
oppose him," said Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, the ranking
Republican on the panel.

'A Distorted View'

"He has a distorted view of the nature of conflict and international affairs,
and has taken irresponsible positions well outside the mainstream of defense
thinking," Mr. Thurmond said.

But a phalanx of Mr. Halperin's Senate allies today joined the battle, adding
their names to a bipartisan group of supporters that includes four former
Secretaries of Defense and two former Directors of Central Intelligence.

"Mr. Halperin has been the subject of an intense campaign of character
assassination based on half-truths, innuendos and outright lies," said Senator
Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts.

Senator David L. Boren, Democrat of Oklahoma, who headed the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence from 1988 to 1993, said Mr. Halperin had worked with
his panel to draft legislation supported by civil libertarians and American
policy makers.

"Mort was always aware of individual liberties, but he carefully balanced those
concerns with the interests of national security," Mr. Boren said.

Job's Peacekeeping Role

Mr. Halperin's nomination is for a job that deals with the new and expanding
role of America's armed forces in international peacekeeping after the collapse
of Communism, but his troubles are rooted in an array of cold war issues,
especially the Vietnam War, Watergate and the Pentagon Papers.

Mr. Halperin's nomination is the second time a lower-level Clinton
Administration choice ran into serious Congressional opposition. Earlier this
year, the White House withdrew the nomination of Lani Guinier to be the Justice
Department's top civil official after her views on how to enforce voting rights
laws were criticized.

Senators focused their questions today on Mr. Halperin's views from that earlier
era, as well as some issues he would deal with if confirmed in his new job.

Senators questioned Mr. Halperin on his trip to London in 1975 to testify at the
deportation hearing of Philip Agee, a renegade agent of the Central Intelligence
Agency who published a book and magazine identifying C.I.A. agents abroad. One
agent, Richard Welch, the station chief in Athens, was assassinated in 1977.

Mr. Halperin said he had made the trip at the request of the American Civil
Liberties Union and had testified about national security issues. He said he had
not addressed the disclosure of the agents' names. "I do not support what Mr.
Agee did," Mr. Halperin said. "I condemn it."

Republicans also criticized Mr. Halperin for writing this year in the journal
Foreign Policy that the United States should "explicitly surrender the right to
intervene in the internal affairs of other countries by overt military means or
by covert operations."

Senators displayed large boards with excerpts of Mr. Halperin's writings.  But
an array of aides sitting behind Mr. Halperin, armed with boxes of his articles,
books and previous Congressional testimony, responded with their own set of
chart boards to demonstrate that Mr. Halperin's views had been taken out of
context.

One of Mr. Halperin's boards had the quotation cited by the Republicans plus
another from the same article: "The United States would, however, retain the
right granted under Article 51 of the U.N. Charter to act unilaterally if
necessary to meet threats to international peace and security involving
aggression across borders."

"A number of charges have been made about my beliefs and activities which are
simply false," Mr. Halperin said. "They are, in some cases, made up out of whole
cloth; in others, they result from wrenching sentences out of context and
building tales around them."

Mr. Halperin ticked off a series of accusations against him, ranging from
ordering an American commander to cancel a field exercise to traveling abroad
for secret meetings with terrorists. He denied each one.

Senator John McCain, an Arizona Republican, said his concerns were not
politically or ideologically motivated, but instead were based on questions
about Mr. Halperin's "credibility."

Mr. Halperin denied that he had changed some of his more provocative opinions in
a "confirmation conversion," but he did concede that he had abandoned some of
his most controversial views.

He said, for example, that in 1974 he urged that the covert operations side of
the Central Intelligence Agency be abolished. Two years later, he said he
abandoned that notion.

The Armed Services Committee is scheduled to hold at least one more hearing,
next Tuesday, on Mr. Halperin's nomination. Senate and Administration officials
said today that it was unlikely the panel would vote on the nomination before
Congress recessed next week. The White House would then have to resubmit Mr.
Halperin's nomination in January.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Morton H. Halperin testifying yesterday at his confirmation
hearing before the Senate Armed Services Committee. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York
Times)(pg. 9)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: November 21, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1443 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   3   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 2      2  67   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 3      3   6   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                and a poem.

 4      4   8   LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues
                the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour."

 5      7  13   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 6      6   4   THE FIRES OF HEAVEN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $24.95.)
                The fifth volume of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.

 7      9   4   DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) An
                architect-engineer gets caught between the warring factions of
                a clan that owns an English racecourse.

 8      8   2   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery
                writer's happy family life is threatened by a madman determined
                to kill him and take his place.

 9      5   5   A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A
                young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in
                Victorian England's high society.

 10    11   8   SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two
                Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics
                and murder.

 11    10  32   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 12    12  11   THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                Concluding the "Griffin & Sabine" trilogy, about an artist and
                his secret admirer.

 13    13  36   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 14         1   HOTEL PASTIS, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $23.) An Englishman is
                harried by intrigues and machinations after he becomes an
                innkeeper in Provence.

 15         1   MRS. DE WINTER, by Susan Hill. (Morrow, $20.) Mr. and Mrs.
                Maxim de Winter return to Cornwall; a sequel to Daphne du
                Maurier's "Rebecca."

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1          1   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More
                comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 2      1   5   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 3      4  11   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life by the star of "Seinfeld."

 4      2  13   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 5      3  28   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 6      5   7   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 7     14   2   THE DOWNING STREET YEARS, by Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins,
                $30.) The former British Prime Minister recalls her 11 1/2
                years in power.

 8      6   5   STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski.
                (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played
                Capt. James Tiberius Kirk.

 9      9   7   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 10     7   7   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by
                Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of
                marriage.

 11     8  67   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 12    11  19   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.)
                Mood-changing medications and their effects.

 13         1   RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $50.) Photographs of and
                observations by the retired basketball superstar.

 14    12  24   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 15    13  14   MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.)
                Inspirational essays.

 16*   10   2   SECRETS OF A SPARROW, by Diana Ross. (Villard, $22.) The
                memoirs of the pop star.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   6   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.

 2      2  27   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.

 3          1   AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with
                Bud Shrake. (Simon & Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes
                from the golf instructor.

 4      3  17   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 6, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear In Mind
(Editors' choices of other books of particular interest)

BUTTERFLY STORIES, by William T. Vollmann. (Grove, $21.) A novel in the form of
linked short stories, mainly about prostitutes, narrated by a customer in a
vivid prose that sometimes seems motivated by authorial aggression.

A DEMOCRACY AT WAR: America's Fight at Home and Abroad in World War II, by
William L. O'Neill. (Free Press, $24.95.) This Rutgers historian assesses the
national conduct during the war as small-minded and selfish; our immense
resources, he thinks, guaranteed a victory beyond our moral deserts.

GENET: A Biography, by Edmund White. (Knopf, $35.) A monumental biography,
meticulously researched, that places Genet's literary vision squarely in his
homosexuality and confronts the mystery of how a man who left school at 12
became a great master of the French language.

A HISTORY OF WARFARE, by John Keegan. (Knopf, $27.50.) Mr. Keegan, the most
readable and original of military historians, argues that war is an omnipresent
cultural ritual of mankind, from which the ruthless modern notion of disciplined
total war was an aberration.

HONEY: Stories, by Elizabeth Tallent. (Knopf, $22.) In her third fine
collection, set mainly in New Mexico, Ms. Tallent's characters are tempered in
the crucible of marriage while their creator revels in comely language and
summons accurately the sensations of daily life.

IN SEARCH OF BERNABE, by Graciela Limon. (Arte Publico, paper, $9.50.) This
stark, resonant first novel follows the lives of several characters, most
notably a mother and her two sons (one a revolutionary, one a death squad
commander), caught up in El Salvador's bloody civil war.

NEVER STOP RUNNING: Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American
Liberalism, by William H. Chafe. (Basic Books, $28.) A historian captures the
rootlessness and personal insecurity of an aggressive reform politician from New
York who could accomplish almost anything except getting himself elected.

PRESIDENT KENNEDY: Profile of Power, by Richard Reeves. (Simon & Schuster, $30.)
A journalist's judicious appraisal that casts Kennedy as a pragmatic cold-war
power broker and a manager of international confrontation.

THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $23.50.) Ms.
Atwood's funniest novel in years concerns three women who are friends and the
mini-skirted Iago who worms her way into their lives.

WHAT IS FOUND THERE: Notebooks on Poetry and Politics, by Adrienne Rich.
(Norton, $20.) A distinguished poet's reflections on the work of poetry, its
social and cultural authority, its power to help us "invent what we desire."

THE WINE-DARK SEA, by Patrick O'Brian. (Norton, $22.) The 16th irresistible
volume in the continuing adventures of the bluff, violin-playing seaman Jack
Aubrey and his great friend, the philosophical surgeon Stephen Maturin.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Spies & Thrillers

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 19; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 811 words


Perhaps only experienced pilots should write novels about flying. Who could be
better qualified? But the trouble is that pilot-writers are so taken with their
specialty that their prose tends to read like an electronics catalogue. Thus in
GHOSTRIDER ONE, by Gerry Carroll (Pocket Books, $22), we get acres of dialogue
that goes as follows:

"Ghostrider 411, Hillsborough. Are you RESCAP capable?"

"That's affirm, Hillsborough."

"Roger. Switch 265.8 and contact Slug 771 for control."

"Hillsborough, 411, Roger. Do you want me to split the flight and leave a
section with you for the original mission?"

"That's negative, 411."

Mr. Carroll, a former Navy pilot and the author of the novel "North SAR," has a
great deal to say about Navy fliers working on a giant carrier. He tries to get
into the mind-set, techniques and inner lives of these exquisitely trained men
who have to have such split-second reflexes. And he succeeds. By the time the
reader finishes all of the detailed information on the A-4 attack plane -- how
it is flown, how it can land on a pitching carrier in the dead of night -- he
should be capable of making a solo flight in the aircraft.

Indeed, Mr. Carroll seems much more interested in flying than in supplying a
plot for his novel. The locale is Vietnam just before and during the Tet
offensive of 1968. A new commander takes over a demoralized attack squadron on
the aircraft carrier Shiloh. We follow him as he whips it into shape, and we
learn the difference between mere command and real leadership.

Nor is the book only about flying. There are some harrowing episodes about the
ground war. Mr. Carroll writes well enough. There is action but relatively
little artificial or superheated prose, and of course the backgrounds are as
authentic as you could desire.

Yet, after a while, this account of our heroes, with perilous mission after
perilous mission, begins to remind one of a novel about businessmen going to the
office every day. A stronger plot line would have helped, but it is fruitless to
criticize a book that the author did not write. He accomplished what he wanted
to do, and that was to acquaint the reader with life as a Navy pilot under
wartime conditions.

David Mason is another author writing about what he knows best. In SHADOW OVER
BABYLON (Dutton, $22.95), he pre sents a top-secret assassination plot conceived
by a high-ranking minister in the British Government. An elite team infiltrates
Iraq, where a sniper has to take out Saddam Hussein from a distance of 1,200
yards. Mr. Mason is a former officer in the Welsh Guards and a trained sniper.
So we learn all we want to know, and then some, about the fine art of
marksmanship.

It's absorbing reading. Mr. Mason writes very well; this is an unusually deft
first novel. He brings in American intelligence, the Israelis and other
interested parties. The Americans become involved because a smart, young
analyst, working from satellite information, gets an idea of what is going on
and starts tracking the team through Saudi Arabia and Iraq. Things get really
wild. And there are some wry observations about the nature of Realpolitik as
practiced by the British, plus a topsy-turvy ending.

Speaking of Mideast dictators, President Hafez al-Assad of Syria plays a major
role in BUTCHER BIRD, by Dean Ing (Forge/ Tom Doherty, $21.95). A French
scientist has developed for Syria a nuclear death ray that can be fired from a
flying platform. It works quietly and invisibly. How nice for a dictator who has
many enemies he would like to terminate with extreme prejudice.

In a way this is a mad-scientist novel, with the standard format for Big Book
techno-thrillers: well over 300 pages, a prologue, dates for each chapter
heading and so on. The mad scientist is opposed by an American team also working
on a death ray. United States intelligence has figured out what Syria is up to
and is rushing to counteract the evil figures.

The novel gets pretty silly, but it may be fun if you are not too
discriminating. The characterizations are romanticized, and the dialogue is one
step above pulp fiction. But Mr. Ing, whose other books include "The Ransom of
Black Stealth One" and "The Nemesis Mission," does know how to tell a story.

David Aikman, a senior correspondent at Time magazine, has a few good ideas in
WHEN THE ALMOND TREE BLOSSOMS (Word Publishing, $19.99), but his writing is
inept. It is 1998 in America -- an America in the throes of a civil war. There
are two factions. One is the People's Movement, with a dictatorship reminiscent
of Stalin and Hitler. The other faction is trying to restore democracy. The
Russians are advising the People's Movement and, indeed, planning to take over
the world in partnership with Japan. Chilly prospect, this. But Mr. Aikman's
floundering presentation makes one lose interest after 50 pages or so.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

STYLE;
Why Are We in Vietnam?

BYLINE: By Molly O'Neill

SECTION: Section 6; Page 71; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 374 words


Obviously the answer to the question "Why are we in Vietnam?" is different than
it was 25 years ago, when the question was a mantra that distinguished the young
from the not-so-young, hawks from doves, idealists from pragmatists. Or, so
thought the likes of me.

Now, scrolling through Compuserve, preparing for my first foray into Southeast
Asia, I see that the old questions surrounding the war have something to do with
Vietnam's current appeal.

But it's important not to discount the vagaries of fashion in this: the sudden
fascination of American designers with the traditional dress of Indochina; the
confluence of culture and esthetics, of food and movies like "The Lover" and
"Indochine."

Of course, for the former antiwar activists and G.I.'s now packing the bars and
cafes of Saigon, the lure is more emotional -- a haunting mixture of guilt and
curiosity, bewilderment and the need to understand. Malachy Miller, one
telecommunicator who traveled to Vietnam last year, writes: "What exotic
destination isn't stained by conquest and a hint of something brutal? In Mexico,
the wars were centuries ago and come off as myth. The war in Vietnam is still a
raw memory."

Others, too, cite the need for closure.

"I felt empowered by going to Vietnam and facing the scars we left there,"
writes a traveler from Portland, Ore. "It was unsettling and soothing," writes
another.

But they are only a portion of the people traveling to Vietnam. According to TTS
International of Seattle, voyagers to Southeast Asia are mainly in their 40's,
hail from both coasts and are the sort of people enamored of the exotic.

"Vietnam is one of the rare places where one can still experience true glamour,"
wrote a recent returnee. "There's something otherworldly about the pace."

This sensation of slow motion is referred to as frequently as the country's
dramatic landscape of jungle and savannah, lazy river deltas and ancient ports.
A slower pace seems to heighten the senses and exaggerate the exotic. Whereas
adventure was once about geographic conquest, today it seems to be about braving
a different timescape. Which is also emblematic of the way hearts and minds have
changed since the last time we chanted, "Next stop, Vietnam."

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lured by curiosity, Westerners are returning to places like
Hoian, where this woman lives. (Marie Laure De Decker for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Great Bowls of Fire

BYLINE: By Molly O'Neill

SECTION: Section 6; Page 81; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1767 words


During the late 1970's, when I was running a restaurant in Boston, the languages
spoken in the kitchen were Spanish (the Argentine dishwashers), French (the
Caribbean, French and Vietnamese prep cooks), English (the American and Italian
sous-chefs) and three dialects of Chinese, courtesy of the Laotians, Cambodians
and Vietnamese working the salad station.

I walked around muttering "English, goddammit" with such regularity that I
became known as Chef English Goddammit in a variety of accents, though I never
succeeded in establishing a single-language kitchen. Instead, I developed an
abiding affection for the meals that Dang Han Chien, formerly a physician in
Vietnam, and Dao Kim Son, a 22-year-old refugee, would make for the restaurant
staff from leftovers.

The flavors -- chili, lime juice, vinegar, lemon grass, basil, mint, curry and
nuoc mam, the condiment from fermented anchovies that the Vietnamese use the way
the Chinese use soy sauce -- were like lightning bolts to our jaded palates,
numbed from tasting Italian sauces day after day.

Though often composed of six tiny courses, the meals were light with lots of
rice and vegetables -- the kind of food that kitchen workers crave. But more
than any individual dish, it was the ritual of sharing bowls of rice or broth or
salads, of rolling bits of grilled meat or fish in lettuce leaves and dipping
these into sweet or pungent sauces, that so appealed to us. By comparison,
leftover lasagna and veal loin seemed ordinary and listless.

So, in an Italian restaurant in the Back Bay section of Boston, snow peas came
to be called Holland peas, because it was the Dutch who brought them to Vietnam;
asparagus spears were called Western bamboo shoots, courtesy of the French, and
limes were called green lemons, for mysterious reasons -- which I still don't
understand.

I do know that the cooking of Vietnam, like most Asian cuisine, is
improvisational and idiosyncratic. After centuries of immigration and foreign
rule, a distinct mosaic of flavors has evolved. The classic "pho" (beef broth
with noodles and shaved beef) is pure Mongolian, a remnant of a thousand years
of Chinese domination; the sweet dipping sauces are reminiscent of Malaysia; the
curries, lemon grass and coconut milk are from Thailand, and the preference for
saute pans, rather than woks, along with the penchant for baguettes and
pastries, are legacies of the French.

But these far-flung influences were never codified into recipes. Rather, they
crept slowly into the Vietnamese kitchen, with its abiding ethos of delicacy and
finesse. In the cooking of Vietnam, nothing is more important than contrast: the
crisp iceberg lettuce for wrapping warm meat, the endless juxtaposition of the
raw and the cooked, the hot spice and the mild rice, the panoply of dipping
sauces that transform, bite after judicious bite.

Vietnam, Han Chien told me gravely, is a nation of nibblers. He and Kim Son
would grill meatballs and roast lemon grass chicken to be eaten between rice and
the giant salad of watercress, mint, bean sprouts and lettuce that is the center
of each meal. When they served soup, they added condiments -- chopped pork,
pickled fish, tofu in vinegar and curried shrimp -- so that each bite became a
different sensation.

There's a contemplative quality to Vietnamese food because every mouthful
awakens the senses. When I asked for a cooking lesson, Kim Son told me, "You
make so the mouth is happy."

"Simple Art of Vietnamese Cooking," by Binh Duong and Marcia Kiesel, and "The
Foods of Vietnam," by Nicole Routhier, are superb complements to her advice.
Each offers mail-order sources for Vietnamese groceries, in addition to recipes
that make the mouth happy and deliver an abiding exoticism to the table.

Ninh Hoa Grilled Meatballs

(ADAPTED FROM "SIMPLE ART OF VIETNAMESE COOKING," BY BINH DUONG AND MARCIA
KIESEL. PRENTICE HALL PRESS.)

 1 pound ground pork
 1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper
 5 cloves garlic, peeled and minced
 1 1/2 tablespoons sugar
 1 teaspoon cornstarch
 1 1/2 teaspoons potato starch
 1 tablespoon bottled fish sauce (nuoc mam)
 Vegetable oil for greasing the hands
 2 small heads Boston lettuce, cored, with leaves separated.

1. In a bowl, mix the pork, pepper, garlic, sugar, cornstarch and potato starch
and fish sauce. Marinate, covered, in the refrigerator for at least 2 hours.

2. Preheat a grill or broiler. With oiled hands, make 21 meatballs, each about 1
inch in diameter. (The mixture may be a bit loose.) If grilling, place 3
meatballs on each of 7 bamboo skewers. If broiling, place on a baking sheet or
broiler pan. Grill or broil until the meatballs are deep brown and crisp on all
sides, about 3 minutes per side. Remove from skewers.

3. Serve the hot meatballs with the lettuce leaves and nuoc cham dipping sauce
(see recipe).

Yield: Four to six servings as an appetizer.

Note: Vietnamese ingredients can be bought at specialty food stores or by mail
order from K. Kalustyan, 123 Lexington Ave., New York, N.Y. 10016; (212)
685-3451.

Nuoc Cham Dipping Sauce

(ADAPTED FROM "SIMPLE ART OF VIETNAMESE COOKING")

 1 to 2 small red chilies, minced, or 1 to 2 teaspoons dried chili flakes
 1 tablespoon white vinegar, heated
 1/2 cup bottled fish sauce (nuoc mam)
 1/4 cup fresh lime juice
 1 small carrot, peeled, shredded, rinsed and squeezed dry
 2 cloves garlic, peeled and minced
 1/2 cup sugar
 1 1/2 cups water.

Put the chilies in a bowl with the vinegar. (If using flakes, soak them in the
vinegar for about 2 minutes.) Add the fish sauce, lime juice, carrot, garlic and
sugar. Stir in 1 1/2 cups warm water, until the sugar is dissolved. Serve at
room temperature. The sauce can be refrigerated for up to 3 days.

Yield: Two and one-half cups.

Hot-and-Sour Shrimp and Lemon Grass Soup

(ADAPTED FROM "SIMPLE ART OF VIETNAMESE COOKING")

 1 pound medium shrimp, peeled and deveined, with shells reserved
 4 cups water
 3 stalks fresh lemon grass, green tops trimmed off and reserved, white bulb
pounded flat and cut into 1-inch lengths
 1 15-ounce can straw mushrooms, drained
 1 small tomato, cut into thin wedges
 1 large scallion, thinly sliced
 1 1/2 cups mung bean sprouts
 1 1/2 teaspoons grated lime zest
 3 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon fresh lime juice
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground
 pepper
 1/4 cup bottled fish sauce (nuoc mam)
 1/4 teaspoon dried chili flakes, plus more to taste
 1/2 teaspoon chili oil
 4 cups cooked white rice.

1. In a saucepan, cover the shrimp shells with 4 cups water. Add the lemon grass
tops and bring to a boil over high heat. Remove, strain the broth and return it
to the saucepan.

2. Add the mushrooms, lemon grass pieces and tomato. Bring to a boil, reduce the
heat to medium and simmer for 4 minutes. Add the shrimp and simmer until they
are opaque, about 2 minutes. Pour into a tureen. Stir in the scallion, bean
sprouts, lime zest and juice, pepper, fish sauce, chili flakes and chili oil.
Serve with the rice.

Yield: Six first-course servings or two to three main-course servings.

Roast Chicken With Lemon Grass

(ADAPTED FROM "THE FOODS OF VIETNAM," BY NICOLE ROUTHIER. STEWART, TABORI &
CHANG.)

 3 stalks fresh lemon grass or 3 tablespoons dried
 6 cloves garlic, crushed
 4 shallots, peeled and sliced
 2 red chili peppers, seeded
 1 tablespoon sugar
 1/2 teaspoon salt
 4 teaspoons bottled fish sauce (nuoc mam)
 2 tablespoons water
 1 roasting chicken, about 4 pounds
 2 tablespoons vegetable oil.

1. If you are using fresh lemon grass, discard the outer leaves and upper half
of the stalk. Cut into thin slices and chop fine. If you are using dried lemon
grass, soak in warm water for 1 hour, then drain and chop fine. Place the lemon
grass, garlic, shallots, chilies, sugar, salt, fish sauce and 2 tablespoons
water in a blender and blend to a paste.

2. Rinse the chicken well and pat dry. Carefully loosen the skin on the breast
and legs, pushing your fingers between the skin and meat to form a pocket. Rub
half of the lemon grass paste over the meat under the skin. Rub the remaining
paste over the skin and inside the cavity. Tuck the wings underneath; tie the
legs with twine. Let stand for 30 minutes.

3. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees. Place the chicken on a rack in a roasting
pan. Roast for 15 minutes. Reduce the oven temperature to 375 degrees and
continue roasting for 1 1/4 hours, basting the chicken with the vegetable oil
and the pan juices. The chicken is done when it registers 180 to 185 degrees on
an instant-reading meat thermometer. Let the chicken stand for 10 minutes. Serve
with white rice and nuoc cham dipping sauce (see recipe).

Yield: Four servings.

Crab Dumpling and Rice Vermicelli Soup

(ADAPTED FROM "THE FOODS OF VIETNAM")

 1/2 pound thin rice vermicelli
 1/4 pound medium shrimp, shelled and deveined
 5 eggs, lightly beaten
 8 ounces fresh or canned lump crab meat, picked over and drained
 Freshly ground pepper to taste
 4 tablespoons vegetable oil
 4 shallots, peeled and thinly sliced
 4 cloves garlic, peeled and finely chopped
 4 scallions, 2 thinly sliced and 2 minced
 2 tablespoons tomato paste
 1 teaspoon chili paste
 4 plum tomatoes, quartered
 5 1/2 cups chicken broth, homemade or low-sodium canned
 4 tablespoons bottled fish sauce (nuoc mam)
 1 teaspoon sugar
 4 large Boston lettuce leaves, shredded
 2 cups fresh bean sprouts
 1/2 cup mint leaves, chopped, for garnish
 Coriander sprigs for garnish
 1 lemon, quartered
 4 chili peppers, thinly sliced.

1. Cook the noodles and set aside. Using a food processor or mortar and pestle,
pound the shrimp very fine. Put the eggs in a bowl and beat in the shrimp, crab
meat and pepper to taste. Refrigerate.

2. In a large pot, heat the oil and saute the shallots, garlic and sliced
scallions until fragrant. Add the tomato paste and chili paste and cook for 1
minute. Add the tomatoes and cook for another minute. Add the chicken broth,
fish sauce and sugar.

3. Bring the soup to a boil, then reduce the heat until it is barely simmering.
Slide the crab-meat and egg mixture carefully into the soup. Cover the pot and
simmer gently for 5 minutes, or until the mixture is slightly firm and floats.
Sprinkle with pepper.

4. Divide the noodles among 4 soup bowls, top each with the shredded lettuce, a
few bean sprouts and the minced scallions, and ladle the soup over. Garnish with
the mint and coriander. Serve with lemon and chili peppers on the side.

Yield: Six servings.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hot-and-sour shrimp and lemon grass soup, made fragrant with
lime zest and chili. (Kenro Izu for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Mist of Perfume River

BYLINE: By Philip Shenon

SECTION: Section 6; Page 72; Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1276 words


The traditional Vietnamese costume known as the ao dai is said by the Vietnamese
to hide everything -- and to hide nothing. Everything, because it is a
full-length, high-neck tunic that covers almost every inch of a woman's body.
Nothing, because it is so close-fitting that it leaves little to the
imagination.

The ao dai is worn for formal occasions. And in Hue, home to Vietnam's
19th-century emperors and the geographical and spiritual heart of the nation,
the locals can think of no lovelier sight than the one offered to them on
festival mornings, when groups of young women pedal their bicycles down the
misty emerald banks of the Perfume River, their long ao dais fluttering in the
chill morning breeze, their fair skin shielded from the early sun by
elbow-length gloves and conical bamboo hats.

"When they arrive here, the tourists think that maybe we Vietnamese are like the
Chinese, that we all wear Mao suits and do not understand the beauty of the
human form," our tour guide told us, a bit touchily. "But we had no Cultural
Revolution here. We never told the painters to stop painting. There is romance
in everything we do. Even if the romance sometimes has an unhappy ending."

The romance of Vietnam has long been a dark one -- stained, or at least tinted,
by the blood and gunpowder spilled during a century spent mostly at war. But it
is romance to be sure: haunted, sensual, knowing. And today it is the romance of
Vietnam that is attracting a new generation of travelers -- photographers and
film makers, fashion designers and writers -- to a nation of nearly 72 million
people that has decided after years of isolation to open itself again to the
world.

What is perhaps most surprising about the Vietnamese is that they do not define
themselves by what Westerners know as the Vietnam War. Vietnam is an ancient
land, and for many Vietnamese, the war fought with the Americans was just one,
and not even the most recent, in a long succession of armed struggles that drove
off the colonialists and unified the nation.

"There have been so many wars," said a Hanoi shopkeeper, ticking off the enemies
she has known in her lifetime on her fingers. "We have fought the Japanese, the
French, the Americans, the Khmer Rouge and then the Chinese. And now," she
sighed heavily, "our enemy is poverty."

Americans who travel to Vietnam -- even to Hanoi, the old enemy stronghold in
the north -- find a gracious welcome. And no one is moving faster to put the war
behind them than the people of Ho Chi Minh City, the former southern capital
that most residents never stopped calling Saigon.

After years of deprivation following the war, big money has returned to Saigon,
and evenings in Ho Chi Minh City are scented once more with the sweet, citrusy
perfume that southern women adore and with the garlicky aroma of cha gio -- the
delicious crab-filled spring rolls that are on the menu of most of the city's
pricey new open-air restaurants.

The waterfront along the sinuous Saigon River has been converted into a giant
construction site as the southern Vietnamese, who remember how capitalism works
and who never lost their taste for Coca-Cola and blue jeans, profit from the
recent free-market reforms of a Government that, though avowedly Marxist, has
discovered pragmatism.

While Ho Chi Minh City is brash and business-mad, Hanoi, the thousand-year-old
capital, has an entirely different temperament. About 900 miles north, Hanoi is
somber and proud -- and arguably the most beautiful capital in Southeast Asia.
It is a city of narrow, willow-shaded streets and rows of cream-colored colonial
villas that are, along with crusty baguettes and cafe filtre, the legacy of this
nation's former French masters.

Hanoi remains a special treasure to the French, who arrive here today by the
planeload on journeys of nostalgia, mournful and joyous. It is not uncommon to
find a few aging French soldiers in the candlelit dining room of the lovingly
restored Metropole Hotel, raising a toast first to the soldiers who died in the
terrible military defeats that France suffered in Vietnam, and then to the
Vietnamese and their future. "A Frenchman comes to Hanoi and he sees these
graceful buildings, and it is a bit of France in Asia, " said a retired French
colonel from Lyons. "We lost in Vietnam," he continued without remorse, "but we
still celebrate it."

Hanoi is best seen from the passenger seat of one of the three-wheeled pedicabs
or cyclopousses, which are found for hire on almost every street corner. The
friendly drivers all know the way to the home of "Bac Ho" -- Uncle Ho. In this
tiny wooden house, among the banyan and milkwood trees in the center of town,
Hanoi's quiet elegance is most in evidence. For years it was the peaceful
retreat of Ho Chi Minh, the wispy-whiskered revolutionary who, alone among
Communist leaders of his day, still inspires affection among his countrymen.

Hue, on the other hand, was home to a series of feudal lords who ruled over this
ancient city from the 16th century until 1802, when one of them -- Gia-Long --
decided that he was worthy of ruling all of Vietnam, establishing a dynasty that
would last until the end of the Second World War.

In the pine-covered hills surrounding the river, the Nguyen Dynasty created a
landscape of architectural magnificence, as seen from one of the 40-foot sampans
that ply the Perfume River in virtual silence. The boats brush past citadels and
pagodas, none more awe-inspiring than the royal tombs, built by the nation's
kings to house their earthly remains. The mausoleum of Emperor Tu Duc is a
palace in miniature, with two wooden Chinese style pavilions set beside a long,
lotus-filled lake. Court histories suggest that the emperor liked to sit for
hours in the shade of his pavilions, writing poetry or fishing as he drank cups
of bitter green tea made with dew.

For many years after the war, travelers to Vietnam, stymied by the need for
special travel permits obtained only after much bureaucratic wrangling, rarely
saw places like Hue. But in just the last several months, the rules have
changed. The Government, still suspicious of foreigners but eager for the hard
currency they carry, has lifted the requirement for permits, and there is now
the chance to see almost all of what rests between Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi.

Now there is the opportunity to discover a vast nation of rain forest and
jungle; of terraced rice paddies set among craggy limestone hills; of fishing
communities dotted along beaches whose brilliant white sands rival the best of
Bali or Kauai. Here is the Vietnam of barefoot farmers marching behind armies of
squawking ducks, of young boys screaming with frenzied delight as they dive off
the backs of water buffaloes into the cool rivers of the interior valleys.

Anyone looking for reminders of war will find them -- displayed on the walls of
family living rooms in the North, where the red-bordered Government certificates
list loved ones killed in battle; in the 20-year-old bomb craters that are today
used as watering holes.

But ask the Vietnamese about the war, and the response is nearly always the
same: "The war is over," said a schoolteacher, pushing back his bamboo hat to
brush away the sweat of an afternoon's toil on his family's small farm in the
northern Red River delta. "I am 22 and my wife is 20, and we do not even
remember the war. We honor the people who died, but we agree with our leaders
when they say that it is time for Vietnam to end its isolation -- it is time to
put aside the war."

And perhaps, he might have added, it is time that the rest of the world allowed
them to.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Thien Mu Pagoda in Hue has been tolling its 4,000-pound
bell since 1701. Thuy Duong, a Hanoi waitress, wears the the traditional hat
spun from coconut leaves. It has a poem under its brim. Silk top by Eva Chun,
$650. (pg. 72-73); Under banyan and milkwood trees, Ho Chi Minh's house, in the
center of Hanoi, is typical of the city's austere elegance. Dating from the late
1800's, the post office in Ho Chi Minh City is a vivid example of colonial
style. Richard Tyler's viscose wedding jacket with bamboo embroidery, $2,475. At
Saks Fifth Avenue. I. Magnin, San Francisco. Neiman Marcus, Beverly Hills,
Calif. A rickshaw ride requires a hat, gloves and the bright, plastic raincoat
that is ubiquitous in Ho Chi Minh City. Floral-print crepe-de-Chine dress from
Chanel, $3,000. At the Chanel Boutique, 5 East 57th Street; Beverly Hills,
Calif.; Palm Beach, Fla. Like much of the Indo Chic look, Chanel's wool
gabardine tank dress ($1,610, at the Chanel Boutique, 5 East 57th Street, and
Bergdorf Goodman) is severe in its simplicity. In Hue, Le Chi Chu Cuc prepares a
rice flour pancake stuffed with prawns. (pg. 74-75); Do Thi Hanh and her
daughter, Nguyen Ngoc Trang, at the Temple of the Jade Mountain in Hanoi. Silk
drawstring pants, $438, and jacket, $498, by Ralph Lauren. At Polo/Ralph Lauren,
867 Madison Avenue. Le Thi Hoang minding the geese outside Hanoi. Linen coat
with mandarin collar from A/X Armani, $160. At A/X Armani Exchange, 568
Broadway. Cropped linen pants from Flyte Ostell, $425. At Barneys New York.
Typical of Vietnam's unisex pajamas, Isaac Mizrahi's linen jacket, $515, and
pants, $325 (at Bergdorf Goodman), are worn by a citizen of Hoi An, once
Vietnam's most important port. (pg. 76-77); Wandering the rice paddies outside
Ho Chi Minh City. A raw silk jacket (left) made locally and a cotton skirt by
Koos & DeWilde, $785. At Neiman Marcus, Bal Harbour, Fla. Silk jacket (right) by
Richard Tyler, $1,460. At Tyler Trafficante, Los Angeles. Skirt by Koos &
DeWilde, $990. At Charivari 57, 18 West 57th Street. In a sampan on the Perfume
River in Hue, Le Thi Hoang Hoa, standing far right, wears a silk vest, $398, and
velvet sarong, $698, by Ralph Lauren. At Polo/Ralph Lauren, 867 Madison Avenue.
Le Thi Minh Nguyet, next to her, in a crushed velvet vest by Ralph Lauren, $498.
At Polo/Ralph Lauren, 867 Madison Avenue and Beverly Hills, Calif. Silk pants
from Vietnam Silk, Ho Chi Minh City. Cropped silk shantung vest by Richard
Tyler, $635. At Saks Fifth Avenue. I. Magnin, San Francisco. Silk slip dress by
Donna Karan, $2,195. At Barneys New York. (pg. 78-79)(Photographs by Marie Laure
De Decker)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY;
Tours for Adventurers: 2 Ways to See Vietnam

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 329 words


Two unusual tours to Vietnam are available this winter. One is for the
physically fit; both are for the adventurous.

A 1,200-mile-long bicycle tour, sponsored by a company called Cycle Vietnam,
will set out from Hanoi on Jan. 6 along the "Reunification Highway" to the Gulf
of Tonkin. It will then pass through Hue and Danang and into the Highlands and
the resort city of Da Lat on the way to Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon. It
will arrive there on Jan. 28. Beaches, mountains, rivers and historical sites
that include the Hoa Lo Prison (the infamous "Hanoi Hilton"), the My Lai
memorial, the former American Embassy and Presidential Palace in Ho Chi Minh
City are all on the route. The cost is $2,395 not including air fare. Hotels,
meals, bottled water, guided tours, the use of a support vehicle and the
services of a doctor, who will travel with the group, are included. There are
two nights of camping. Participants should be in good physical shape.
Information: Cycle Vietnam, (503) 282-8499, fax (503) 331-1458.

From Feb. 19 to March 15, "Vietnam in Depth," a culturally and ecologically
oriented tour offered by Harvard's Museum of Comparative Zoology, will be led by
Dr. John Constable, a surgeon and associate clinical professor at Harvard
Medical School, and his wife, Sylvia. The group will also be accompanied by
naturalists working in Vietnam.

The tour begins in Ho Chi Minh City, and the itinerary includes the Mekong
Delta, Hue and Hanoi. Temples, palaces, a crane reserve, an aquarium and a
national forest are among the sightseeing highlights. On the final day the group
is scheduled to visit the "Perfumed Pagoda," a spring pilgrimage site reached by
sampan on the Yen River.

The price of $4,690 includes meals, lodging, sightseeing, visa fees and
gratuities for local guides and drivers; international air fares are extra. In
keeping with the tour's historical theme, accommodations are in prewar hotels.
Information: (617) 495-2463.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Vietnam

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Thousand Days and 30 Years;
From Man to Martyr to Myth

BYLINE: By TOM WICKER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1504 words


THIRTY years after John Fitzgerald Kennedy's murder in Dallas on Nov. 22, 1963,
Americans continue to hold the 35th President in improbably high regard -- not
just as a man of star quality, whose life was cut short in a moment whose
origins are still debated, but as a national leader ranked in some polls with or
above Abraham Lincoln and Franklin D. Roosevelt.

Yet John Kennedy's "Thousand Days" in the Presidency were marked less by
historic achievements than by continual crises -- the Bay of Pigs fiasco;
Berlin; the world's first nuclear confrontation; the beginnings of the war in
Vietnam; the heated collisions of white authority and black civil rights
demonstrators in the Southern states. Nor were Kennedy's responses always sure.

In his last months in office, for example, he concluded the first nuclear
test-ban treaty with the Soviet Union. But in his early months he had ordered a
massive military buildup that contributed heavily to the Soviet-American arms
race. He was reluctant to expend political capital on behalf of black
demonstrators, whose persistence made him impatient, and was forced mostly by
events into his clashes with Southern recalcitrants like Governors George
Wallace of Alabama and Ross Barnett of Mississippi.

The overall record of his Presidency, though in many respects admirable, hardly
accounts for Kennedy's high standing three decades later -- a standing all the
more unlikely because the years since his death have seen continuing assaults on
his personal and political reputations.

His dalliances with women before and during his White House years have become
public knowledge. Books like "A Question of Character: A Life of John F.
Kennedy" by Thomas C. Reeves and Nigel Hamilton's "J.F.K.: Reckless Youth" have
pictured him as privileged, pampered, often irresponsible and insensitive.
Inadequately answered charges persist that he and his brother, Attorney General
Robert F. Kennedy, repeatedly sought the assassination of Fidel Castro. The
author Richard Reeves makes it clear in "President Kennedy: Profile in Power"
that Kennedy consistently deceived the public about his health, enduring almost
constant pain and sometimes resorting to "feel good" injections during his
campaign and Presidency.

Changes in Atmosphere

The nation's political and social atmospheres, moreover, have changed greatly
since John Kennedy's time. The election of Ronald Reagan in 1980 signaled a
national embrace of conservatism after decades of the New Deal liberalism that
Kennedy was mistakenly believed to exemplify (his party, save its Southerners,
was further to the left than he wanted to be). And the growth of the urban
underclass, with the rising incidence of urban crime, has chilled attitudes
toward black Americans, with whose improved status the 35th President is
indelibly linked.

All this, or less, would have dulled the public's regard for any other former
President. How has John F. Kennedy, while not exactly a candidate for Mount
Rushmore, prevailed over predictable eclipse? The most important reason,
undoubtedly, is the almost mythic manner of his death.

The hero cut down at the height of his glory (though Kennedy was in something of
a political slump in the fall of 1963) is a staple of legend-making. And when
such a fate befalls a figure of youth and beauty, the legend becomes even more
of a romantic drama -- heightened, in Kennedy's case, by the mundane fact that
few Americans in 1963 had witnessed, even imagined, the murder of a President.

By then, in fact, the Presidency was an office exalted almost beyond mortality
-- by the personality and prominence of Franklin Roosevelt in Depression and
war; by Truman's and Eisenhower's cold war leadership of the so-called free
world, and by the President's command of nuclear weapons.

As the inheritor of that exalted place, John F. Kennedy became something like a
young American emperor: it could hardly be imagined by a fascinated public that
he or any President was vulnerable to a human hand. But he was -- a nearly
unbelievable fact that spawned dozens of conspiracy theories for a people unable
to accept the idea that a deed so momentous did not have equally momentous
origins.

The assassination in Dallas, moreover, marked the real arrival of television,
history's mightiest conveyor of unforgettable images and moments. Only that
autumn, the two major networks, still relatively primitive, had inaugurated
30-minute evening news broadcasts (with John Kennedy the guest star on each
program). But from the moment the shots rang out in Dealey Plaza through the
funeral services three days later, the networks stayed continuously on the air,
steadily focused on the searing drama -- bringing the nation together, as
perhaps never before, in its time of shock and grief. Television, blazoning the
events of that weekend on the memories of most Americans then living, became the
national nervous system.

Kennedy, then in his third year of office, was believed by many to be growing in
stature, moving toward a higher statesmanship, an impression since cultivated in
the numerous memoirs of his associates. The limited test-ban treaty, concluded
only weeks before the fatal shots were fired, seemed ample evidence. So more
than a few Americans believe today, some passionately, that a President growing
in office would not have taken the nation so deeply into Vietnam as his
successor did.

Nor does Vietnam provide the only such wishful idea. Even if Nov. 22, 1963, is
taken only as a benchmark in time and what followed a coincidence, it was not
long thereafter that things began to go wrong for Americans. The nation's youth
began to drop out and turn on, the war in Vietnam became an endless nightmare,
cities burned in the "long hot summers" of black revolt, Robert Kennedy and
Martin Luther King fell before other assassins, world economic supremacy
trickled away, crime turned cities into huddles of fear, Watergate destroyed a
President and faith in Presidents, hostages and burning helicopters in Iran
shattered illusions of American might.

Ironically, all that enhanced the Kennedy legend. Many Americans believed, on
faith rather than evidence, that if John Kennedy had not been cut down as he was
coming into his prime, if Bobby Kennedy had been there to follow him, these
disasters could somehow have been avoided. The worse things seemed to become,
the more such Americans missed something they identified with the Kennedy
brothers, if in belief rather than fact.

John Kennedy had declared in his inaugural address that "a new generation of
Americans, born in this century" had come to power with him. After the stolid
years of the 50's and the Eisenhower Administration, the change seemed welcome
to that "new generation"; and a third of a century later, in a time of political
revulsion, many graying oldsters still mourn a lost leader and the idea of a new
age that never came. They will never know if it ever would have.

His most dedicated opponents, moreover, conceded that Kennedy was an engaging
man -- not the least of his political assets. His Presidential news conferences
were the first to be televised live and regularly, and for millions of viewers
they established -- often by the alchemy of "news management" -- his
articulatenesshis wit, his sophistication, his apparent mastery of the details
of government and diplomacy. No President ever had had the exposure in action
that television gave him, and to Americans he became more familiar and
recognizable, as have all Presidents since, than the local mayor or Congressman.

Finally, as idolaters often overstate, detractors frequently underrate the
Kennedy record in office. It was by no means negligible. He broke, for instance,
the centuries-old taboo against a Roman Catholic President, exposing other
taboos to the light of reason. He became the first President to call the
struggle of American blacks for full equality "a moral issue" -- brave words at
the time, earning him a special place in the respect and affection of black
Americans.

And though Kennedy's cold warrior inaugural address is more widely quoted, his
most memorable words came in the last months of his life, in his speech on June
10, 1963, at American University. He called on the nation, in what was then a
risky and challenging change from years of hostility, to re-examine its attitude
toward the Soviet Union.

"In the final analysis," he declared, "our most basic common link is that we all
inhabit this small planet. We all breathe the same air. We all cherish our
children's future. And we are all mortal."

So we all are, as was John Fitzgerald Kennedy. Despite the imperial trappings of
the Presidency and his own glittering aura, he knew that well enough. But in the
soul-shaking years since his death, as between disillusionment and legend,
Americans have chosen legend -- as if to hold in memory their own sense of
themselves and their country as they most wished them to be, as they used to
believe they were.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The charm And the power: John F. Kennedy in the Oval Office,
1961. (pg. 1); The speeding limousine, Lyndon B. Johnson's swearing-in, and the
funeral procession were images of the assassination imbedded in the
consciousness of Americans who lived through those long days. (Associated Press)
(pg. 3)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In America;
'If I Had Known'

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 686 words


Oh, she was beautiful. No one questioned that. She had that striking, standout
kind of beauty you couldn't help but notice, the kind that can make you catch
your breath.

Janet Sackman was 17 in 1949 and had already caught the attention of the big
advertising agencies. She was tall, almost 5 feet 10 inches, and had a radiant,
healthy, outdoor look. Besides being beautiful, she was exceptionally
photogenic. The camera was crazy about her. She modeled clothes, including
bathing suits, did cigarette ads, and posed for the covers of Life, Look and
other magazines.

America in 1949 was a great place to be young and beautiful. The war was over
and the Depression had not returned. Television was making its move. "South
Pacific," a celebration of romantic love and eternal happiness, was on Broadway.
Jackie Robinson was the National League batting champion, and the Yankees, like
the country, were champions of the world.

Optimism ruled. The baby boomers were already toddling. Almost everywhere the
prospects for the future seemed unlimited.

Janet Sackman did commercials on Perry Como's live, thrice-weekly television
program, "The Chesterfield Supper Club," and she did print ads for Lucky
Strikes.

Last week, in an interview, she recalled one of the Lucky Strike photo sessions:
"A middle-aged tobacco executive was there, and while they were changing the
lights he started talking to me and he said, 'You know, it would be a good idea
if you started to smoke so that you'd know how to hold a cigarette, or puff on a
cigarette when you do other commercials.' "

That sounded reasonable, so Janet Sackman, age 17, started to smoke. She smoked
Chesterfields. No filters. "By the time they came out with king size," she said,
"I was so addicted that I bought them so I could have more puffs per cigarette."

Smokers didn't know in the late-40's and early-50's what smoking could do to
them. Said Ms. Sackman, "If I had known . . ."

In 1983, at age 51, Janet Sackman, still beautiful, married and the mother of
four children, developed an earache. At first doctors told her it was nothing.
In fact, she had throat cancer.

"Cancer," she said, as if still amazed.

Her larynx, which is where the vocal cords are located, was removed. "I had the
surgery and then I couldn't talk," she said. "This is esophageal speech. It took
a lot of learning. It took me about six months to say my first word."

She went for checkups twice a year and after a while it looked as if she was
home free. But in 1990 an X-ray indicated a problem and the problem turned out
to be lung cancer.

"I had to have a third of my lung removed," Ms. Sackman said. "That was a very
difficult operation, especially recuperating from it. Very painful."

Janet Sackman just turned 62. If you ask how she feels, she will tell you she
feels good. That, of course, is relative. Feeling good to someone who has lost a
larynx and part of a lung to cancer is not the same as it is to someone who has
always been in reasonably good health.

The men and women running the tobacco companies can no longer hide behind the
ignorance of the executive who told Janet Sackman it would be a good idea to
smoke. Today's executives know what the deal is. They know, or certainly should
know, that they are engaged in the relentless slaughter of vast numbers of
Americans.

In terms of body counts, remarkable levels of efficiency have been achieved.
Nothing comes close to the tobacco companies' ability to kill by volume.

The American Cancer Society, which held its 17th annual Great American Smokeout
last week, says 418,000 Americans die from tobacco-related illnesses each year
-- nearly eight times as many Americans as were killed in all the years of
Vietnam.

In business, of course, it is dollars above all. If you have to step over
corpses to collect your cash, so be it. Money excuses everything.

Hence, this afternoon at Madison Square Garden we have the finals of the
Virginia Slims tennis championships, and the continuing irony of exceptionally
vital and very young women being used to promote cigarettes, a product that
destroys life.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE PACIFIC SUMMIT;
Leaders at Summit Seek Strong Pacific Community

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1578 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, Nov. 20


President Clinton played host to a Pacific Rim club meeting today, gathering 13
Asian-Pacific leaders in an Indian long house on a windswept island to preach
the gospel of open markets and to secure America's foothold in the world's
fastest growing economic community.

Mr. Clinton said the free-flowing talks with his counterparts -- the largest
such gathering ever of Asian leaders -- had laid the basis for an Asian-Pacific
"community" that would play an "increasingly vital role for our nation and the
world" by working together to expand trade, lower tariffs and create new
high-tech jobs.

"At least now, for the first time," Mr. Clinton told reporters during a break in
the six hours of talks, "our region has the means to hold serious policy
discussions on such questions as how to remove trade barriers and how to sustain
robust growth.

"If you ask me to summarize in a sentence what we have agreed, it is this: We
have agreed that the Asia-Pacific region should be a united one, not divided. We
have agreed that our economic policies should be open, not closed."

Open Economic Policies

"We have also agreed that we should begin to express that conviction by doing
everything we possibly can," Mr. Clinton said, to get a good global trade
agreement by Dec. 15 that would reduce tariffs and set rules for international
commerce.

Dressed in a brown leather bomber-style jacket, lumberjack shirt, brown slacks
and boots, Mr. Clinton greeted his guests at the Seattle docks at dawn to carry
them by Coast Guard ferry to Blake Island -- like a weekend outdoorsman taking a
few fraternity brothers out for a picnic. Only China's President, Jiang Zemin,
didn't quite get into the swing of today's L. L. Bean diplomatic dress code,
coming in a business suit.

Japan's Prime Minister, Morihiro Hosokawa, who is considered something of a
fashion plate in Tokyo, showed up in an aviator's scarf, and Kim Young Sam,
South Korea's President, wore a Korean cardigan sweater.  President Fidel V.
Ramos of the Philippines wore black leather gloves in which he jauntily twirled
a cigar.

Their casual dress, though, belied the fact that these were the leaders of some
of the world's most populous nations, countries that control half of the world's
total output of goods and services.

"I hope we will all exchange telephone numbers and fax machine numbers,"
President Ramos said.

Once on the remote island in the middle of Puget Sound, eight miles off the
coast of Seattle, Mr. Clinton and the leaders retreated to a long house in
Tillicum Village, a replica of a Native American settlement, where they entered
into an unstructured discussion on the future of their Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation forum.

Warmed by a space heater during a raw Seattle morning, they were seated in
chairs in a circle, each accompanied only by their translators and a single
aide.

One official remarked that if the world has become a global village, its Main
Street, where the business is booming, is now somewhere around the South China
Sea, at the heart of the collection of Asian-Pacific nations gathered here.

As the Pacific Rim leaders waved hello to the cameras from the balcony of the
log building with Mr. Clinton standing in their midst, they almost seemed to be
waving hello to the American public, and underscoring the President's argument
that American jobs and markets will increasingly be coming from Latin America
and the Orient, not from across the Atlantic.

Largest Gathering Since 1966>

It was the biggest gathering of Asian and Pacific leaders since President Lyndon
Johnson convened a summit meeting in 1966 in Manila to enlist support for the
Vietnam War. But this gathering was a striking contrast to the East-West
get-togethers that have so dominated global politics during the cold war. Here
the issue was not the balance of power, but the balance of trade. Here the
acronyms being tossed around were not Start, NATO or C.F.E., but APEC, Asean and
G.N.P. Here the question being asked most by reporters was not who blinked, but
who paid?

Indeed, many officials seemed to feel a certain electricity in the air here that
comes from witnessing the creation of a grouping of powers that all the
participants appear to believe is going to be important -- though no one is
quite sure what shape it will take.

The Asian-Pacific nations are deeply wary about being herded together too
tightly by the United States, because they fear both its political domination
and its insistence on expanding human rights along with expanding trade. Japan's
Foreign Minister, Tsutomu Hata, reflected that wariness when he told reporters
that APEC should evolve through "incremental gradualism by consensus."

The unusual combination of energy and ambiguity that surrounded this meeting was
captured in a "vision statement" issued by the leaders at the close of their
session. It was long on vision and short on specifics.

"In this post-cold-war era, we have an opportunity to build a new economic
foundation for the Asia-Pacific that harnesses the energy of our diverse
economies, strengthens cooperation and promotes prosperity," it said. "Our
meeting reflects the emergence of a new voice for the Asia-Pacific in world
affairs."

'Cooperative Solutions'>

It said that APEC envisaged a community of Asia-Pacific economies that will work
together to promote "cooperative solutions" to global economic problems, an open
international trading system, improved education and training and advances in
telecommunications and transportation among member states.

Mr. Clinton said the leaders had agreed to gather next year in Indonesia for a
second regional summit meeting.  The importance of such annual meetings, say
American officials, is that it will begin to give more of a structure and
permanence to this Asian-American alliance.

During today's discussions President Kim of South Korea quoted a Korean proverb:
"The beginning is half the job done."

A White House spokeswoman, Dee Dee Myers, said the next meeting will take place
in November or December 1994 following Congressional elections in the United
States.
 What Mr. Clinton hoped to achieve most from this summit meeting -- and appears
to have accomplished is to insure that America is not slowly locked out of this
emerging Asian economic Main Street, which is growing twice as fast as Europe.

The Asians, for their part seem anxious to make sure that they also have a
strong link with the emerging North American free trade zone. American officials
also hoped that the prospect of an American-Asian trading association would
force the Europeans to make the last concessions needed to complete the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade -- the worldwide trade agreement -- by Dec. 15.
"The message to Europe" from this meeting, Mr. Clinton said, "is we want this to
be a united but open community and we want Europe to work with us to get a good
GATT agreement. We want them to join us in a new world trading system."

On Thursday, APEC added Mexico and Papua New Guinea to its roster and agreed to
add Chile next year. In addition to those newcomers, current members are:
Australia, Brunei, Canada, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea,
Malaysia, New Zealand, the Phillipines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and the
United States.

While American officials expressed satisfaction with the results of this week's
summit, it did underscore the tension between Washington's three priorities in
Asia -- expanding trade, promoting human rights and democratization and stemming
missile proliferation.

None of the Asian-Pacific leaders share America's enthusiasm for making trade
benefits contingent on human rights performance. And the more the United States
pushes to expand trade in the region to create jobs back home, the more leverage
the Chinese and others have in resisting American demands on human rights.

American officials said that despite the good public face that Mr. Clinton tried
to put on his meeting Friday with the Chinese president -- saying that they had
at least begun a dialogue about human rights and other issues -- the Chinese
leader in fact gave Mr. Clinton nothing whatsoever.

With the Chinese now running a $19 billion dollar trade surplus with Washington,
and doing business in almost all 50 states, they seem increasingly confident
that Congress will not strip them of their trade benefits because it would cost
too many jobs in too many parts of America -- particularly Seattle, whose Boeing
Aircraft company now does 14 percent of its business with China.

China Sees U.S. as Codependent

China's Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, bluntly told reporters that this issue of
whether or not the United States will renew China's low trading tariffs in June
-- depending on its human rights behavior -- is a relic of the past, because
Washington is now as dependent on the trade for creating middle-class jobs as
China is.

"It is not the case of a special advantage to one side or a special disadvantage
to the other," Mr. Qichen said, when asked if he feared that Washington would
not renew China's most-favored-nation trade beneifts. "We do not approve of the
practice of linking things which have nothing to do with trade issues."

Mike Jendrezejczyk, head of Asia Watch, a human-rights monitoring organization,
said he was struck by "the amazing confidence the Chinese now have that trade
will take care all their problems in America."

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 22, 1993, Monday / December 2, 1993, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A front-page picture caption in some editions yesterday about the meeting of
Pacific Rim leaders misidentified the man in the right foreground. He was Prime
Minister James Bolger of New Zealand, not Prime Minister Jean Chretien of
Canada.


The main front-page article on Nov. 21 about the meeting of Asian-Pacific
leaders in Seattle misstated the surname of the Foreign Minister of China at one
point. He is Qian Qichen; Qian is the surname.


GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton walks with, from ,left, President Fidel Ramos
of the Philippines, President Suharto of Indonesia, Prime Minister Jean Chretien
of Canada and President Kim Young Sam of South Korea. (Jim Wilson/The New York
Times)

Map of Washington state showing location of Blake Island. (pg. 14)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Books of The Times;
What Made Allard Lowenstein Run: A Psychological Portrait

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1020 words



Never Stop Running
Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American Liberalism
By William H. Chafe
Illustrated. 556 pages. Basic Books/HarperCollins. $28.

Allard K. Lowenstein (1929-1981) may be remembered now as a man who never
stopped running for Congressional seats in and around New York City, and never
stopped losing. But in William H. Chafe's fascinating new political and
psychological biography, "Never Stop Running: Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle
to Save American Liberalism," Lowenstein comes to life again as a Pied Piper for
the young and idealistic and as a man who passionately believed in the
possibility of reforming the system without tearing it apart.

Combining his avidity for reform with a strict anti-Communism, Lowenstein was
able to play a major role in three liberal crusades of the 1960's and 70's: the
fight against apartheid in South Africa, the battle for civil rights that
culminated in the Freedom Summer in Mississippi and the campaign against the
United States' role in Vietnam that led to President Lyndon B. Johnson's
decision not to run again for office in 1968.

Mr. Chafe goes far beyond merely recounting these events. A professor of history
at Duke University and the author of "The American Woman," among many other
books, he develops a theory that what lay beneath Allard Lowenstein's prodigious
talents as a liberal activist were two traumatizing secrets that undermined his
sense of his own worth. The first was that his mother had died when he was only
a year old, a fact he did not learn until a decade later and was never allowed
to discuss openly with his doting but demanding father. The second was that he
was sexually attracted to other men.

An infinitely complex result, as Mr. Chafe sees his subject's career, was that
Lowenstein disliked himself and his Jewishness and dreamed of finding redemption
in a white-bread version of America. This led to a lifelong quest to escape
himself. He could never stop running for office, yet he could never afford to
win.

This theory -- if one can call such a loose construction of ideas a theory --
proves useful up to a point in Mr. Chafe's handling. He employs it to explain
the rise of Lowenstein's career to the climax of his astonishingly successful
"Dump Johnson" campaign and its descent after the disaster of Robert F.
Kennedy's assassination to the point where Lowenstein seemed to revel in defeat.
Particularly acute is Mr. Chafe's explanation of why Lowenstein so often seemed
to be on both sides of the fence, as for instance in his role as president of
the National Student Association in the early 1950's, where he managed
simultaneously to avoid and encourage the clandestine support of the Central
Intelligence Agency.

Mr. Chafe's theory also proves promising as an organizing principle.  In a
typical chapter, he will begin by mentioning the illustrative incidents of a
given period in Lowenstein's life, for example what he refers to in a chapter
title as "1968: Year of Triumph, Year of Tragedy." He will then describe those
incidents in detail, in this case Lowenstein's failure to connect effectively
with Senator Eugene J. McCarthy's Presidential campaign after President Johnson
withdrew, his failed attempt to bring Senator McCarthy and Senator Robert F.
Kennedy together in a working coalition and his only successful election
campaign, in the Fifth Congressional District, in Nassau County. Finally, Mr.
Chafe will analyze how these public events related to what was going on in his
subject's frenetic private life, always stressing that for Lowenstein there was
no disjunction between the political and personal.

The trouble with this approach is that as Mr. Chafe proceeds through his
subject's life he does not come closer to any crux of Lowenstein's psychological
conflicts, for example, the precise effect of his mother's death. Instead the
text merely takes the points that have already been made and shakes them into
new patterns. A result is increasingly tedious confusion and repetitiveness.
Another distraction is a high incidence of incorrect details, at least in areas
that this reviewer happens to know something about: Felix Adler founded the
Ethical Culture Schools in the 19th century, not Algernon Black in the 20th;
Hank Greenberg played for the Detroit Tigers throughout his career, not the
Cleveland Indians; student mentors at Yale were called freshman counselors, not
resident advisers.

A more damaging problem is that having implied throughout his book that Allard
Lowenstein's career came to stand for American liberalism in the mid-20th
century, Mr. Chafe never satisfyingly completes his equation. Does he mean to
generalize from his argument that Lowenstein was acting out his private problems
in public? Do all liberals tend to cultivate the commons instead of their own
gardens? Is liberal activism by its very nature an exercise in sticking one's
nose where it doesn't belong? Or was Allard Lowenstein an ideal citizen whose
motives happened to be confused? Mr. Chafe never really confronts these
questions.

Still, his book remains a highly intriguing portrait of an impossible man whose
very nature helped him to achieve the impossible. Even his death had meaning in
Mr. Chafe's scheme of things. Lowenstein was assassinated on March 14, 1981, by
one Dennis Sweeney, a crazed former disciple who blamed Lowenstein for
transmitting the tormenting voices that Mr. Sweeney insisted were being
broadcast from his teeth.

Psychiatrists have since argued that Mr. Sweeney suffered from adult-onset
schizophrenia and that therefore his murderous act had nothing to do with
Lowenstein's habitual tendency to befriend young men and then drop them. But Mr.
Chafe points out that Lowenstein knew all too well that Mr. Sweeney was
dangerous, yet thought he could handle him. As "Never Stop Running" concludes,
Mr. Sweeney's madness was just one more impossibly difficult problem that Allard
Lowenstein's tragic hubris convinced him he could solve.

 A picture with the review appeared without a caption. It showed Mr. Lowenstein,
not the author.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 23, 1993, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

A book review yesterday about "Never Stop Running: Allard Lowenstein and the
Struggle to Save American Liberalism," by William H. Chafe, misstated the date
of Mr. Lowenstein's assassination. It was March 14, 1980, not 1981.

GRAPHIC: Photo: William H. Chafe (The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 23, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Gulf War Syndrome: Is It a Real Disease?

BYLINE: By PHILIP J. HILTS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1570 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


IT began in Indiana early in 1992, when soldiers in two reserve units that had
fought in the Persian Gulf war began to suffer a puzzling array of symptoms.
Some became unusually fatigued, and others said their joints ached. They
experienced headaches, rashes and hair loss, and their memories occasionally
failed them. In some cases the symptoms were severe enough to require
hospitalization.

Over the next year, hundreds and then thousands of veterans began showing up at
hospitals run by the Department of Veterans Affairs with these and a wide array
of other symptoms. Eventually, 10,000 veterans asked the hospitals for physical
examinations to see if they had what has come to be called gulf war syndrome.

The sequence of events has occurred many times in recent years: first there are
complaints of severe but undiagnosable symptoms, then the sufferers hear about
others experiencing the same symptoms and begin to trade information, then there
is the naming of a possible new disease, and finally there is a plea for an
investigation of the symptom clusters. Experts say such problems begin with real
suffering that is often dismissed as psychosomatic -- or, to use a more
contemporary counterpart, "stress related." Among many complaints of this sort,
the ones closest to acquiring status as recognized diseases are "sick building
syndrome" and "multiple chemical sensitivity."

With gulf war syndrome, as with many such outbreaks, even when the claims are
taken seriously they are difficult to deal with because no one can do much for
the sufferers, says Dr. Claudia Miller, an expert on multiple chemical
sensitivity who served on a Veterans Affairs panel that looked into gulf war
syndrome.

The response from the Department of Defense has been skeptical. "First of all,
we do not believe it is a syndrome," said Lieut. Col. Douglas Hart, a Pentagon
spokesman. "It is just some symptoms that we don't have an explanation for."

That attitude has fanned the anger of those who believe there is indeed a group
of symptoms identifying a common condition, in short, a syndrome.

Veterans were also angered last week by a report that the Department of Defense
had withheld information on chemical agents detected during the war. For two
years, the Pentagon had denied having any evidence that Iraq had used chemical
or biological agents, but last Tuesday it acknowledged the validity of work by
Czech chemical-weapons experts in the week after the air war started in January
1991. They found that there were traces of nerve gas and a blister agent in the
gulf region.

Memories of Agent Orange

The quantities of both were small, suggesting that something like a bombed plant
rather than a deliberate release was the source. The doses would have been too
minute to cause any serious illness, another Pentagon spokesman said.

Veterans say the Government's denials remind them of similar statements about
the effects of Agent Orange, the military's name for a defoliant used in
Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War. Although researchers believe that the
contaminant of Agent Orange, dioxin, can cause certain illnesses in sufficiently
high doses, it is unclear whether servicemen were exposed to such levels.

"We are afraid this is Agent Orange revisited," Staff Sgt. Steve Robertson told
a reporter in April 1992. Sergeant Robertson, a gulf war veteran who experienced
aching joints and a severe cough, was referred to a psychiatrist who told him he
was suffering from anger and needed to vent it. The symptoms have persisted, and
he believes they have a physical cause.

But the Department of Veterans Affairs responded differently than the Department
of Defense. It set up a gulf war registry not long after the first reports of
gulf war veterans' complaints in 1992 and announced that veterans could come to
its hospitals for a free examination if they were worried.

Immediate Concerns

Even before the war was over, the department had begun looking into possible
health problems. "Anyone watching the oil fire in Kuwait had to wonder what kind
of problems that would cause," said Dr. Susan Mather, assistant chief of health
for the veterans department. In early 1991, while the war was still going on,
she began researching the toxic effects of oil fires and other ailments specific
to the gulf region.

But the array of symptoms that Dr. Mather soon began seeing did not fit her
expectations. They did not seem to be related to smoke inhalation, nor were they
among the symptoms that might be expected after exposure to chemical weapons
like the nerve gas Sarin, one chemical reportedly detected by the Czech experts.

In any case, air quality on the ground in Kuwait was not as bad as it looked,
Dr. Mather said. The greatest part of the pollution from the fires was carried
high into the atmosphere by the heat from the flames.

In a first attempt to collect data to determine whether the syndrome is real,
the Department of Veterans Affairs surveyed 5,300 gulf war veterans and 5,300
veterans who had served during the same period but had not been assigned to the
gulf. The survey, which is continuing, found that equal numbers in the two
groups suffered several conditions and diseases, including ones affecting the
respiratory system.

Questions About Survey

The only two exceptions were found in areas where differences would be expected
in combat and noncombat troops: twice as many gulf veterans showed signs of
post-traumatic stress, and about 15 percent more gulf veterans showed signs of
alcohol dependence, a common finding in returning troops.

But some veterans are asking if the survey tells everything. Some point out that
the number of people examined so far has been relatively small, so it would be
relatively easy for some people with an unknown syndrome to be placed by mistake
in other categories of diagnosis. The department has said it is aware of that
possibility and is continuing the survey for that reason.

Dr. Miller also said it was possible that identical environmental conditions,
including the presence of certain chemicals, could generate a wide variety of
symptoms in different people. For example, she suggested that the limbic system
in the brain, which can be reached through the nose, may malfunction because of
some toxic chemicals and could produce such a wide variety of symptoms

Strict Rules on Benefits

In a statement last week, Jesse Brown, the Secretary for Veterans Affairs, said
that all suspected causes for the mystery illness, including exposure to
chemical warfare agents, were being studied. The department has announced that
it will begin examining veterans who believe they have the syndrome.

In the meantime, Secretary Brown said, guidelines for approving medical benefits
are strict, and his agency has approved them for only 79 of 1,472 veterans who
say they got ill from exposure to something in the environment during the gulf
war.

Dr. Miller has proposed building a clinic in which people with gulf war syndrome
and other environmentally related syndromes would be housed in super-clean rooms
devoid of chemicals and be put on a highly restricted diet. They would be
monitored to see if their symptoms were reduced. Then the chemicals suspected of
causing the symptoms could be reintroduced to the patients' diet or air in
controlled amounts to see if the symptoms reappeared.

Dr. Miller says her proposal, using both placebos and a double-blind design, is
the only way doctors could truly determine whether chemical sensitivity
syndromes exist. "That really would resolve many of these questions, and
relatively quickly," she said. "I hope."

Her project, which has been endorsed by a report of the National Academy of
Sciences, would cost about $2 million, including building the clinic and
operating it for a year. She is hoping to obtain financing from Government
agencies.

Testifying before the Senate Committee on Veterans' Affairs last Tuesday, Maj.
Gen. Ronald R. Blanck, commander of the Walter Reed Army Medical Center, said
that the World Health Organization had closely examined and ruled out, at least
for now, several possible causes of the symptoms in the gulf war veterans.

Among the eliminated causes were smoke from oil fires; leishmaniasis, a group of
diseases caused by protozoan parasites, which they did find in 31 servicemen;
exposure to petroleum from other sources, including diesel-fired heaters in the
soldiers' tents; depleted uranium from bombed nuclear plants, and chemical
warfare agents, which, they said, had been found in amounts too small to cause
widespread effects.

Both the Veterans Affairs Department and the Defense Department are keeping
registries of those who served in the war and those who complain of symptoms
that might be related to the syndrome. And both have begun research programs to
be carried out over the next few years.

Cases like this can end in different ways. Some complaints are not registered as
symptoms of definable diseases. Other symptoms have come to be accepted as those
of true disorders, as The Lancet, an international medical journal, noted last
week.

British university researchers reported in The Lancet that many of the 293
soldiers who were shot by the British for desertion or cowardice during World
War I would now be recognized as victims of "shell shock," or "post-traumatic
stress syndrome," as it is called today.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dr. Susan Mather of the veterans department expected medical
problems among gulf veterans. (Kirsten Bremmer for The New York Times); Some
gulf war veterans have reported a puzzling array of symptoms, such as fatigue,
aching joints and headaches. Kimo Hollingsworth, left, and Steve Roberts,
veterans of the war, have reported illness. They work at the American Legion
headquarters in Washington. (Marty Katz for The New York Times)(pf. C12)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 23, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SCIENTIST AT WORK: Harold E. Varmus;
Out of the Lab and Into the Bureaucracy

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 6; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2196 words

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.


HAROLD E. VARMUS, the new director of the National Institutes of Health and
therefore one of the most powerful figures in science, is a man with many
weighty matters over which he can mull.

He can worry about the slide in government financing for scientific research, or
the wretched state of science education in America. He can dwell on the
demoralized condition of the institutes themselves, where many of the clinics
and laboratories are dangerously decrepit and where charges of racial
discrimination and sexual harassment have been flying. He can fret over choosing
the perfect director for one of the most politically sensitive of the new
divisions at the N.I.H., the Office of AIDS Research.

Dr. Varmus can ponder all these great issues, and he has been doing so with
considerable zeal over the past few months, but at the moment his mind has
fastened onto something much merrier.

"Data!" he crowed happily. "Can you believe it? Real data!" He held up a piece
of X-ray film displaying a ladderlike pattern of black smudges, the evidence of
gene activity. "My lab just sent it to me this morning," he said, referring to
the laboratory he left behind at the University of California at San Francisco,
where he was (and still is) professor of molecular virology, biochemistry and
biophysics. "It's the best thing I've seen all day."

The experimental result in Dr. Varmus's hand is more than a pleasant distraction
from the details of his new career as administrative potentate. As a scientist
who won a Nobel Prize in 1989 for fundamental research on the genes that cause
cancer, as a scientist who has spent the last 25 years surrounded by the
paraphernalia of molecular biology -- flasks, petri dishes, test tubes,
scintillators and centrifuges -- Dr. Varmus needs to keep discovering new things
about how nature works.

"It's a drug," he said. "It's an addiction. It's a craving. I have to have it."

"One of the most difficult things for me right now is that my lab is in
California and I'm here," he added. "I'm not getting my daily fix." For that
reason, Dr. Varmus plans to set up a small laboratory at the N.I.H., staffed by
just enough graduate students, technicians and postdoctoral fellows to supply
him with his data buzz and still allow him to stay focused on the enormous task
before him: running and in a sense reinventing the organization that is the
lifeblood of the nation's biomedical enterprise. The Senate confirmed Dr. Varmus
in a smoothly perfunctory voice vote early Saturday morning.

Dr. Varmus will be 54 years old next month, but he has the build of an athlete,
staying slim with the long, hard runs and bicycle rides for which he is renowned
among his peers. His hair is thinning but still dark, and his small, impish face
looks perpetually amused. Coming from California and academia, Dr. Varmus has
yet to adopt the gray-suited ways of Washington, and he keeps his tie slung
carelessly over the pole in his office coat closet, not far from his sweaty
workout clothes. He arrives at the N.I.H. in the wake of the former director,
Dr. Bernadine Healy, who alienated a number of scientists and politicians with
her argumentative style and who was asked to leave her position last June. He
arrives as though buoyed on clouds of glory, acclaimed for his scientific
achievements, his quickness of mind, his Jeffersonian love of learning and
culture that variously alights on poetry, theater, music, performance art, the
study of ancient Chinese oracle bones, the study of war memorials.

"Whatever crosses his path receives the advantage of his wonderful
intelligence," said Dr. Diane Middlebrook, professor of English at Stanford
University and author of an acclaimed biography of Anne Sexton. "I'm used to
being around the large egos of major scientists, but Harold, though he has a
strong sense of himself, has a genuine curiousity that is not mediated by a
desire to be self-aggrandizing."

Not only is Dr. Varmus the first Nobel laureate to head the institutes, he is
also one of the few scientists who can claim training on the other side of the
great intellectual divide, having earned his bachelor's degree in English from
Amherst College and a master's degree in English literature from Harvard
University.

Dr. Ira Herskowitz, a professor of genetics at the University of California at
San Francisco, said, "Harold is a passionate information junkie, and this is
going to serve him very well in his new job, where he'll have to assimilate
tremendous amounts of information."

Basic researchers hope that as one of their own, Dr. Varmus can help shore up
their declining fortunes and morale. The percentage of grants submitted to the
N.I.H. that are financed has slipped from about 40 percent 20 years ago to at
best 15 percent today. However, Dr. Varmus admits that given the current
economy, he is unlikely to persuade Congress to substantially increase the
institutes' $11 billion budget any time soon. What is more, although he will
happily trumpet the triumphs of pure research, he knows that his constituency
now is much broader than bench scientists alone, encompassing clinicians,
epidemiologists, psychologists, practitioners of alternative medicine and the
like. And before he can push through new programs, Dr. Varmus is likely to need
time to master the role of supreme bureaucrat, a job for which his background
has hardly prepared him.

Some groups have expressed concern that Dr. Varmus is so fixated on basic
research that he could undo their recent successes in getting Federal funds
earmarked for the study of particularly diseases. Frances M. Visco, president of
the National Breast Cancer Coalition, a lobbying organization based in
Washington that recently persuaded Congress to allocate $210 million of the
military budget for, oddly enough, breast cancer research, said scientists have
had their way too long. "The scientific community historically has been making
decisions about how to spend research money without any oversight," she said.
"We're saying, you're not going to be able to do that anymore. We're saying,
let's focus on breast cancer. It's time we do that.

"We're concerned that Dr. Varmus may be opposed to our principles."

Breast Cancer Research

However, Dr. Varmus, who was on the scientific panel that advised the Army on
how best to spend its $210 million, said he felt the two camps were closer than
Ms. Visco seemed to think. "They didn't want the money to just go into
mammography studies or drug trials," he said. "They wanted it to go into a basic
understanding of breast cancer. And we asked that applicants for money be able
to convince reviewers that what they're doing is related to breast cancer," even
if their project is studying cell division in yeast.

Dr. Varmus pointed out that his mother died of breast cancer 23 years ago, a
loss that helped inspire him to study a virus that causes breast cancer in mice.

He has been somewhat less persuaded by recent calls for an increase in financing
for the behavioral and social sciences. "I begin with the premise that behavior
is an incredibly important element in medicine," he said. "People's habits,
their willingness to quit smoking, their willingness to take steps to avoid
transmission of H.I.V., are all behavioral questions.

"But what I'm looking for are new ideas, real discoveries. When I read about
genetics, I see breakthroughs every day. And while I'm trying to learn more
about behavioral science, I must say that I don't feel I get tremendous
intellectual stimulation from most of the things I read."

Beyond pitching for hard science, Dr. Varmus has many plans for the institutes
proper: filling vacant positions, recruiting bright young scientists to spend
their most energetic years at the Government campus, rebuilding facilities like
the huge clinic where experimental trials are carried out, a structure that
engineers say may collapse in the next few years without an expensive overhaul.

Administrative Squabbles

In addition, he has conflicts to resolve, including charges by some employees
that they have not been promoted because of their race or gender. Also festering
are debates over the Women's Health Initiative, a large study launched by Dr.
Healy and designed to explore the impact of diet, nutritional supplements,
exercise, estrogen replacement therapy and other factors on women's long-term
health. Many researchers feel the $66 million study is too disorganized and
badly conceived to yield meaningful answers, and Dr. Varmus hopes in the near
future to convene a panel to decide which parts of the trial should be kept and
which modified or discarded.

How well Dr. Varmus will fare in his new position, or how much he will like it,
is unclear. Friends talk about his phenomenal energy, his ability to work
tirelessly, to exercise ferociously, to recover from a very serious biking
accident near the San Francisco campus in a handful of days and return
fearlessly to his old biking habits. His colleagues and students talk of how
much they enjoy working with him, how attentively he follows everybody's
experiments.

He is also extremely competitive and determined to win. "Occasionally, when new
postdocs would come to the lab, Harold would ask them if they liked to run,"
said Dr. Bruce Bowerman, an assistant professor of biology at the University of
Oregon in Eugene who studied under Dr. Varmus. "If they did, he'd invite them
out for a run with him, and if he could run faster, he'd leave them far behind.
He relished showing up younger runners."

Yet Dr. Varmus has relatively little administrative experience, except managing
his lab of 25 people, and he has not been known for his diplomacy, a skill that
would seem essential for dealing with Congress. His sister, Ellen Varmus Bloch,
said her brother went into research rather than clinical medicine because "he's
not one with a whole lot of bedside manner," adding, "He's very honest,
forthcoming and smart, but he doesn't have much patience for whining."

Dr. Leon Levintow, a professor emeritus of the University of California at San
Francisco and the former chairman of Dr. Varmus's department, said that when he
talked with Dr. Varmus about the N.I.H. position, he wondered whether his old
colleague could hide his feelings well enough to thrive in Washington. "In the
past, Harold made no bones about the fact that he's impatient with ignorant
attitudes," said Dr. Levintow. "But he said he recognizes the importance of
being politically savvy, and he's cultivated that talent."

If suppleness of response is a key to political success, Dr. Varmus has
demonstrated his adaptability throughout his career. His father was the state
physician for Jones Beach in New York, a job that sometimes included the
unpleasant task of declaring people dead from drowning, and his mother was a
psychiatric social worker. Growing up in Freeport, L.I., Dr. Varmus assumed he
would be a doctor. But he developed a passionate interest in literature, and as
a teen-ager thought he would be happy as a literary scholar. At Harvard, he
changed his mind. "I saw my friends in medical school seeming to be more engaged
with the real world," he said. "That provoked a sort of jealousy, and I decided
to go to medical school after all," earning his medical degree from Columbia
University.

In part because he is married to Constance Casey, an editor and writer and now
the assistant editor of the book review section of The Washington Post, he has
stayed very much immersed in the world of literature, attending plays and poetry
readings and reading widely. The couple have two sons, Jacob, a junior at the
University of Iowa, and Christopher, a junior in high school.

An opponent of the war in Vietnam, Dr. Varmus wanted to avoid being drafted, so
he performed his public- service obligations by joining Dr. Ira Pastan's
laboratory at the N.I.H. in 1968, studying bacterial biochemistry. From there
Dr. Varmus went to the University of California, beginning as a postdoctoral
fellow to Dr. J. Michael Bishop, a molecular biologist, and swiftly rising up
become his collaborator.

The two won their Nobel Prize for the discovery that the body holds within it
genes, called oncogenes, that through a few simple biochemical alterations,
become fomenters of cancerous growth. The detection of oncogenes transformed the
study of cancer almost overnight, and laboratories around the world continue to
explore how these genes work in their healthy configuration, why they sometimes
turn renegade and how the mutant genes can be counteracted to block malignant
growth. He also has worked on genes that help shape the developing brain, and on
the insidious mechanisms that viruses use to infiltrate human cells.

Dr. Varmus thrived as a scientist, but as the years passed he became
increasingly interested in science policy, joining committees and government
panels. He also became hungry for a career switch. "I'm doing this in part
because I have a certain restlessness," he said. "I loved what I was doing but I
can see that life is not infinite. Twenty-three years, same house, same job. I
was ready for a change."

NAME: Harold E. Varmus

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Harold E. Varmus, the new director of the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., keeps a tie in his office closet near his
bicycle gear. (Marty Katz for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Experts in the Comedy of Self-Love

BYLINE: By MARGO JEFFERSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 24; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1024 words



 Private Parts
 By Howard Stern
 Illustrated. 446 pages. Simon & Schuster. $23.

 Confessions
of a Raving,
Unconfined Nut
 Misadventures in the Counterculture
 By Paul Krassner
 Illustrated. 352 pages. Simon & Schuster. $23.

Attention, readers: If you do not want to hear about breasts, buttocks, body
parts and foreign objects; about radio orgies accompanied by Gene Autry crooning
"Back in the Saddle Again" and Janis Joplin singing "Down on Me"; about lesbians
at Girl Scout camp and talk show hosts who call themselves names like
Rumpleforeskin, please turn the page. If you choose to read on, know that you
have entered the Comedy Testosterone Zone.

That zone takes in the playpen, the club, the bar and the Entertainment Network.
For Paul Krassner, who is 61, it includes the counterculture of the 60's and
draws on political satire. For Howard Stern, who is 20 years younger, it
includes the Long Island subculture of the 80's and relies on social caricature.

Between them, they embody the archetypal American comic. He is an adult male
between the ages of 20 and 90. He can play the wise guy or the victim, be
offensive or beguiling and move happily between the virile and the infantile.
(Mr. Krassner, quoting Aldous Huxley, calls such performances "excruciating
orgasms of self-assertion." You could also call them skillful displays of
man-boy self-love.) There is plenty of hilarity here and plenty of stupidity,
too. That's because stupidity is as cathartic as wit. It lets us feel smart
without having to act smart or be smart, and it is the key to ethnic, racial and
sexual insult humor.

We tend to choose comedians whose targets suit our world view, and on these
grounds I can't pretend for a moment that I don't prefer Paul Krassner. But it's
also true that for every jibe of Howard Stern's that makes me want to push him
down a manhole, there's another that makes me shriek with laughter.

Howard Stern is a master of the good cop-bad cop routine. One moment he's a
schlemiel with a miniature penis, "an obsessive-compulsive, anal-retentive
neurotic because I was raised by a woman who ran her household with the
intensity of Hitler" and by a man who yelled, "Shut up, you moron!" whenever
little Howard opened his mouth. The next moment he's a white suburban gangster
rapper, trashing Sinead O'Connor, Jerry Seinfeld, the NBC executives who muzzled
and fired him and Rush Limbaugh, whose book has displaced his at the top of the
best-seller list.

The chapters of "Private Parts" read like monologues, and the whole book is
designed to look like those diaries and fan scrapbooks you kept when you were a
teen-ager. The text hurtles along, broken up with pictures of Howard and his
cohorts, interview snippets, testimonials, ("I love him. I really love him."
Sylvester Stallone) and copies of his hate mail. "Dear Pig," opens one. "I feel
sorry for you Howard," intones another. All of this is very entertaining. The
book matches the rhythms and ruptures of his talk instead of flattening them
out, and you can skip backward or forward when a routine gets too long, or turns
into the kind of rant you can hear in a mall or a subway car.

It was important for this reader to be able to skip backward and forward. I hate
the Stern rants about Rodney King -- "he should be beaten every time he reaches
for his car keys" -- and about Indians who get medical degrees and buy expensive
real estate in America when they should go home and help their own people. I
hate knowing that masses of readers who probably drink as much as Rodney King
and probably never tried to get a medical degree anywhere, are laughing their
heads off and calling it a victory against political correctness.

But "political correctness" doesn't mean what it used to mean. In the 40's and
50's, the "politically correct" were large numbers of citizens who thought that
racial difference and sexual activity were crimes, not parts of life, and who
wanted words like "Communism," "abortion" and "civil rights" banned from the
news media. Paul Krassner grew up in those days, and so it's no surprise that he
learned about the power of comedy by working for the publisher of Mad magazine
and editing Lenny Bruce's book, "How to Talk Dirty and Influence People." He
started his own magazine, The Realist, in 1958, taking his motto from Groucho
Marx: "Satire is verboten today. The restrictions -- political, religious and
every other kind -- have killed satire." His targets included telethons, the
F.B.I., one of whose operatives branded him "a raving, unconfined nut," and the
Warren Commission's report on the Kennedy assassination. His contributors
included Joseph Heller, Norman Mailer, a teen-age pacifist and a teen-age Nazi.

The Realist was scathing, silly and the rogue uncle -- if not the father -- of
The National Lampoon, Spy, "Laugh-In" and Doonesbury. "I had no role models and
no competition," Mr. Krassner says happily, "just an open field mined with
taboos waiting to be exploded."

Did Paul Krassner take more risks than Howard Stern takes? He did, but few
comics are better or worse than their times, and here Krassner had the
advantage. He palled around with Lenny Bruce and Abbie Hoffman; Howard Stern got
Sam Kinison and Andrew Dice Clay. Mr. Krassner could make fun of G. Gordon Liddy
and the Vietnam War. Mr. Stern must make do with Regis Philbin and the Federal
Communications Commission.

I hope Mr. Stern invites Mr. Krassner onto his television interview show, and I
hope Mr. Krassner accepts the invitation. I also want Mr. Stern to invite his
mother onto his show. One day, many years ago, she was driving her son and three
of his friends to school when they started making fun of blacks. "All of a
sudden my mother turned to them and said, 'Listen, boys, don't make fun of
blacks. I'm part black, you know.' There was a stone silence . . .

" 'Ma, that's not true,' I said.

" 'Oh yes, it most certainly is, Howard, and you shouldn't be ashamed of it,
either.' "

Any woman who can do that is clearly the source of her son's comedic gifts.

Don't be ashamed, Howard. Hold your head high.


NAME: Howard Stern; Paul Krassner

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Howard Stern. (E! Entertainment Television/Simon & Schuster);
Paul Krassner. (Jay Green/Simon & Schuster)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-Fugitive Gets 5 Years in '70 Armory Theft

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 552 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Nov. 24


Katherine Ann Power, the longtime fugitive and Vietnam-era radical, was
sentenced to five years in Federal prison today for her role in a 1970 theft at
a National Guard armory in Newburyport.

The sentence, handed down by Judge Nathaniel Gorton of Federal District Court,
is to be served at the same time as Ms. Power's 8-to-12-year state prison
sentence for a Sept. 23, 1970, bank robbery in Brighton in which a police
officer, Walter A. Schroeder, was fatally shot. Ms. Power drove the getaway car
in the robbery.

In the armory theft, which took place on Sept. 20, 1970, Ms. Power and several
accomplices stole a pickup truck, military radios, 400 rounds of ammunition and
devices for setting off explosives, prosecutors said. The accomplices were
caught and convicted long ago.

Assistant United States Attorney Brian Kelly said Ms. Power told the authorities
that the military equipment was going to be delivered to the Black Panthers.

For years Ms. Power, 44, lived in Oregon under the name Alice Metzinger. She
married and raised a child. When she came forward in September, she said she
wanted to face her past.

At that time, she pleaded guilty in state court to two counts of bank robbery
and one count of manslaughter in the killing of Officer Schroeder.

A week later she to pleaded guilty to one charge of theft of Government property
in connection with the armory case. As part of the plea agreement, the
Government agreed to dismiss Federal bank robbery charges from a holdup in
Philadelphia several weeks before the Newburyport robbery.

The Federal sentence imposed today roughly coincides with the time it will take
for Ms. Power will become eligible for parole on the state charges.

Judge Gorton also fined Ms. Power $10,000 and said he would consider a request
that she be allowed to serve her sentence in a Federal prison on the West Coast,
near her husband and son, if she would do something to benefit the survivors of
Officer Schroeder, who was the father of nine children.

But Ms. Power's lawyer, Rikki Klieman, today acknowledged two problems with the
request.

First the Massachusetts Department of Corrections determines where state
prisoners will be held and is under no obligation to honor a recommendation by a
Federal judge. Second, Judge Robert Banks of Suffolk County Superior Court, the
state judge who sentenced Ms. Power for the bank robbery, has prohibited her
from engaging in any actions that could earn a profit related to her crimes.

In addition to her 8-to-12-year sentence, Judge Banks sentenced Ms. Power to 20
years' probation.

Ms. Klieman said today that Ms. Power's probation officer has interpreted the
judge's prohibition on profits to mean that Ms. Power may not give interviews to
news organizations, which Ms. Klieman said was the most likely way for Ms. Power
to raise money for the Schroeders.

Ms. Klieman said she and the American Civil Liberties Union had filed an appeal
of that condition on Nov. 12.

Ms. Power told Judge Gorton today: "Regardless of any surrounding circumstances,
personal or historical, I broke the law of the United States and I acknowledge
that. I am deeply sorry for the damage my actions have caused, both to
particular individuals and to society. I will continue to live my life as an act
of contrition for that."

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. TO ENCOURAGE LEGAL IMMIGRANTS TO GET CITIZENSHIP

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1518 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 25


The Clinton Administration says it will actively encourage legal immigrants to
become United States citizens, a new policy intended to counter hostility to
immigrants.

The effort could enfranchise millions of people who have lived in this country
for years without seeking citizenship. When immigrants become citizens, they
gain the right to vote, to hold public office and to serve on juries.

Becoming citizens would also make it easier for them to get jobs as police
officers or public school teachers because such jobs are reserved for citizens
in some states, and it would make it easier for them to bring in certain close
relatives.

10 Million Could Be Eligible

The Immigration and Naturalization Service estimates that 10 million legal
permanent residents who are not citizens live in the United States. By the turn
of the century, this group may constitute one-fourth of the population in some
cities, including New York, Los Angeles and Miami.

Until now, the Federal Government has not promoted naturalization, and the
complexity of the process has probably discouraged many immigrants from applying
for citizenship. In addition, many immigrants express ambivalent feelings,
wishing to become part of United States society while also retaining roots in
their homelands.

Doris M. Meissner, the new Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization, said
in an interview this week that the new policy was intended to defuse tensions
over immigration.

'I Am Very Concerned'

"We have to do as much as we can to promote naturalization," said Mrs.
Meissner, who took office on Oct. 18. "I am very concerned about the
anti-immigrant feelings we see in various parts of the country and in Congress.
Naturalization helps counteract anti-immigrant attitudes. When people become
citizens, they accept our values, and most Americans are reassured."

The new policy is also inspired by the fact that three million immigrants who
gained legal status under the amnesty provisions of a 1986 law are just becoming
eligible for citizenship.

Sam Bernsen, a lawyer who worked at the Immigration and Naturalization Service
for more than 35 years, said the new policy had profound implications. "For the
first time," he said, "the Government will affirmatively go out and encourage
aliens to become citizens. They would then have a voice in our political system,
with voting rights, and could run for public office."

In the coming year, Mrs. Meissner said, the Government will work with private
groups to publicize the advantages of citizenship and to expedite the handling
of applications. In addition, she said, without lowering standards for
citizenship, she intends to simplify naturalization procedures and will seek
additional money and employees to review applications.

Hispanic and Asian American groups welcomed the new emphasis on naturalization.
But some lawyers, noting that the immigration service is already deluged with
work, say they doubt that it can efficiently handle hundreds of thousands of new
applications.

Large numbers of immigrants, especially those from Mexico, remain lawful
permanent residents for many years without seeking United States citizenship. In
part, that is because permanent resident aliens have many rights of citizens,
including the right to work and to obtain some Government benefits.

Mexicans, for example, tend to retain close ties to their homeland after
becoming permanent residents of this country. Many believe that they would
jeopardize the right to own property in Mexico if they became United States
citizens, but the Mexican Embassy here says that fear is unfounded.

'Naturalization Builds Bridges'

Mrs. Meissner said: "We have never been very aggressive in encouraging resident
aliens to naturalize. That has to change. Naturalization builds bridges between
new immigrant groups and the existing society, much as labor unions, political
parties and public schools have done in the past."

Charles Kamasaki, vice president of the National Council of La Raza, a Hispanic
advocacy group, said it would be "an enormous change" if the Government actively
promoted naturalization.

"The Government claims to have a neutral policy toward citizenship," he said.
"But because of all the obstacles in place, it is, in effect, discouraging
citizenship. Only the most resourceful, highly motivated people make it through
the process."

In general, lawful permanent residents may apply for citizenship after residing
in the United States for five years. They must show an ability to read, write
and speak the English language and a knowledge of the history and government of
the United States.

Federal officials say the Government can handle more applications if it revises
the process of naturalization, so private nonprofit groups do some work now done
by the Government.

In encouraging naturalization, Mrs. Meissner said, "We don't want to sacrifice
or neglect other functions."

Duke Austin, a spokesman for the immigration service, said the agency now
interviews all applicants to verify the information they submit in writing. Mrs.
Meissner said she hoped to make such interviews an option rather than a
requirement for the Government.

Plans to Cut Waiting Time

"A school could certify that a person can speak English," she said. "You don't
necessarily need a Government interview to do that."

The I.N.S. has 17,500 employees and a budget of $1.2 billion this year. Fewer
than 10 percent of the employees work on naturalization, and less than 10
percent of the money is used for that purpose.

At present, a person applying for citizenship in New York City must wait more
than seven months for an interview. In San Francisco, the wait is 10 months; in
Miami, 11 months.

Verne Jervis, a spokesman for the immigration service, estimated that there are
10 million lawful permanent residents in this country. The Government, he said,
has no precise count because it is not necessarily informed when immigrants die
or leave the country.

In 1992, he said, 240,252 immigrants became citizens, down from 308,058
naturalized in 1991. More immigrants come to the United States from Mexico than
from any other country. But only 12,880 of the people naturalized last year were
Mexicans. The largest numbers were from the Philippines (28,579), Vietnam
(18,357) and China (13,488).

Rick Swartz, a Washington lawyer who advises immigrant and ethnic groups, said:
"It's extremely important to be promoting naturalization. If we fail to do it,
there is an increasing danger of native-born Americans' saying these immigrants
are not loyal to the United States. And look to the future. By the year 2000,
more than one-fourth of the population of Los Angeles, New York, Miami, San
Francisco, Houston and Chicago may be disfranchised because they are not
citizens."

In Congress and in states like California, hard hit by recession, there have
been many proposals to curb immigration, to limit asylum and to restrict
immigrants' eligibility for Government benefits. Liberal Democrats have joined
Republicans in urging use of National Guard troops to help patrol the border
with Mexico. Gov. Pete Wilson of California has called for a constitutional
amendment denying citizenship to children born in the United States to illegal
immigrants.

Mr. Swartz is working with immigrant groups across the country to organize a
nonpartisan campaign that will help immigrants obtain citizenship. "This process
offers a tremendous potential for renewal of democratic values, a gold mine for
either political party that chooses to pursue it," he said.

Demetrios G. Papademetriou, director of the immigration policy program at the
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, said it was good for the Government
to encourage naturalization because people who go through the process "develop a
true stake in the country, in its economic and social progress."

But he said: "A lot of immigrants become citizens for reasons other than full
commitment to their new country. They do it because they can get additional
immigration benefits."

Citizens can easily bring in immediate relatives, including spouses and
unmarried children under 21. Citizens at least 21 years old can also bring in
their parents. There is neither a waiting period nor a numerical limit on visas
for such immigrants. By contrast, the spouses and children of permanent resident
aliens usually have to wait several years for permission to immigrate; their
parents get no special preference.

'A Breath of Fresh Air'

E. Richard Larson, legal director of the Mexican American Legal Defense and
Educational Fund, praised the new policy, saying, "We totally agree that
naturalization should be encouraged."

"Prior commissioners contributed to tensions over immigration," he said. "Doris
Meissner is a breath of fresh air."

Harry P. Pachon, president of the Tomas Rivera Center in Claremont, Calif., a
research institute that focuses on immigration policy, said, "For the last
decade, we had immigration commissioners who gave little emphasis to the middle
initial of I.N.S."

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

After Flood, Giving Thanks Simply

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 996 words

DATELINE: PLAINVILLE, Ill., Nov. 25


For Ken and Sandi Crim, this was Thanksgiving without the harvest, or home.

All that they had sown last spring -- thousands of rows of corn, soybeans and
wheat -- had been lost in the flood. They had been forced to sell their hogs,
all 400 head, since they no longer have a shed, a pen or anywhere else to keep
them. The two-story white clapboard house where they had lived for 17 years is a
mud-caked shell. Who knows when they will be able to move back?

But just as surely as they will plant again next spring, so did Mr. and Mrs.
Crim, and their three children, Eric, 16, LeAnn, 20, and Allison, 22, sit down
together today for the traditional feast. There were no elaborate speeches, just
heads bowed in the kitchen for a brief prayer.

With her family gathered round in her mother-in-law's home, Mrs. Crim, whose
hair suddenly went gray this summer, gave thanks simply: "We're together."

"And no one was hurt," added Mr. Crim, who had belonged to the volunteer chain
gang that for 25 days tried to hold back the Mississippi here, hurling sandbags,
running supplies in boats, nailing boards together to build a 1.5-mile wall
along the levee that had once protected some of the world's most fertile
farmland.

Didn't Want to Marry a Farmer

This afternoon the kitchen table was piled high with turkey, sweet potatoes,
boiled turnips, succotash, fresh-baked rolls and pumpkin and cherry pies. It was
at this very table, Alberta Crim recalled, that her daughter-in-law, Sandi, had
sat for 25 days straight, an unseen, one-woman flood communications center.

"She had a telephone in one ear and a two-way radio in the other," Alberta Crim
said.

Sandi Crim had imagined another sort of life. "I did not marry a farmer," she
said. "I thought I was marrying a teacher." Her voice was emphatic, but the look
she gave the man who had been her high school sweetheart, and for 25 years her
husband, was full of warmth.

She had good reason not to want to marry a farmer. "My father was a dairy
farmer," she said. "When I was a freshman in high school, the cows got some kind
of disease and they all died. We were done -- no cows, no income."

Ken Crim, 46, said he went to Western Illinois University, where he earned a
teaching degree only because he had no choice. "It was college or the Vietnam
War," he said. He was a carpenter's son who wanted to farm, and when the chance
came to go to work for a large landowner, Ted House, he wanted it.

His wife did not. "I said, 'No, it's tough, it's hard, there's no money,' " she
recalled. "But he said he wanted to and so I said, 'O.K., here we go.' " And
then she threw herself into the work of the farm, driving combines and grain
trucks and doing the books.

It has been just as hard, and as risky, as she had imagined. But the farm has
also brought her close to her husband in a way that, say, an office job might
not have allowed. "We're together 24 hours a day, seven days a week," she said.
"I could always look out the windows and see where Kenny was."

This fall Mr. Crim has been part of a flood cleanup crew operating under a
Federal job training program. He is paid about $6 an hour, with $6,000 the
maximum he can earn for the season. Mr. Crim, who says he despises bureaucracy
("I've never written a memo in my life"), had to submit to a mandatory
orientation.

"They showed us a film telling us not to pick up snakes and not to cut ourselves
with knives," said the man who has worked around animals and tools all his life.
"They told us they'd be counseling us to make sure we weren't grieving too much.
Thank God, they haven't caught up with me on that one yet."

In an icy rain this morning, Mr. Crim and Mr. House's son, Alexander House, who
inherited his father's land and says he considers Mr. Crim his partner, drove
their pick-ups through the mud that used to be a road to where the Sny levee had
broke.

Nowhere does the Midwest look fertile at this time of year. But this was another
planet: fallen trees, dead corn stalks wrapped around trees that were still
standing, acres and acres of chopped off stalks leaning in the same direction as
the current of the river that had flowed over them. And there was an enormous
beach that had been formed overnight from sand that had once packed the levee.

The sand -- about 300,000 tons of it, 10 feet deep in places -- is the second
disaster. Until it can be cleared away, the land beneath it is useless. One
semi-truck holds about 22 tons; Mr. House needs an army of the trucks. But so
far none of the Federal agencies he has contacted have sent help.

"They keep saying they have to have a meeting on this," said Mr. House, who
along with Mr. Crim and friends put down an entire road in one night during the
flood -- without a meeting.

Keeping Family Together

Back in July, when the river was rising daily, Mr. Crim had trouble meeting with
his own family. For one thing, they were not even living together. After they
left their house, Mr. and Mrs. Crim moved in with Alberta Crim. Eric and LeAnn
moved in with Eric's seventh-grade teacher, Lynn Sparks. Allison was at
Northeast Missouri State University in Kirksville, where she is a senior.

In August, the family was able to rent a house in Payson, about 10 miles from
here. Today the Crims showed home videos of the flood. There were scenes of the
levee workers, of what looked like an ocean washing over the farm, of friends
emptying the damaged remains of what had been the Crim home. "There went our
paneling," Mr. Crim said. "That was our carpet."

Eric Crim let out a whoop. "There's that stupid piano!" he said. "No one could
play it." The piano is one loss the Crim family does not regret.

Eric is his father's son: He worked beside him on the levee day and night. And,
despite the destruction he has seen, he says he intends to be a farmer. He wants
to bring in the harvest.

"If people stop becoming farmers," Eric said, "sooner or later, someone's going
to go hungry."


NAME: Ken Crim; Sandi Crim

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The floods washed away the family's income and devastated their
home, but for Ken Crim, second from left, and his wife, Sandi, second from
right, it did not obscure the occasion to give thanks. At the home of his
mother, Alberta Crim, right, in Plainville, Ill., the Crims shared a prayer with
their daughter, Allison, and a cousin, Dick Stewart, before beginning the
traditional holiday feast. (Jeff Roberson for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Jailed by Hanoi, Shut Out by Washington

SECTION: Section A; Page 34; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 374 words


More than 20 years after the last American troops left Vietnam, a sullen shadow
war still rages. Psyches on both sides remain haunted by extravagant suspicions,
diplomats barely communicate, and unfortunate people trapped in the middle can
pay a heavy price.

One such person is Do Ngoc Long, imprisoned and persecuted by Hanoi for his
associations with anti-war Americans -- and now rebuffed by Washington in his
quest for political asylum in the U.S. It would be particularly appropriate if
President Clinton intervened directly in the asylum case and spared Mr. Long
further torments.

During the war years, Mr. Long worked with the "Shoeshine Boys" project,
organized by American conscientious objectors to help homeless children in
Saigon and Danang. To Hanoi hard-liners, it was inconceivable that Washington
would have tolerated Americans participating in such a project unless they were
really secret U.S. agents.

Despite economic reforms, that kind of hard-line political mentality still
persists in Vietnamese police agencies. In 1990, Mr. Long was arrested on
suspicion of "activities detrimental to the national security." The allegation
was based on his supposed cooperation with another anti-war American trying to
end the U.S. embargo against Vietnam.

After three years' imprisonment and a campaign of denunciations in the official
media, Mr. Long was released last April. Both the Bush and Clinton
Administrations had told Hanoi that they were concerned about Mr. Long, and the
approval of his application for entry to the U.S. as a refugee seemed a logical
next step.

Yet in August, the Immigration and Naturalization Service turned him down,
suggesting that he go through the years-long process of applying for an
immigrant visa. According to narrow procedural guidelines, Mr. Long's arrest was
too recent to qualify as clearly political. Yet the propaganda campaign against
him suggests that he remains highly vulnerable so long as he stays in Vietnam.

Fortunately, however, the Immigration Service is ultimately accountable to a
President familiar with the powerful emotions of the Vietnam War and the
independence of Americans who opposed it. Mr. Clinton can help rescue Mr. Long
from the cruel shadow war.

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
An American Story

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 35; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 688 words


Fifteen years ago this Thanksgiving weekend a 10-year-old Vietnamese boy named
Viet Dinh arrived in this country as a refugee. He was with his mother, four
sisters and a brother. They had $200, which they spent on used winter coats.

They were boat people. They had left Vietnam on a small fishing boat, which lost
its engine in a storm. They drifted for days until they made it to Malaysia --
swimming in at night to avoid patrol boats that had fired at them. After months
in a refugee camp they were cleared for admission to the United States and flown
to Portland, Ore.

Two members of the family were left behind in Vietnam: Viet Dinh's father, Phong
Dinh, and his older sister Van Dinh, who was 20 then. She stayed behind to help
their father.

Phong Dinh had been a city councilman in Vung Tau during the Saigon regime. When
the Communists took over in 1975, he was sent to a re-education camp. He escaped
from the camp on June 12, 1978, and was on the run when his wife and six
children left.

Over the next five years Phong Dinh tried unsuccessfully 25 times to get out of
Vietnam by boat. He paid boatmen who never turned up or who were arrested.
Finally, in 1983, he made it to the Philippines, and then to the United States.

That left the oldest child, Van Dinh. She had helped her father pay the boatmen.
But it was six years before she managed to leave herself: on a boat that reached
Hong Kong in August 1989.

The family here knew that she had left Vietnam because they got a message to
that effect. But for a year they did not know she was in a Hong Kong refugee
camp; indeed, they did not know whether she had landed anywhere or had gone down
at sea, as many boat people did.

Van Dinh was kept in the locked Hong Kong camp for three years, waiting for
clearance as a refugee. With her was her 5-year-old son, Quan, who had a
congenital heart condition. That made her desperate to reach the United States,
but for years she could not even get an interview with those in charge of the
refugee process in Hong Kong.

At the end of 1991 Viet Dinh, then 23 years old, sent me an essay he had written
about his sister Van's plight in Hong Kong. I forwarded it to The New York Times
Op-Ed page, and the editors published it in January 1992.

Last month I had another letter from Viet Dinh. It had good news about his
sister. After his Op-Ed piece was published, other papers picked up the story.
The Hong Kong authorities, feeling the pressure, finally interviewed Van Dinh --
and found that she was entitled to refugee status. In September 1992 she made it
to Portland. The family was reunited after 15 years.

There is more to tell about the Dinh family, as I learned when I interviewed
Viet. His parents are running a small grocery in Salem, Ore. A sister, Anh,
helps them. Another sister, Thu, is an accountant. Kathleen and Leanne are
computer programmers. Viet's one brother, Bao, is an architect.

The child with the heart condition, Van's son Quan, has been treated in
Portland. He is doing fine.

Van herself, after 14 months in the United States, is studying at a community
college in Salem and working as an assembler in an electronics plant. "After she
gets her English and cultural skills together," Viet said, "I think she'd like
to open a business."

It is an American story, and one that I wish members of Congress and their
constituents who are fulminating these days about "the immigrant threat" would
think about. The Dinh family is doing exactly what immigrants on the Lower East
Side and so many other places did in past years: struggling for themselves and
making this country better.

There is no other country that has taken in so many people from so many places
and cultures, and gained so much in the process. To turn away from that
tradition now would do the United States great damage.

One more thing about Viet Dinh. His recent letter ended: "I graduated from the
Harvard Law School in June and am now a law clerk for Judge Laurence H.
Silberman of the U.S. Court of Appeals in Washington. Next year I clerk for
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor at the Supreme Court."

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By Laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 936 words



ROUND UP THE USUAL SUSPECTS
The Making of "Casablanca" -- Bogart, Bergman, and World War II
By Aljean Harmetz. Hyperion, $12.95.
The stars are dead but the film will live on, for reasons the author reveals.
Her study of what may be America's best-loved movie "deploys telling details and
illuminating anecdotes," Desmond Ryan said here last year.


LOVE MEDICINE: New and Expanded Version
By Louise Erdrich. Harper Perennial, $12.
The author has added new chapters to her first novel and also resequenced the
existing ones. What emerges is a fuller history of the Kashpaws and the
Lamartines, two families who are, like Ms. Erdrich, of Chippewa Indian ancestry.
The families' pasts have been intertwined for generations, and their members
tell the story. In 1984 our reviewer, Marco Portales, said, "These characters
might be unfamiliar to most readers, but Miss Erd rich makes us understand and
care for them through her selection and skillful presentation of the events,
details and attitudes that each of her well-conceived narrators relates."
Another author who draws on his Indian heritage is N. Scott Momaday, whose IN
THE PRESENCE OF THE SUN: Stories and Poems (St. Martin's, $9.95) has just been
reissued. Illustrated by the author, the book celebrates the life and legends of
the Kiowa tribe. "He paints rich and vivid images, word pictures that for all
their specificity, their 'Indianness,' speak to us all," Barbara Bode said here
earlier this year. The eponymous hero of THE ORDEAL OF RUNNING STANDING, by
Thomas Fall (University of Oklahoma, $14.95), also a Kiowa, is forced to choose
between his financial interest in the white world and his allegiance to his
people. When the book was first published in 1970, our reviewer, Martin Levin,
called it a "moving novel." The work of both Ms. Erdrich and Mr. Momaday can
also be found in EARTH SONG, SKY SPIRIT: Short Stories of the Contemporary
Native American Experience, edited by Clifford E. Trafzer (Anchor/Doubleday,
$12.95), along with fiction by 28 other authors, among them Leslie Marmon Silko
and Michael Dorris.
IN SEARCH OF ANTI-SEMITISM
By William F. Buckley Jr. Continuum, $13.95.
The author examines the role of Israel in American politics, concluding that
support for policies that undermine the existence of a Jewish state is indeed
tantamount to anti-Semitism. The book is "fascinating reading," Nathan Glazer
said here last year.
THE JOURNEY OF IBN FATTOUMA
By Naguib Mahfouz. Translated by Denys Johnson-Davies. Anchor/Doubleday, $9.95.
First published in Arabic 10 years ago, this novel by the Nobel Prize-winning
Egyptian author chronicles the odyssey of a Muslim man who visits several
mythical nations, only to find each one somehow lacking in tolerance. Last year
one critic called it "a slender, magical parable of idealism and compromise."
The Middle East is also the setting of CITY OF MANY DAYS, by Shulamith Hareven,
translated by Hillel Halkin with the author (Mercury House, $11.95). In this
1977 novel, a young Sephardic Jewish girl comes of age in Jerusalem in the years
after the British Mandate. The heroine's story is distilled into vignettes "that
can be earthy, lyrical, moving or funny," Martin Levin said here.
THE BEST AND THE BRIGHTEST
By David Halberstam. Fawcett Columbine, $15.
This 20th-anniversary edition includes a new introduction explaining the
author's interest in the origins of the Vietnam War. The "best and brightest"
were our nation's leaders, who allowed bureaucratic politics and a disregard for
history to sweep them into the conflict. In 1972 our reviewer, Victor S.
Navasky, praised "the artful use" of "insider anecdotes, vignettes and detail."
DOLORES CLAIBORNE
By Stephen King. Signet, $6.99.
This novel depends on the ordinary for its horror, exploring the mind of a
once-battered wife who may be responsible for two deaths. Mr. King "proves that
he can do more than simply frighten readers," Bill Kent said here last year.
A TERRIBLE LIAR: A Memoir
By Hume Cronyn. Quill/Morrow, $13.
This could be subtitled "But a Very Good Autobiographer," for the author recalls
his long acting career through anecdotes that are revelatory rather than
self-serving. In 1991 our reviewer, Ronald Bryden, called the book "an
investigation into what makes him tick."
THE INTERIOR CASTLE: The Art and Life of Jean Stafford
By Ann Hulbert. University of Massachusetts, $15.95.
Jean Stafford rarely allowed others into her heart, and the relation between her
fiction and her personality would seem difficult to unveil. But of the recent
biographies of her, "Ms. Hulbert's book best charts that interpenetration" in a
way that should bring Stafford new readers, William H. Pritchard said here last
year.
AMERICAN GOTHIC
The Story of America's Legendary Theatrical Family -- Junius, Edwin, and John
Wilkes Booth
By Gene Smith. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $12.
The Booths are probably better known for the criminal actions of one than the
acting talents of all, and this book, despite its title, won't change that. "But
small matter," our reviewer, Margot Peters, said last year. "The story rivets
you. You can't put the book down."
BATTLE OF THE BOOKS: The Curriculum Debate in America
By James Atlas. Norton, $8.95.
The author expresses nostalgia for the good old days when the "Great Books" of
Western civilization were not yet under attack, while also acknowledging the
force of opposing arguments. "Mr. Atlas makes us feel as Keats said, on our
pulses, what has been lost," Carolyn G. Heilbrun said in The New York Times last
year.
    LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: November 28, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1448 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   4   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 2      2  68   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 3      3   7   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                and a poem.

 4      5  14   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 5      4   9   LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) A sequel to "The Witching
                Hour."

 6      8   3   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A writer's happy
                family life is threatened by a madman.

 7      9   6   A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A
                young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in
                Victorian England's high society.

 8      7   5   DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) An
                architect-engineer gets caught between the warring factions of
                a clan that owns an English racecourse.

 9      6   5   THE FIRES OF HEAVEN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $24.95.)
                The fifth volume of a fantasy saga.

 10    11  33   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 11    10   9   SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two
                Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics
                and murder.

 12    12  12   THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) A
                sequel to "Griffin & Sabine."

 13    13  37   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 14         1   DARK MIRROR, by Diane Duane. (Pocket, $22.) A "Star Trek" story
                about an evil universe that tries to replace one of the
                Federation's starships with its own.

 15        44   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                illustrated cards and letters.

 16*        1   THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Talese/Doubleday,
                $23.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly
                reappears in their lives.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   2   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More
                comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 2      2   6   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 3      4  14   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 4      3  12   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 5      5  29   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 6      6   8   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 7      7   3   THE DOWNING STREET YEARS, by Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins,
                $30.) The former British Prime Minister recalls her 11 1/2
                years in power.

 8     10   8   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by
                Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of
                marriage.

 9      8   6   STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski.
                (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played
                Capt. James Tiberius Kirk.

 10     9   8   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 11    12  20   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A
                psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their
                effects on a person's self.

 12*   11  68   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 13         5   MORE MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Putnam,
                $21.95.) Stories about country music stars from the host of the
                "Nashville Now" television show.

 14    14  25   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 15    13   2   RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $50.) Photographs of and
                observations by the retired basketball superstar.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   7   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.

 2      2  28   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.

 3      3   2   AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with
                Bud Shrake. (Simon & Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes
                from the golf instructor.

 4      4  18   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 13, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND

THE BOOK OF NIGHTS, by Sylvie Germain. (Verba Mundi/Godine, $22.95.) In this
work of magic realism by a French philosopher living in Prague, the protean
world of the Brothers Grimm meets Nazi Germany.

THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER, edited by Mark Tucker. (Oxford University, $30.) A
fascinating anthology of 70 years' worth of writing about (and occasionally by)
Ellington, who clearly inspired powerful emotions in even the most sober minds.

EXIT INTO HISTORY: A Journey Through the New Eastern Europe, by Eva Hoffman.
(Viking, $23.) Seeking out the ordinary, a Polish-born writer with a touch of
American objectivity makes a tour of Mitteleuropa, returning with subtle
insights about a world in transition.

EXTRA INNINGS: A Memoir, by Doris Grumbach. (Norton, $22.) Well into her 70's,
Ms. Grumbach says she is trying to "learn to sit still" and mining what she
calls her "mental compost heap."

GENET: A Biography, by Edmund White. (Knopf, $35.) A monumental biography,
meticulously researched, that places Genet's literary vision squarely in his
homosexuality and confronts the mystery of how a man who left school at 12
became a great master of the French language.

A HISTORY OF WARFARE, by John Keegan. (Knopf, $27.50.) Mr. Keegan, the most
readable and original of military historians, argues that war is an omnipresent
cultural ritual of mankind, from which the ruthless modern notion of disciplined
total war was an aberration.

HONEY: Stories, by Elizabeth Tallent. (Knopf, $22.) In her third fine
collection, set mainly in New Mexico, Ms. Tallent's characters are tempered in
the crucible of marriage while their creator revels in comely language and
summons accurately the sensations of daily life.

JAZZ: The American Theme Song, by James Lincoln Collier. (Oxford University,
$25.) Starting with the provocative idea that there is no satisfactory history
of jazz, Mr. Collier pleads for musical literacy, rails against fan mentality
and smashes some popular notions.

NEVER STOP RUNNING: Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American
Liberalism, by William H. Chafe. (Basic Books, $28.) A historian captures the
rootlessness and personal insecurity of an aggressive reform politician from New
York who could accomplish almost anything except getting himself elected.

THAT'S THE WAY I SEE IT, by David Hockney. Edited by Nikos Stangos. (Chronicle
Books, $35.) The second volume of the artist's reminiscences, taken from the
tape recorder of Mr. Stangos, is a long, perky monologue -- autobiography
alternating with ruminations on vision and the reproduction of images.

WHAT IS FOUND THERE: Notebooks on Poetry and Politics, by Adrienne Rich.
(Norton, $20.) A distinguished poet's reflections on the work of poetry, its
social and cultural authority, its power to help us "invent what we desire."

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TOUT SHEET;
Handicapping the Scramble for an Oscar Nomination

BYLINE: By Caryn James

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1762 words


JUST IN TIME FOR THE HOLIDAYS, Hollywood is trotting out films about AIDS, the
Holocaust and Vietnam. You were expecting sugar plums? Forget it. Holiday time
is the kickoff of the Oscar-campaign season.

The studios save their best Oscar possibilities for December so they will be
fresh in Academy voters' minds. (Eligible films must open by Dec. 31.) In the
next month nearly a dozen heavyweight dramas will arrive. Tom Hanks loses weight
as a lawyer with AIDS in "Philadelphia." Oliver Stone loses the Vietnam War
again in "Heaven and Earth." Steven Spielberg may well lose money with
"Schindler's List," a black-and-white film about a German who saved Jews from
the Holocaust.

These uncheery subjects could use the commercial jolt of an Oscar nomination,
and the studios are set to campaign hard. Like any political battle, an Oscar
campaign is largely about spending money and spinning images. Voters will be
swamped with videocassettes; ads will run in trade papers like Variety. All
that's missing is Larry King moderating a debate between Martin Scorsese and
James Ivory: Will "The Age of Innocence" and "The Remains of the Day" cancel
each other out, repressing each other to death?

Here is a preview of how the campaign is shaping up. A theme to remember as the
race develops: Actors Who Work Too Much. The Oscar season has brought two movies
starring Anthony Hopkins, two Daniel Day-Lewises, two Holly Hunters, two Tommy
Lee Joneses.

And, when judging the Oscar race, it's best to keep in mind one of Mae West's
mottoes: "Goodness had nothing to do with it."

BEST PICTURE

Sure Things

"Philadelphia" (Opens Dec. 22) Advance word has ranged from "brilliant" to "a TV
movie," but none of that matters. Hollywood can't wait to congratulate itself on
making its first big-budget, mainstream drama on the subject of AIDS.


"Schindler's List" (Dec. 15) In Hollywood's sibling rivalry, Steven Spielberg is
regarded as the bratty little brother who has become more successful than
everyone else. That will help. The community's resentment is so well known, it
would seem churlish not to nominate a Spielberg film that fits the Oscar model
so perfectly: serious, noble and over three hours long.


"The Age of Innocence" Martin Scorsese's luxurious and subtle period piece is a
strong contender, though it was stronger when it opened in September. It has
done pretty well at the box office but is no smash and has lost Oscar momentum
to the more recent "Remains of the Day."


"The Remains of the Day" The latest elegant Merchant-Ivory film has English
accents, was released by a major studio, Columbia, and is making a lot of money.
A nomination seems guaranteed, and if quality really mattered, it would be a
shoo-in winner. But the winning film is usually about people who chew up the
scenery; this is about people who chew up their own insides.


"The Piano" Jane Campion's strange, beautiful, 19th-century romance may seem too
slow for some Oscar voters, but it is definitely art. Even more important, the
independent distributor Miramax knows how to run an Oscar campaign, so much so
that it got Best Picture nominations for such unlikely candidates as "The Crying
Game" and "My Left Foot."


Long Shots

"Heaven and Earth" (Christmas Day) There's always a chance that the automatic
Oliver Stone-Vietnam nomination will kick in again ("Platoon" and "Born on the
Fourth of July"), but the field is crowded and something's got to go.


"The Joy Luck Club" This film is the longest of long shots, but the "Terms of
Endearment" principle states: Never rule out a successful middlebrow weeper that
doesn't make anyone feel bad.

Shut Out

"Short Cuts"Half of Hollywood was in Robert Altman's loosy-goosey Los Angeles
story, but all of Hollywood was in "The Player" last year.


"Much Ado About Nothing" Kenneth Branagh's delightful, profitable Shakespeare
movie gets a big campaign, but the Academy has been there before with "Henry V."


BEST DIRECTOR

Sure Things

James Ivory He keeps making brilliant films; the Academy keeps nominating him;
it keeps giving the Oscar to somebody else.


Steven Spielberg They'll just get it over with and nominate him.


Jane Campion A true original and a woman. Who wants to hear more complaints
about how The Year of the Woman wasn't?


Martin Scorsese The right guy for the wrong reasons. He should have won for
"Raging Bull" but lost to Robert Redford for "Ordinary People." He should have
won for "Goodfellas" but lost to Kevin Costner for "Dances With Wolves." They
have to give it to him sometime, and he'll get points for stretching from
mobsters to Edith Wharton.


Jonathan Demme "Philadelphia" makes people cry and he could repeat his recent
win for "Silence of the Lambs," if he promises to keep his acceptance speech
short.

Shut Out

Robert Altman Still too ornery.


Brian De Palma "Carlito's Way" too slight, too deja vu.


Oliver Stone Did anyone say conspiracy?

Sure Things

Daniel Day-Lewis "In the Name of the Father" (Dec. 29). The Hollywood buzz is
that he'll be nominated for this flamboyant role as an accused I.R.A. terrorist
rather than for his restrained performance in "The Age of Innocence." Weirdest
scenario: He splits his own vote and isn't nominated at all.


Anthony Hopkins "The Remains of the Day." He's competing with himself, too.
Savoy Pictures will campaign for Mr. Hopkins as the English writer C. S. Lewis
in the weeper "Shadlowlands" (opening Christmas Day.) But his peformance as the
repressed butler in "Remains of the Day" is a classic.


Tom Hanks "Philadelphia." Widely considered a sure bet to win. The role is
sympathetic; he has to look sick on screen; this is Hollywood's safest way of
embracing people with AIDS.


Denzel Washington "Philadelphia." He's got a lead role so he's stuck in this
category, but he'll have a hard time beating Tom Hanks's showier role in the
same film.


Harvey Keitel "The Piano." The tough guy becomes a sensitive, tattooed Maori
wannabe, gaining votes for playing against type. Miramax will run a heavy-duty
campaign.


Long Shots

Tommy Lee Jones "Heaven and Earth." This should have been in the Suporting Actor
category, but he has that nomination sewn up for "The Fugitive." Voters love a
double play.


Laurence Fishburne "What's Love Got to Do With It?" Disney will campaign for his
great performance as Ike Turner, sending out hundreds of cassettes, but the
movie was a commercial dud.


Jeff Bridges "Fearless." Everyone liked the performance. No one liked the movie.


Shut Out

Al Pacino "Carlito's Way." He has done mobsters better, and he won last year for
"Scent of a Woman."


Liam Neeson "Schindler's List." Schindler is rumored to be the weakest aspect of
the film.

BEST ACTRESS

Sure Things

Holly Hunter "The Piano." Acting with one hand tied behind your back -- or in
this case with no dialogue -- always gets big points. Many people think she's a
sure winner for her portrayal of a passionate woman who refuses to speak.


Michelle Pfeiffer "The Age of Innocence." Holly Hunter's only competition. She
got mixed reviews for the performance, but the Academy loves her so much it has
nominated her three times before, last year for a movie hardly anybody saw,
"Love Field."


Julia Roberts "The Pelican Brief" (Dec. 17). She's another Academy darling and a
comeback story to boot. Though this thriller doesn't seem like Oscar material,
remember that she was nominated for the fluffy "Pretty Woman."


Emma Thompson "The Remains of the Day." Good show, but she won last year for
"Howards End."

Long Shots

Angela Bassett "What's Love Got to Do With It?" Nobody paid to see her dancing
and crying as Tina Turner, but who is left to nominate?


Hiep Thi Le "Heaven and Earth." A nonprofessional whose performance is getting
good advance word.


Debra Winger "Shadowlands" (Christmas Day). She gets to die, as in "Terms of
Endearment," but the film is a tough sell and Hollywood thinks she's a pain.

BEST SUPPORTING ACTOR

Sure Things

Sean Penn "Carlito's Way." He's frenzied and gets to disguise himself with dorky
hair and 70's costumes in an attention-grabbing role as a corrupt lawyer.


John Malkovich "In the Line of Fire." A realistically creepy performance as a
would-be Presidential assassin.


Tommy Lee Jones "The Fugitive." Everyone loved him as the tough, obsessed Lieut.
Gerard.


Ben Kingsley "Schindler's List." His role is on the line between leading and
supporting categories, but Universal's campaign will smartly position him here,
where competition is less stiff. Playing Schindler's Jewish business manager, he
has a good chance to win.

Long Shot

Leonardo DiCaprio "What's Eating Gilbert Grape" (Dec. 17). He plays a teen-ager
in a tough, showy role as a mentally slow character.

Shut Out

Ralph Fiennes "Schindler's List." He's a hot actor in England, and Universal is
floating his name, but he plays the big villain and the Academy will never vote
for a Nazi.

BEST SUPPORTING ACTRESS

Sure Things

Winona Ryder "The Age of Innocence." She deserves to be in the leading actress
category, but Columbia will campaign for her as Supporting Actress, avoiding
competition with Michelle Pfeiffer.


Rosie Perez "Fearless." A dramatic, unexpected role as a bereaved mother. Warner
Brothers plans a strong campaign, hoping to make her this year's Marisa Tomei
(last year's surprise winner, thanks to Fox's campaign for her in "My Cousin
Vinny").


Jeanne Moreau "The Summer House" (Dec. 21). Who can resist nominating Jeanne
Moreau, even for this small movie made for English television.


Holly Hunter "The Firm." A good and funny little role in a film that made tons
of money.


Anyone from "The Joy Luck Club" Disney insists it will campaign for all nine
actresses, and many viewers complain that they can't keep the film's four
mother-daughter stories straight anyway. Most likely candidate is Tsai Chin as
the crafty, straight-faced Auntie Lindo.

Long Shot

Anna Paquin "The Piano." She gives a rich and natural performance as Holly
Hunter's 9-year-old daughter.


Anyone from "Short Cuts" Fine Line will put up the entire cast of 22 actors and
actresses for Supporting awards. Women have the better roles, and the best
possibilities are Andie MacDowell, Lily Tomlin and Jennifer Jason Leigh.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Tom Hanks in " Philadelphia" -- The industry's first big-budget
AIDS drama. (Ken Regan/Camera 5); Ralph Fiennes, right, in "Schindler's List" --
The film fits the Oscar model perfectly: serious, noble, more than three hours
long. (Universal Pictures); Michelle Pfieffer and Daniel Day-Lewis in "The Age
of Innocence" -- Luxurious. (Philip Caruso/Colombia Pictures); Anthony Hopkins
and Emma Thompson in " The Remains of the Day" -- Certain to get nominations.
(Derrick Santini/Columbia Pictures) (P.24); Vivian Wu, Left, with Yi Ding in
"The Joy Luck Club" -- Disney will push nine actresses for a best supporting
nomination. (Phil Bray/Buena Vista Pictures) (P.25).

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ARCHITECTURE VIEW;
A Sanctuary, Yes, but This Is Not a Place to Hide

BYLINE: By Herbert Muschamp

SECTION: Section 2; Page 37; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1028 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


ARCHES SOARING INTO DIM infinitude, hazy light filtered through colored glass or
clouds of incense, walls inscribed with arcane symbols: in the secular
imagination, religion is often depicted as an architecture of obscurity, as if
to evoke a formless world that lies beyond reason or the grave.

The Metropolitan Community Church, a striking new building in Washington, honors
a different idea: that a religion makes it possible to see things with the
utmost clarity. This nondenominational house of worship, which was dedicated in
March, ushers its congregation and guests into a realm of literal and metaphoric
transparency: a place where space, structure and function have been rendered
into lucid, accessible form.

Social as well as theological convictions have helped to shape this design, for
the Metropolitan Community Church has staked its identity to an ideal of
openness. The congregation, predominantly lesbians and gay men, is linked not
only by religious faith but by belief in the value of being visibly who you are.
Many of its members have struggled against social pressures to withdraw behind a
mask -- versions of the "don't ask, don't tell" military policy hammered out in
this city earlier this year. The church they've built for themselves may be a
sanctuary, but it is not a place to hide.

Even the decision to create a new building was a kind of coming out -- since its
founding in 1970, the Washington branch of the Metropolitan Community Church has
met in borrowed quarters or in buildings designed for other purposes -- and it
took more than one act of faith to realize it. How does a congregation of 500
people raise $1.2 million for architecture? It sells bonds and prays.

Then there was community tension to contend with. In Washington, as in many
other American cities, gay people have been in the vanguard of neighborhood
gentrification. While some residents of Shaw, the low-income north Washington
neighborhood where the church is located, welcomed it as a community anchor, the
pastor, Larry Uhrig, and associate pastor, Candice Shults, worked hard to build
trust with those who feared that they would be displaced by an upscale invasion.

But the church took its most breathtaking leap of faith when it hired its
architect,

Suzane Reatig. Israeli-born, a woman who describes herself as not particularly
religious, Ms. Reatig had never received a solo commission before. But while she
didn't have a body of work to recommend her to the church's building committee,
she impressed them with her determination. And her esthetic convictions
paralleled the church's social mission. After toiling for years on residential
projects where she was often called upon to gussy things up with period styles,
Ms. Reatig yearned to make an honest building. No frills, no pretensions, just
the simple art of building well.

Together, architect and client have produced a prodigy of the Washington
cityscape, a building that recalls Maya Lin's Vietnam Memorial in its
enlargement of emotional impact through a reduction of formal means. The
church's main space, a 300-seat sanctuary, is the antithesis of Lin's sunken
black chevron: a glass-walled cube of light, the sanctuary rises two and a half
stories to a barrel vault of white painted steel.

YET THE ROOM RESEMBLES Lin's design in its power to lure the mind beyond its
finite physical dimensions. During daylight hours, the eye is drawn past the
altar, beyond the glass wall (and the simple wooden cross framed by its
mullions), over treetops, to the sky. At night, the glass turns reflective,
doubling the sanctuary's modest volume into an illusion of deep space.

The transparency of the design is further amplified by the exposed structure:
the steel bowstring trusses that support the ceiling; the cross-bracing of the
windows; the spare walls of rough-textured, "split face" concrete block in a
shade of dusty mauve. And it extends to the clarity with which the building's
envelope conveys the organizational hierarchy within. Supporting functions --
offices, lobbies, a library -- are wrapped around the sanctuary in a two-story,
L-shaped configuration, enclosed within walls of concrete block that stand out
against the sanctuary's shimmering glass expanse.

This organizational division has also enabled Ms. Reatig to adjust the building
to its urban context. While the vaulted sanctuary assumes a landmark presence
along the broad frontage of Fifth Street, the service wing holds the scale of
the residential buildings on the adjacent side street. The church wants to be a
good neighbor but not an invisible one. At night, the sanctuary glows brightly
against the sky -- and against the stereotypical view that gay life after dark
is an X-rated disco marathon.

Death is a vital presence here. In the Middle Ages and the Renaissance,
religious buildings were often raised in response to plague. The Metropolitan
Community Church provides a focus for faith in the age of AIDS. Ms. Reatig
speaks of being inspired by the Eastern view that death is the opposite not of
life but of birth. That idea is implicit in the design of a small chapel on the
church's second floor. Rows of niches are punched into the rear wall of the
chapel, forming a columbarium for funerary urns. The niches also overlook the
sanctuary below, as if the dead were part of the congregation. The grid of
hollow sockets reads like a statement of mission. Here, political struggle is
absorbed into a spiritual ordeal.

The chapel is the one place in the building where Ms. Reatig uses colored glass:
a single deep green window. Green is a color of life, but Ms. Reatig has chosen
a spectral, bluish tint. Light pouring through the window stains the room an
unearthly shade that brings to mind the tomb as well as springtime. The chapel
may be the church's true sanctuary. It speaks to a community that has been
ravaged not only by loss but by survival. Friends get sick, they die; and life
does not take a recess, nor does the plague abate. In this quiet grotto of a
room, Ms. Reatig has made a place for sorting out feelings shattered almost
beyond repair. It is a public space for private grief.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Metropolitan Community Church in Washington -- No frills, no
pretensions, just the simple art of building well. (Michael Geissinger for The
New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NURSES OF VIETNAM, STILL WOUNDED

SECTION: Section 6; Page 19; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 56 words


I found Laura Palmer's article "The Nurses of Vietnam, Still Wounded" (Nov. 7)
very moving. I hate to sound stupid and insensitive -- and male centered, I
guess -- but I had never thought about the scars of the war in that regard. It
was truly consciousness raising, if that term is still O.K.

 JOHN K. DELLINGER
Lititz, Pa.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NURSES OF VIETNAM, STILL WOUNDED

SECTION: Section 6; Page 19; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 83 words


Lieut. Joan Furey and Lieut. Lynda Van Devanter worked side by side with me in
the 71st Evacuation Hospital, Pleiku, South Vietnam, in 1969. I can recall
operating with a team of surgeons and nurses for 10 hours on an American soldier
who had an extensive head injury and received 72 units of blood, only to find
out that one hour after surgery he died. It is hard to recover from these
experiences without the support of your country and its citizens.

ALBERT HORNBLASS, M.D
New York, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NURSES OF VIETNAM, STILL WOUNDED

SECTION: Section 6; Page 19; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 62 words


I cannot get your article out of my mind. Although such an endless stream of
broken bodies and death is itself impossible to fully imagine, it is the rapes
that continue to haunt me. These military women and their rapists were supposed
to be on the same side of the war. It looks as if rape is just another way to
die by friendly fire.

LESLIE SCHWARTZ
Rochester

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NURSES OF VIETNAM, STILL WOUNDED

SECTION: Section 6; Page 19; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 94 words


We are nurses who care for H.I.V.-infected patients at Beth Israel Medical
Center. Your article struck a particular chord with us. War kills the young
primarily, and so does AIDS. We trained to be healers but AIDS doesn't allow us
to heal. We discussed this in our Monday morning support group. The nurses in
Vietnam had no forum in which to share their experiences. When they tried, they
were discouraged and reprimanded. We can go home at night. They couldn't. We
would like to express our support for these brave women.

DALE MANDELMAN
New York, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
China Chooses Not to Prod North Korea

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1032 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


AS brothers in arms, China and North Korea have a long history of standing
shoulder to shoulder against Western "hegemony" in Asia. Perhaps half a million
Chinese soldiers died defending the right of Kim Il Sung, North Korea's longtime
dictator, to commit one of the century's great military blunders in attacking
South Korea on June 25, 1950.

Today, the world is anxiously waiting to see how a much different China, one
desperately seeking an era of stability in which to lift its 1.2 billion
citizens to prosperity, is going to help North Korea escape its most serious
confrontation with the West since Harry Truman was forced to send a general
named MacArthur onto the beach at Inchon.

There are many signs that China's leaders are torn over which course to take,
whether to back the doddering, 81-year-old general in Pyongyang, thereby
supporting his quest to become Asia's second nuclear power, or join a United
Nations pressure campaign to stop him.

Either way, China could lose, and that is why few analysts here expect China's
untested new President and Communist Party boss, Jiang Zemin, a fence-sitter all
his career, to take a leading role in Korean diplomacy.

This month in Seattle, Mr. Jiang, in his first performance on the world stage as
China's leader, clearly demurred when Pacific leaders looked to him to exert
some influence on his North Korean comrades.

Instead, Mr. Jiang told Prime Minister Mirohiro Hosokawa of Japan in private
that China has little influence these days over Kim Il Sung and, therefore,
could not be counted on to change North Korea's ways.

This must have added to the disappointment of President Clinton, who has little
to show for upgrading relations with China at some political risk this fall --
including meeting with Mr. Jiang in Seattle. Afterward, he returned to
Washington to strike a shoulder-to-shoulder stand last week with South Korea's
President, Kim Young Sam, but avoided the more bellicose vocabulary that his
Administration has recently directed at North Korea. And Mr. Clinton held out an
unexpected carrot.

If North Korea allows inspections of its nuclear installations and resumes its
dialogue with the South, the United States would consider standing down from the
annual "Team Spirit" war maneuvers it conducts with South Korea -- war maneuvers
that North Korea, through its paranoic lens, views as a prelude to invasion.

Asian diplomats say Mr. Clinton's offer, including other incentives like aid and
the possibility of normal relations, was not self-inspired. Japan, South Korea
and China have all warned that painting the prickly North Korean dictator into a
corner is counterproductive. Mr. Clinton last week said he got the message.

Asian leaders also felt that the American oratory was too far out in front of
the politics. They say no Asian power, especially those most threatened by the
prospect of a nuclear North Korea, is now ready to support United Nations
sanctions for the simple reason that they won't yield any result except perhaps
a war devastating to the region's vibrant economies.

Japan and South Korea have made it clear they eventually may go along with a
United Nations campaign of pressure and sanctions, but neither feels the threat
has "ripened," as one Japanese diplomat said. After a briefing from Defense
Secretary Les Aspin in Tokyo last month, a Japanese official said, "We still are
not persuaded that North Korea has a full nuclear capability or an effective
means to carry a nuclear weapon."

Such statements raise the question of whether the Administration and its Asian
allies agree on what constitutes a North Korean nuclear capability. If North
Korea has extracted enough plutonium from its five-megawatt research reactor to
assemble one or several crude, untested nuclear bombs -- but is still far from
actually assembling a device -- is this a threat so severe as to warrant an
immediate United States-led military assault aimed at leveling North Korea's
well-dispersed nuclear complex? Presented with such a scenario, an Asian
diplomat will warn of the enormous flow of Korean refugees to the Chinese border
in a military conflict, or about how the peninsula's economy could be set back
decades, or of heavy casualties.

Now, as diplomacy approaches the brink over North Korea, the key players seem
focused on different schedules.

The United States remains riveted on the International Atomic Energy Agency's
inability to inspect North Korea's nuclear labs or assure the Security Council
that North Korean scientists have not yet tightened the last screw on their
first nuclear bomb.

The Long View

At a meeting next month, the atomic-energy agency may well conclude that, having
been thwarted since the spring, it can no longer guarantee North Korea is in
compliance as a signer of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. That could
trigger an unwelcome escalation of the crisis.

China's leaders seem to take greater comfort in focusing on the long term in
North Korea -- the prospect that the death of Kim Il Sung will bring an era of
change for a country caught in what Secretary of State Warren Christopher calls
a "time warp."

Implicit in China's strategy is that it might tolerate the development of a
nuclear bomb until it could persuade a successor regime to return to non-nuclear
status, as South Africa did under President F. W. de Klerk. A Western diplomat
here said that beneath China's noncommital statements on the need to avoid
pressure is the hope "that they can somehow manage the collapse of the Kim
dynasty and bring about a transition to a Communist regime that is more like
China or Vietnam, one that is open and interested in economic development, but
which is still Communist and retains stability."

If Mr. Clinton succeeds in his new policy of broader diplomatic engagement with
what seems a hopelessly isolated regime, he will have scored a major Asian
policy success, as well as a blow for nuclear non-proliferation. But the North
Korean problem may also demonstrate a new imperative about the new world order
-- that commercial interests and stability outweigh all but the most advanced,
the most "ripened," of security risks.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Seeking to avoid a confrontation with North Korea over its
nuclear aspirations, China pleads that it no longer holds much influence over
its long-time ally. North Korean President Kim Il Sung, center, and his son, Kim
Jong Il, right, appeared at the dedication of a monument earlier this year.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

John I. Dugan; Lawyer, 86

SECTION: Section 1; Page 58; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 124 words


John I. Dugan, a Manhattan lawyer for 48 years who practiced admiralty and
international law, died on Thursday at his home in New Rochelle. He was 86.

He died of liver cancer, said his wife, Marie.

At the time of his death he was a partner in the firm of Dugan & Rosen, which
was established at the end of World War II. For many years he was legal counsel
for United Seamen's Service, which has provided community services for merchant
mariners in foreign countries, including in Vietnam during the war there. He
also served as a special attorney for the United States Treasury Department and
the Customs Service.

He was a graduate of Creighton University and the Catholic University Law
School.

He is survived by his wife, Marie.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 29, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Opera;
Theatrical Vietnam: A Land Of Ghosts

BYLINE: By JAMES R. OESTREICH,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: WILMINGTON, Del., Nov. 27


"Tonkin," a collaboration by Conrad Cummings and Thomas Bird which received its
premiere this evening at the Grand Opera House here, is an opera with an agenda,
if in fact it is an opera. At first exposure, it seemed more a theatrical work
of an overreaching sort that has become familiar on Broadway, a simplistic
historical pageant of noble ideas and spiritual uplift.

The action glances on three eras of recent Vietnamese history. Act I deals with
the end of the Japanese occupation in 1945; the historical Ho Chi Minh and a
fictional young Vietnamese woman, Trung Minh Chau, aid a fictional downed
American flier, John Paul Scott. In Act II, in the 50's and 60's, Scott and his
countrymen are allied with the South Vietnamese against Ho in the North; Trung
shifts allegiance from North to South, then bails out of the country altogether.
Finally, in Act III, a Westernized Trung returns to present-day Vietnam, to find
a country heavily populated with ghosts.

Time was when opera was concerned with rounded, or at least one-dimensional,
human characters of however historic a cast, and their emotions, frustrations
and triumphs. Here the characters are mere symbols, seemingly bereft of intimate
human feeling, as distinct from, say, revolutionary rage. When Ho and Scott
reappear as ghosts, they seem no less real or more irreal than they did earlier,
for they were never more than concepts.

The definition of opera has, of course, broadened over the last decade or two,
to include plays of ideas. Philip Glass's historical gloss "Satyagraha" comes to
mind, if only because Mr. Cummings's musical idiom draws so heavily on Mr.
Glass's. But "Satyagraha" succeeded precisely because Mr. Glass's mesmeric
Minimalist idiom in its concentrated form ideally served the abstracted drama.

Mr. Cummings's toothless Minimalism uses Glassian snippets as mere
accompanimental licks that meekly shift and move on so as not to wear out their
welcome. Shorn of their obsessive point, the rudimentary tonal gestures become
insipidly sentimental and melodramatic.

Mr. Cummings samples musical history for techniques and sonorities the way
rappers sample pop rhythms. He builds to the end of Act I with a cumulative,
interleaving quartet and chorus that evokes Beethoven's great quartet "Mir ist
so wunderbar" in "Fidelio." But he carries on far longer than Beethoven did when
the idea was original and in the process reduces Beethoven's great liberation
drama to the mindless cheerleading and pageantry of "Les Miserables."

It is unpleasant to have to criticize a project so fraught with good intentions.
For Mr. Bird, in particular, who created the concept and wrote the libretto with
Mr. Cummings and Robert T. Jones, the issues must cut close to the bone; a
Vietnam veteran, he was the founder and artistic director of the Vietnam
Veterans Ensemble Theater Company in New York. "It's my hope 'Tonkin' will in
some way illuminate our differences in a way we can understand and reconcile
them in peaceful and constructive ways," he writes in the program.

Mr. Cummings expounds similarly, proffering opera as social therapy, even as he
tries to redefine the form. But the terms of any reconciliation are far from
clear. What are we to conclude when the work ends with a kicky little C-major
cadence and Trung's complacent "All's won"? ("All's one," get it?) That we
should embrace one another because, after all, there was blundering and cynicism
on every side? Cold comfort.

Opera Delaware, which commissioned the work, did well by it onstage, in an
economical production directed by Harry Silverstein and conducted by David
Lawton. Peggy Kriha, an entirely winning Trung, was ably supported by Perry Ward
as Ho, Matthew Lord as Scott and Kathryn Honan-Carter as a State Department
Representative and Madame Nhu.

The Opera Delaware commission was supported by grants from Opera America, the
National Endowment for the Arts and several individuals in Wilmington. "Tonkin"
will be given two more performances, on Thursday and Saturday evenings.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 29, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

John I. Dugan, Lawyer, 86

SECTION: Section D; Page 8; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 124 words


John I. Dugan, a Manhattan lawyer for 48 years who practiced admiralty and
international law, died on Thursday at his home in New Rochelle. He was 86.

He died of liver cancer, said his wife, Marie.

At the time of his death he was a partner in the firm of Dugan & Rosen, which
was established at the end of World War II. For many years he was legal counsel
for United Seamen's Service, which has provided community services for merchant
mariners in foreign countries, including in Vietnam during the war there. He
also served as a special attorney for the United States Treasury Department and
the Customs Service.

He was a graduate of Creighton University and the Catholic University Law
School.

He is survived by his wife, Marie.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 30, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 633 words



Markets

Crude oil prices plunged to their lowest levels in three years as OPEC's
inability to agree on production cuts sent the oil market into turmoil. Crude
oil for January delivery fell $1.07, to $15.31 a barrel, in New York, the lowest
since it traded at $15.06 in June 1990. The prices of gasoline and heating oil
also fell. [Page D1.]

Transportation stocks surged amid the drop in oil prices, but turned back down
late in the session. The Dow industrials lost 6.15 points. [D8.] Mutual fund
investors continued to plow money into foreign stocks, but interest in American
bond funds waned. [D8.]

Bond prices initially rose on the plunging oil prices, but selling followed,
apparently as profit taking. The 30-year Treasury bond Yield fell slightly, to
6.23 percent. [D16.]

Precious metals prices tumbled as the plunge in oil prices cooled fears of
renewed inflation. [D15.] The dollar rose against the Japanese yen but fell
against most European currencies. [D15.]

Companies

A growing number of hospitals are questioning the economics of throwaway
supplies, which are estimated to account for 80 percent of the $1.2 billion
hospitals will spend this year on operating-room equipment. The hospitals, under
pressure to reduce costs, also pay heavily to have medical waste carted to
landfills. [D1.]

Chemical companies could be exposed to renewed liability for the use of Agent
Orange during the Vietnam War. Veterans asked the Supreme Court to reopen
litigation involving the defoliant. [D4.]

Kendall Square Research shares plunged 33 percent after it said its auditor
could not vouch for its financial statements. [D4.]

Hughes Network will provide BellSouth with cellular-telephone equipment in a
deal some valued at $400 million. [D4.]

Green Point Savings sweetened its plan to convert to stock ownership, offering
depositors $50 million in extra interest. [D4.]

Plans by News Corporation to issue super-voting shares drew opposition from
Australian regulators and investors. [D5.]

The Putnam Berkley Group plans a new line of paperbacks, to be headed by Susan
J. Petersen, former Ballantine president. [D5.]

The Delaware Supreme Court agreed to hear an appeal by Paramount Communications
and Viacom of a ruling blocking their merger. [D5.]

International

The Japanese stock market fell further, hurt by deepening economic malaise and
concern that the Government had no stimulus plan. Analysts worry that the
effects could reach the U.S. [D1.]

France and Germany's stark differences over economic issues, coming to light in
the GATT negotiations, are expected to lead to considerable tensions between the
two countries. [D1.]

Japan agreed to partly open its market to imported rice, the U.S. said, clearing
one of the remaining hurdles to achievement of a new global trade agreement by
mid-December. [D6.]

Communities along the 2,000-mile U.S.-Mexican border warn that the roads,
bridges and customs stations that would handle expanded trade under Nafta are
already overburdened. [A18.]

Brazil began signing agreements to reschedule $35 billion it owes to foreign
banks and other private creditors. [D6.]

The Economy

The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether the F.D.I.C. could recover some
losses of failed savings institutions by suing an institution's outside lawyers
and accountants for professional malpractice. [D1.] The Court heard arguments
involving how much an airport can charge carriers to land their planes. [B8.]

Today's Columns

3DO and Atari hope to use new technology to shake the stranglehold of the
Japanese on video games. Market Place. [D8.]

Beefeater gin's ads by FCB/Leber Katz try to win younger consumers but keep
older ones. Stuart Elliott: Advertising. [D19.]

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 30, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Personality May Decide Who Heads Police

BYLINE: By ALAN FINDER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words


With Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani's search for a police commissioner
apparently narrowed down to two choices, the selection may reveal more about the
Mayor-elect than it does about the direction of the Police Department.

The two men described by Giuliani aides as the finalists -- the current
Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, and the Boston Police Commissioner, William J.
Bratton -- do not appear to differ significantly on major police policies,
several law-enforcement experts said yesterday. And since Mr. Giuliani, a former
United States Attorney, has already clearly articulated the directions in which
he wants to take the Police Department, the decision is not likely to have a
profound impact on the department, the experts said.

Among Mr. Giuliani's calculations, several experts said, is whether his campaign
pledge to make the police more aggressive against drug dealers would appear to
be compromised if he selected the current Commissioner, whose management he
implicitly criticized throughout the campaign.

The Mayor-elect, who promised to shake up city government, also faces a
political question: In his first selection of a top official for his
administration, can he afford to choose Mr. Kelly, who was appointed last year
by Mayor David N. Dinkins?

Beyond that, the decision may well signal the personal style that Mr. Giuliani
is likely to favor.

Both Mr. Kelly and Mr. Bratton support the shift toward community policing --
the placing of more officers on foot patrol -- which Mr. Giuliani says he wants
to increase. Both are also likely to back Mr. Giuliani's goal of having the
police make more arrests of street-level drug dealers.

"I don't think they differ significantly on principles," said Lawrence W.
Sherman, a professor of criminology at the University of Maryland. "I think they
would do things similarly. It may just be a matter of style and the approach
they take to getting things done."

Aides to Mr. Giuliani said yesterday that the choice seemed to have narrowed to
Mr. Kelly and Mr. Bratton, with a decision likely this week.

Mr. Bratton is a more flamboyant administrator than Mr. Kelly, and as chief of
the New York City Transit Police in 1991 and 1992, Mr. Bratton showed a
willingness, even an eagerness, to take risks and make changes, several
law-enforcement officials said. Mr. Kelly, on the other hand, has spent three
decades in the city's Police Department, has broad support for his management
skills and might be better positioned to make the changes Mr. Giuliani seeks
because he knows the department so well.

In many ways, Mr. Giuliani's choice could rest on his sense of the two
candidates' personalities: With whom could he work more easily?

A Matter of Chemistry

"Since both of them are so superior, it may well come down to just that:
chemistry," said Gerald W. Lynch, president of John Jay College of Criminal
Justice.

That Mr. Kelly and Mr. Bratton are again front-runners for the post -- just as
they were in October 1992 when Mr. Dinkins was searching for a replacement for
the departed commissioner, Lee P. Brown -- also indicates the strength of their
resumes and the dearth of other strong candidates for the demanding job. The
department requires the management of 30,000 people and the political skills to
navigate New York's treacherous political waters.

The lack of other candidates, especially outstanding police commissioners from
many other large cities, also reflects the high cost of living in New York.
"There are not many who would want to go to New York," said Professor Sherman of
the University of Maryland, citing the city's high taxes and high living costs.

"It's not easy for New York to get top commissioners because of the salary the
city pays," Professor Sherman said. In Los Angeles, for example, the police
chief is paid $150,000 a year, he said. In New York the salary is $110,000 a
year.

Galvanizing the Force

Mr. Giuliani's choice between Mr. Bratton and Mr. Kelly is likely to come down
to this, several experts said: Which man would be more likely to galvanize the
department?

The case for Mr. Bratton rests on his experience, particularly the innovations
he made in his brief, 21-month stint with the transit police -- including
introducing semiautomatic weapons and raising morale -- and his standing as an
outsider.

"Bratton is much more outspoken," said a law-enforcement official who spoke on
the condition of anonymity, saying that he admired both men and did not want to
be accused of lobbying for either. "When he first came to New York, he made a
lot of big statements. He backed them up, and a lot of us thought he was going
to fall on his face."

"Bratton is an outsider to the N.Y.P.D., and that may be the key," the official
said. "Bratton might be more likely to change things around."

More Restrained Style

Mr. Kelly's personal style is more restrained, but he knows the huge New York
Police Department extremely well. (It is about 15 times bigger than Boston's
2,100-officer force.) Mr. Kelly also has received three advanced degrees and has
won broad support as Commissioner from constituencies as diverse as the
Patrolmen's Benevolent Association and black and Hispanic members of the City
Council. That might make him more able to reshape the department to Mr.
Giuliani's liking.

"Kelly is in many ways the best of the traditional kind of police commissioner,
the 'up from the ranks' self-made guy who respects the traditions of the
department, but is not afraid to change," the law-enforcement official said.

The two candidates share many attributes. Both are Vietnam veterans. Both rose
through the ranks, Mr. Bratton in his native Boston and Mr. Kelly in New York.
They are about the same age -- Mr. Kelly is 52 and Mr. Bratton is 45 -- and both
have shown a keen interest and skill in management.

That leads some experts to speculate that Mr. Giuliani's judgment of their
personalities could prove decisive. "I would think that it would be the
chemistry between him and them that would determine the direction that things
go," said Dr. Lynch of John Jay College.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo:Mayor-elect Rudolph W. Giuliani's selection of a police
commissioner may well signal the personal style that he and top aides like the
police commissioner are likely to favor. Mr. Giuliani examined resumes yesterday
at his transition headquarters with Fran Reiter of his transition team. (Andrea
Mohin/The New York Times)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 30, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of the Times;
Gauging the Power of Nationalism

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 907 words



The Wrath of Nations
Civilization and the Fury of Nationalism
By William Pfaff
256 pages. Simon & Schuster. $22.

In his last book, the eloquent "Barbarian Sentiments," the journalist William
Pfaff suggested that America's efforts to remake the world in its own image have
led to disasters like Vietnam, that American foreign policy has consistently
failed to acknowledge the fierce and enduring power of nationalism around the
world. His new book, "The Wrath of Nations," more or less takes up where
"Barbarian Sentiments" left off, providing the reader with a succinct history of
nationalism and its consequences both in the past and in the years to come.

Like the historian John Lukacs, who addressed similar questions in his recent
book, "The End of the 20th Century and the End of the Modern Age," Mr. Pfaff
sees nationalism as the most powerful political force of the 20th century, and
perhaps of the 21st century as well.

The 20th century, he notes, began with World War I, "the greatest of all wars of
nationalism," and is ending with world attention once again focused on the
Balkans, a region whose distress, like that of the Middle East, "is the direct
outcome of the destruction of the Hapsburg and Ottoman empires in 1918" and
their replacement by a series of ethnic states.

But if nationalism informs the violence erupting in places like the former
Yugoslavia and the former Soviet Union, says Mr. Pfaff, it is also responsible
for the destruction of the two bloodiest movements of 20th-century history:
Communism and Nazism. Whereas Mr. Lukacs tends to regard Stalin and Hitler as
extreme nationalists, Mr. Pfaff chooses to see Communism and Nazism as despotic
forms of internationalism.

"They were resisted because they were evil, certainly," he writes, "their
cruelty, and dehumanizing force, awaked moral resistance everywhere they
touched. But the fundamental political force mobilizing resistance to Hitler was
nationalism, and this was true long before even Germany's enemies had grasped
the real nature of Nazism and its genocidal aims." In Mr. Pfaff's view,
Churchill's "indomitable Englishness," de Gaulle's appeal to a France "dedicated
to an exalted and exceptional destiny" and the patriotism of Dutch, Belgians,
Norwegians, Czechs, Poles and others prepared to fight in 1940 and 1941 were
what "halted Hitler and prepared his eventual defeat."

"Nationalism," he says, "proved as well to be the source of resistance to the
postwar Soviet system in Eastern Europe, demonstrated in the East German
uprising of 1953, the Hungarian Revolution and Polish mutiny in 1956, the
Czechoslovak 'spring' in 1968, and the subsequent development of Solidarity in
Poland and the dissident movements elsewhere. Outraged nationalism -- hatred for
foreign occupation and domination -- powered the waves of protest in Eastern
Europe in 1989 which culminated in the breaching of the Berlin wall."

In fact, says Mr. Pfaff, nationalism has long been regarded as "a progressive
cause, a modern movement of the popular interest against empire or dynasty, a
struggle against privilege." This attitude helped shape Woodrow Wilson's 1918
peace proposals and helped lead to the post-World War I partition of the
Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman territories, a decision that would result, Mr.
Pfaff writes, in the creation of "incoherent national states obsessed with their
residual ethnic and national quarrels" and contribute "to the disorder
culminating in the Second World War."

Yet after World War II, Mr. Pfaff goes on, "progressive hopes were again
attached to nationalism, with respect to the liberation of the Asian and African
populations of the European colonial empires." "It was generally held," he
writes, "that granting them independence was a moral imperative upon the
colonial powers, even if the new nations governed themselves badly."

In recent years, alternatives to nationalism have surfaced in efforts to enlarge
the role of the United Nations and to create a kind of European commonwealth of
democratic nations through assorted trade and economic agreements. Hopes for
this sort of international cooperation flourished in the wake of the United
Nations coalition to fight the gulf war, says Mr. Pfaff, but floundered with the
failure of the United Nations, Western Europe and America to deal successfully
with the current crisis in the Balkans.

"It was possible to see 1992-1993 as having terminated the postwar world," Mr.
Pfaff writes. "It was possible to interpret the Yugoslav war as a blow to
liberal internationalism equivalent to the failure of the League of Nations in
the 1930's to deal with Fascist and Nazi aggression."

Although such sharp assessments help enliven a text that intermittently
threatens to turn into a dry history lesson, some of Mr. Pfaff's other opinions
are decidedly eccentric. He argues, for instance, that North America would be a
better place if the United States had allowed the South to secede during the
Civil War. And he contends that the African continent's immediate future would
be brighter "if the international community would reimpose a form of paternalist
neocolonialism in most of Africa, unpalatable as that may seem."

Mr. Pfaff does not even make an attempt to explain such opinions, but tosses
them off as so much casual small talk. They ultimately distract the reader from
the many valid and thought-provoking arguments in this timely book.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: William Pfaff (Jeoffrey Gassen/Simon & Schuster)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 30, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

COMPANY NEWS;
Veterans Seek Revival Of Agent Orange Suit

BYLINE: By ALISON LEIGH COWAN

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 619 words


Vietnam veterans asked the United States Supreme Court yesterday to reopen
litigation against the makers of Agent Orange, which became the most bitter
legal dispute to stem from the Indochina war.

The veterans say they learned of health problems they believe to be associated
with the chemical defoliant only after a $180 million settlement reached in 1984
by other veterans with manufacturers and distributors of Agent Orange.
Effectively, they are arguing that their rights were traded away to help others
who simply had the misfortune of getting sick first.

The case could reopen a nagging liability that chemical companies tried to
contain long ago. Though it is formally known as Ivy v. Diamond Shamrock,
Monsanto and Dow Chemical are believed to have greater exposure, as they bore
the brunt of the 1984 settlement -- Monsanto, 45.5 percent, and Dow Chemical,
19.5 percent.

Other big defendants now include Hercules Inc., the TH Agriculture and Nutrition
Company, Uniroyal Chemical and Thompson-Hayward Chemical.

The Veterans' Star Lawyer

Adding to the case's visibility is that Laurence H. Tribe, the well-known
Harvard Law School professor, who has won 15 of 21 cases before the Supreme
Court, has agreed to help the Vietnam veterans try to persuade the Justices to
hear their case. Should the court agree, Professor Tribe is expected to
represent them.

He and Robert M. Hager, a public interest lawyer in Washington, are mounting an
argument that the Federal courts should never have taken the case away from the
Texas state court where it was first filed.

In addition, they say it is unfair to hold their clients to a settlement that
never benefited them, since they were in no position at the time to know they
were ill. The veterans argue that exposure to Agent Orange, a herbicide used
extensively during the Vietnam War to pinpoint enemy soldiers, is the cause of
life-threatening illnesses and disabilities, some of which have long incubation
periods.

Roughly 30,000 veterans who died or suffered total disability have, since 1984,
been awarded settlements averaging $3,200. Veterans who opted out of the
settlement process fared even worse, having had no success in trying to prove
their cases individually. Likewise, veterans who took ill only after the
settlement have been thwarted by the courts in their efforts to sue the
companies, most recently by the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit on Aug.
26.

Mr. Hager said the appellate court estimated at one point that there might be
several hundred thousand former service personnel who were exposed to Agent
Orange, counting those who already received some payment. Even if only 10,000
turn out to have strong cases against the manufacturers, he said the total
liability could reach into the billions of dollars.

Calvert D. Crary, a litigation analyst for Auerbach, Pollak & Richardson in
Stamford, Conn., disagrees, even though he bets that Professor Tribe will win.
"If the plaintiffs who opted out of the class-action settlement were unable to
prove their diseases were caused by Agent Orange," he said, "what makes you
think these people would have better luck? If the stocks do get hit as a result
of this, it might be an opportunity to start rooting around for buying
opportunities."

Richard A. Daynard, a Northeastern University law professor and a specialist in
product liability, said it was important that Professor Tribe had taken the
case. "Generally, Larry Tribe has a very good win-loss record," he said, "and he
wouldn't take the case if he didn't think he had a good shot at winning it."
And, he added, "There's a lot more evidence that Agent Orange causes diseases
than there was in 1984."

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 2, 1993, Thursday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Tuesday, about
efforts by Vietnam veterans to reopen litigation involving the chemical
defoliant Agent Orange, misidentified a defendant in the case. It was Uniroyal
Inc., not its former affiliate the Uniroyal Chemical Company.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Laurence H. Tribe of Harvard Law School is helping Vietnam
veterans who seek to reopen litigation against companies that made the chemical
Agent Orange. (Evan Richman for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

In School

BYLINE: By Michael Winerip

SECTION: Section B; Page 11; Column 5; National Desk; Education Page

LENGTH: 933 words

DATELINE: ITHACA, N.Y.


Aaron Evergreen waltzed into first-period class at the Alternative Community
School here and called out to his People's History teacher, Karen Adams: "Hey
Karen, what period is 9:30? Second? Woa, I'm going to be missing Banned Books. I
love that class."

It was the end of first semester marking period, and the juniors at this public
high school knew what that meant. "Self evaluations today," Ms. Adams said.
"This is an important evaluation. Quite often when people are sending packets
off to college, People's History is one they choose. I want you to write about
what you learned in the first nine weeks. I'm going to project and say I need it
to be quiet when I write, so I'd like you to be quiet."

There wasn't a peep, not even from the two girls sitting on the window sill.
These are very motivated alternative students. Many are shooting for the Ivy
Leagues. Soon, the juniors will be taking the alternative school's S.A.T. prep
seminar.

Started in 1974 at the end of the Vietnam war, this 260-student high
school-middle school is suddenly the future again. The State Education
Department has named it one of New York's 14 Compact schools, meaning it
embodies the values of the education reform movement.

David Lehman, the founder and principal, now has more requests for visits than
he can handle. "We try to hold it to one or two a week," he said. "We have
people scheduled into February." The school is being championed by a generation
of education leaders who understand that alternative is not the antithesis of
rigorous. In the 1970's, as a local administrator in Great Neck and Scarsdale,
Thomas Sobol, now the New York State Education Commissioner, helped start
alternative schools there.

The Ithaca school is deceptive. It looks laid back. Students sit in corridors
between classes. There is a daily meeting for everyone, run by a student. When
the principal had something to say, he raised his hand, and after a half-dozen
others spoke, the student leader said, "Yes, Dave?"

But to sit in class is to see how much extra work it takes by teachers to
produce courses that are entertaining and challenging for both the average and
Ivy League-bound kid. Three years ago, Dan Flerlage and Steve Hoffman set out to
remake their physics class into an algebra-trigonometry-physics double credit
course. The two science teachers spent an hour and a half daily planning for a
year. (They were aided by a small grant that allowed the school to hire an extra
person to free the two men for a period each day.)

Their new course starts with an eight-week unit on a car crash that asks
students to re-create the accident, calculating the speed the vehicles were
traveling. In this way students reinvent the law of conservation of momentum.
They bang bowling balls together and smash air hockey pucks, decipher a pattern,
then use the seven computers in the room (another grant) to develop a
simulation. "By the time they're done, they walk out owning that formula," said
Mr. Flerlage, who has an engineering degree from Cornell.

A side benefit: girls and average students who had shied away from physics take
the new course.

Mr. Flerlage felt he was spending too much time making students memorize biology
terms to pass the state Regents diploma exam. So he created his own test,
submitted it to the state and earned a waiver. Now, students who pass his test
get Regents credit. (A typical Dan Flerlage exam question: "Write an essay
comparing yourself to an earthworm at the atomic, molecular, cellular, tissue,
system and organism levels.")

Kids know how hard this is for teachers. "Dan would take two hours commenting on
each paper," said Kate Weisburd, a sophomore. "Other schools give you a letter
and give it back."

People's History sounds like anarchy, but Ms. Adams is firmly in control,
running a highly structured course. "Kids like chronology, they need structure,"
she said. When she finishes comparing the Articles of Confederation with the
Constitution, she does a lesson comparing the former Soviet Union with the
current federated states. By year's end, students have had American history plus
a current events course.

None of this would be possible without the principal, Dave, a 54-year-old Ph.D.
workaholic who has chosen to stay in one place 20 years. With the same
per-student spending as Ithaca High School, he has created a school with an
average class size of 16 instead of 25.

How? There is no vice principal and one part-time cafeteria worker. (Art Stark,
a teacher, prepares lunch with students, who get credit for culinary arts.) The
principal teaches a course, and classes run four days a week rather than five.
Because the school is small, teachers don't have hall or lunchroom duty, and
there are no security guards.

The principal schedules no classes Tuesday afternoon or Thursday morning.
Students use the time to develop art, music, drama or science projects or do
community service.

"We cover fewer topics in greater depth," the principal said. The school is too
small to offer advanced placement courses; students travel to Ithaca High for
these.

The reformers want to replicate this, although several teachers here believe
when outsiders understand how much work is involved to create a relaxed-looking
alternative school, enthusiasm will dampen. Even in Cornell University's
hometown, the school lost favor in the 1980's and might not have survived
without its fierce-willed principal.

For now, it is nice to be the future again. "The other day they had me do a
workshop for all the administrators in the district," Dave said.

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Croatia's Symbols Are Patriotic, Not Fascist

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 518 words


To the Editor:

I emigrated to this country as a child in 1954, joined the United States Navy
while still in high school, was graduated from the Naval Academy and served my
country for more than 30 years. I did not have a problem with our involvement in
Vietnam when it happened nor do I now.

As one of the "conservative Croatians" you dismiss for insisting that "Ustashes
were merely nationalists who gave Croatia its only semblance of independence"
(editorial, Nov. 13), let me tell you why I support the actions of President
Franjo Tudjman of Croatia pertaining to that country's new currency and coat of
arms with full realization that the President is a former Communist general.

First, most of those symbols you dismiss as Fascist were around long before the
Fascists; for example, the Croatian coat of arms can be traced back a thousand
years. Second, Ustashes were not created by Hitler. They were created before
Hitler came to power as a response to state-sponsored murder and terror
originating from Belgrade after World War I, just as now. The similarity is a
desire for Croatia to be independent and free, true in 1930 and in 1990.

Third, the Ustashe alliance with Hitler's fascists grew less from similar
political aims than from the support of England, France and Russia for Belgrade
without regard to its objectives or tactics, also true today.

No one can or should defend the atrocities committed during World War II or
those going on today. At the same time, one must try to understand how the
alliances came about and go past the fact that the victors write the history,
and realize that at least in the Balkans, atrocities happened on all sides and
started well before the outbreak of World War II.

This in no way justifies the atrocities, but it must be understood they were
started from Belgrade and were aided and abetted from London, Paris and Moscow
as well as from Berlin. Both times Belgrade determined the rules of engagement.
Belgrade allocates the blame, and whether royalist or Communist, the motivation
is to keep Croatia from independence.

If you read Mr. Tudjman's speeches, you will see that he promotes Western-style
democracy for Croatia with full rights for all minorities. Mr. Tudjman does not
support the World War II Ustashe, but he must recognize they came about to
promote independence. Ustashe, like today's leaders, used centuries-old symbols
to increase Croatian patriotism.

In your same issue there was an article on a report for the first time by
Belgrade newspapers of current atrocities by Serbian chetniks (known by the same
name and using the same symbols as during World War II), including playing
soccer with severed heads. No comment about the act or the symbols appeared on
your editorial page.

Perhaps you should concentrate on stopping today's genocide rather than on those
long past that are beyond influence. You can rest assured that if President
Tudjman even starts promoting genocide against minorities in Croatia,
conservative Croatian-Americans will be the first to confront him.

JOSEPH MANDICH
Seattle, Nov. 24, 1993

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 2, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

In Estonia, an American Tries to Turn a Gang Into an Army

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 892 words

DATELINE: TALLINN, Estonia


Among the volunteers of the Pullapaa infantry company it was a defiant, if
somewhat comic, act of patriotism: turning their weapons on their own
commanders, the mutineers barricaded themselves in their barracks during the
summer to protest the Government's failure to purge former Communists and Soviet
Army officers from Estonia's military ranks.

The rebellion lasted less than a week and ended without a shot fired, but for
Gen. Aleksander Einseln, a retired United States Army colonel and Estonian
native who was hired in May to command the country's fledgling defense forces,
it was one more reminder of how far he has to go to build a professional army
out of a ragtag collection of Soviet-trained soldiers and hard-line militias who
see Communists under every bunk.

"The problem is, a lot of these guys behave more like they belong to a street
gang than an army," said General Einseln, a 61-year-old former American tank
commander and Vietnam veteran whose family fled Estonia in 1944. "When I look at
the corruption and the mind-set, the political intrigues and the poor state of
training and equipment, I don't know quite where to begin."

Two years after Estonia and its Baltic neighbors, Latvia and Lithuania, wrested
free of the old Soviet empire, the three small Baltic republics have been busily
building new nations out of the wreckage of the Soviet Union. Along the way,
they have acquired their own currencies, a noisy free press, a quarrelsome
Parliament and an aggressive private sector.

Hostage to Its Neighbor

But as far as their ability to defend themselves, they remain hostage to their
giant Russian neighbor, with their frontiers protected by rival collections of
partisans like the Pullapaa troops and soldiers from the poorly armed regular
army.

"The current strategic doctrine of the Baltics would probably be best described
as the CNN-defense," said Ukka Knuuti, an official in the Finnish Defense
Ministry, referring to the Cable News Network. "The idea is, you resist just
enough so the whole world can see you have been attacked."

As it is, the Baltic nations have no real navies or air forces, and their last
large shipment of Western military assistance consisted of surplus Swedish
bicycles. Western nations, wary of provoking Moscow's wrath, have been hesitant
to provide the Baltic states with military equipment, and they are too poor to
buy much.

The regular army in Estonia consists of 2,500 soldiers, about the same number of
Russian soldiers still guarding former Soviet Army installations within the
republic. About 20,000 Russian troops, most of them in neighboring Latvia, are
the last, enfeebled remnants of the crack force of more than 150,000 Soviet
troops billeted in the Baltic republics when they belonged to Moscow.

Building an Army on $5.50 a Month

Most of the Estonian Army soldiers are conscripts, paid a monthly wage
equivalent to $5.50. The army is supplemented by a border guard force of about
4,000, as well as by the Estonian Defense League, an irregular militia of 6,500
volunteers.

Their presence also adds a level of political instability to the military
situation. When the Pullapaa company rebelled last summer, hard-line
nationalists in Parliament rallied to their side. The Defense Minister resigned
in the resulting turmoil, and Parliament refused to punish the mutiny leaders.

Still, General Einseln said he has cashiered some 1,500 members of the league,
as he tried to bring them under his command. "It was a matter of cleaning out
the crooks, thieves and adventurers," he said.

The situation is as unstable in the other two republics. In September, a militia
unit in Lithuania also rebelled, hiding in the woods for a week and then
mounting an unsuccessful assault on an army regional headquarters. In Latvia,
thieves have taken to dressing in military uniforms, then stopping cars on rural
roads to rob the occupants.

Fear of a Baltic Sudetenland

"The question of Baltic security is more of a political question than a purely
military question," said Hannes Walter, Estonia's Deputy Minister of Defense.
With sizable Russian minorities in both Latvia and Estonia, Moscow has sought to
link the withdrawal of troops to guarantees of fair treatment for the Russian
minority.

The fear, said Mr. Walter, is of a kind of "Sudetenland" scenario, in which the
Russians would justify an invasion to protect the interests of Russian nationals
in the Baltics like Germany sought to defend its invasion of western
Czechoslovakia at the outset of World War II. Before the Baltics can seriously
consider joining a Western defense pact, the issue of both the remaining Russian
troops and the Russian minorities must be resolved, Mr. Walter said.

But there is one other obstacle as well: to join the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, Estonia must have an army compatible with Western military units.
Estonia is the first of the Baltic states to move toward modernizing its
military, closing a $50 million deal with an Israeli arms supplier last year to
provide light weapons.

"But even then, we still have a long way to go," General Einseln said. "The
biggest problem is erasing the Soviet mind-set that still exists, which includes
the idea that corruption is acceptable and that officers lead by fear and
intimidation, rather than example."


LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 2, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 106 words


Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Bishop Thomas V. Daily's
plans for the Catholic schools in the Brooklyn diocese misattributed several
statements in some editions. It was John J. Convey, a professor of education at
Catholic University, not Bishop Daily, who said that pastors had lamented that
many Catholic students and their parents were not practicing their religion;
that the growing number of non-Catholic students had raised questions about
whether the schools would maintain their Catholic identity; and that many lay
teachers felt less comfortable than nuns, brothers and priests in teaching
religion.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 2, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 48 words


Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Tuesday, about
efforts by Vietnam veterans to reopen litigation involving the chemical
defoliant Agent Orange, misidentified a defendant in the case. It was Uniroyal
Inc., not its former affiliate the Uniroyal Chemical Company.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              205 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 5, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Notable Books of the Year 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 20484 words


This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas Books issue
of December 1992. The list suggests only high points in the main fields of
reader interest, and it does not include titles chosen by the editors of the
Book Review as the Best Books of 1993. Books are arranged alphabetically under
subject headings.

Art, Music & Popular Culture

 THE ART OF CELEBRATION: Twentieth-Century Painting, Literature, Sculpture,
Photography, and Jazz. By Alfred Appel Jr. (Knopf, $35.) Modern times aren't all
Eliot and Kafka, the author cheerfully argues; there's also Matisse, Astaire,
Chaplin, Teddy Wilson and a whole raft of dedicated life affirmers.

ATGET'S SEVEN ALBUMS. By Molly Nesbit. (Yale University, $55.) A scholar finds
political commitment and self-conscious intentions in the work of the Paris
photographer who has been interpreted as a primitive.

BLACK AND BLUE: The Life and Lyrics of Andy Razaf. By Barry Singer. Foreword by
Bobby Short. (Schirmer, $28.) An important, atmospheric biography of the
lyricist who wrote "Ain't Misbehavin'," "Honeysuckle Rose" and "Stompin' at the
Savoy."

BOMBSHELL: The Life and Death of Jean Harlow. By David Stenn. (Doubleday,
$22.50.) A scrupulous biography of the woman who could tangle with the best of
them on screen but in real life was passive and unlucky.

CHAUTAUQUA SUMMER: Adventures of a Late-Twentieth-Century Vaudevillian. By
Rebecca Chace. (Harcourt Brace, $21.95.) An amusing, intimate account of a
season with the Flying Karamazov Brothers on their annual vaudeville circuit.

THE CITY IN SLANG: New York Life and Popular Speech. By Irving Lewis Allen.
(Oxford University, $25.) A dense, reflective and occasionally nostalgic
dissection of New York street talk, old and new.

CHRISTEN KOBKE. By Sanford Schwartz. (Timken, $35.) Mr. Schwartz's portrait, the
first English book-length study of the Danish painter known for his small, quiet
landscapes, is conversational, affectionate and discerning.

THE COLLECTED WRITINGS OF ROBERT MOTHERWELL. Edited by Stephanie Terenzio.
(Oxford University, $39.95.) Essays, observations and pronouncements by the most
articulate member of the New York School of painters, illuminating the ambitions
and the ethos of the Abstract Expressionist movement.

CONTRADICTIONS: Artistic Life, the Socialist State, and the Chinese Painter Li
Huasheng. By Jerome Silbergeld with Gong Jisui. (University of Washington, $50.)
This gripping book about a landscape painter and his shifting fortunes under
Communism is not only a fine study of painting in modern China but an absorbing
introduction to the peculiarities of everyday life there.

CORNELL CAPA: Photographs. Edited by Cornell Capa and Richard Whelan.
(Bulfinch/Little, Brown, $60.) Pictures that certify Mr. Capa's statement of his
aims: to show "human beings, their lives, their habitats, their behavior and
their relationships."

CUT WITH THE KITCHEN KNIFE: The Weimar Photomontages of Hannah Hoch. By Maud
Lavin. (Yale University, $40.) An account of the work of the avant-garde artist
that illuminates new definitions of femininity and sexual roles in Weimar
Germany.

DANCING: The Pleasure, Power, and Art of Movement. By Gerald Jonas. (Abrams,
with Thirteen/ WNET, $45.) A lavishly produced cross-cultural history of dance
worldwide, companion volume to a public television series.

DESIGN, FORM, AND CHAOS. By Paul Rand. (Yale University, $45.) In this
collection of essays by the pre-eminent statesman of graphic design, Mr. Rand
compares his own beautiful forms with the duds of the day.

THE DISCOVERY OF AMERICA. By Saul Steinberg. (Knopf, $50.) The first book-length
collection in 14 years by a great and greatly intelligent artist, who came to
this country in 1942 and whose vision of America has lately become tougher,
grittier, darker.

THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER. Edited by Mark Tucker. (Oxford University, $30.) A
fascinating anthology of 70 years' worth of writing about (and occasionally by)
Ellington, who clearly inspired powerful emotions in even the most sober minds.

EPSTEIN: Artist Against the Establishment. By Stephen Gardiner. (Viking, $35.)
This polemical book defends at every point a major artist who all his life
defied bourgeois conformity yet managed to die the proprietor of a knighthood.
 FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT: COLLECTED WRITINGS. Volume 1: 1894-1930. Volume 2:
1930-1932. Edited by Bruce Brooks Pfeiffer. (Rizzoli, cloth, $60 each; paper,
$40 each.) The start of a projected six-volume edition of the architect's
literary output; the collection's star so far is the 1932 version of "An
Autobiography."

A HISTORY OF RUSSIAN ARCHITECTURE. By William Craft Brumfield. (Cambridge
University, $95.) A beautiful history, covering styles and influences from the
medievalism of the 11th century to the functionalism of the 1980's.

JAZZ: The American Theme Song. By James Lincoln Collier. (Oxford University,
$25.) Starting with the provocative idea that there is no satisfactory history
of jazz, Mr. Collier pleads for musical literacy, rails against fan mentality
and smashes some popular notions, including the idea that jazz was invented by
blacks in New Orleans.

JUDY GARLAND: The Secret Life of an American Legend. By David Shipman.
(Hyperion, $24.95.) A British film historian wins the reader's respect by
treating his tragic, pill-popping subject with sober earnestness.

THE LAND WHERE THE BLUES BEGAN. By Alan Lomax. (Pantheon, $25.) A serious and
committed folklorist gives a firsthand account of his 50-year-old travels by
steamboat, highway and railroad in search of the blues.

LOITERING WITH INTENT: The Child. By Peter O'Toole. (Hyperion, $21.95.) The
erratic memoir of a boy who escaped from the stench of a Yorkshire industrial
slum into the stuffiness of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts.

MAGRITTE: The Silence of the World. By David Sylvester. (Menil
Foundation/Abrams, $75.) This authoritative, deliberate, insightful overview of
Magritte's life and art, by an English art historian, is beautifully illustrated
as well.

THE MAN IN THE BOWLER HAT: His History and Iconography. By Fred Miller Robinson.
(University of North Carolina, $24.95.) An ironic look at the cheerless
trademark of modernism -- as worn by Oscar Wilde, Charlie Chaplin, Laurel and
Hardy, and Magritte's anonymous men.

MARLENE DIETRICH. By Maria Riva. (Knopf, $27.50.) Dietrich's only child tells
all in a book that startles by its sharpness of remembrance while confirming and
completing much that was already known about the disciplined, hard-working movie
star.

MATISSE: A Portrait. By Hayden Herrera. (Harcourt Brace, $29.95.) In this
admirable biography, Ms. Herrera shows that behind the bland and prim presence
of the painter was an utterly self-absorbed bully.

MONDO BARBIE. Edited by Lucinda Ebersole and Richard Peabody. (St. Martin's,
paper, $12.95.) A clever anthology of fiction and poetry inspired by the doll
that is the all-American totemic bimbo.

NEW YORK, NEW YORK: How the Apartment House Transformed the Life of the City
(1869-1930). By Elizabeth Hawes. (Knopf, $30.) The author asks what makes
Manhattan so different, so European, so un-American, and decides that it is
high-rise living.

NICO: The End. By James Young. (Overlook, $21.95.) The absurd final years of a
masochistic, monomaniacal, once beautiful singer whose heart belonged to heroin
-- as told by one of the band members who helped her stand up.

NOEL AND COLE: The Sophisticates. By Stephen Citron. (Oxford University, $25.)
One needed applause, the other didn't; one struggled to pay the bills, the other
didn't; one had serious relationships, the other didn't. But both of them were
gay, in every sense.

OPERA IN AMERICA: A Cultural History. By John Dizikes. (Yale University, $35.) A
curious and delightful unearthing of opera firsts, from Leavenworth and
Leadville to Stephen Sondheim.

PICASSO AND DORA: A Personal Memoir. By James Lord. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$35.) Life at the heart of the post-1945 artistic enterprise: what a genius, his
mistress and a shrewd memoirist did and said to and about one another.

PUSH COMES TO SHOVE: An Autobiography. By Twyla Tharp. (Linda Grey/Bantam,
$24.50.) A mix of the dead serious with deadpan farce, suffering with glory,
much like her own dances.

THE QUEEN'S THROAT: Opera, Homosexuality, and the Mystery of Desire. By Wayne
Koestenbaum. (Poseidon, $22.) A dazzling, high-spirited anatomy of the "opera
queen," the homosexual fan for whom opera is a passion and an obsession.

RHYTHM AND THE BLUES: A Life in American Music. By Jerry Wexler and David Ritz.
(Knopf, $25.) Mr. Wexler, the wily man who defined the role of the modern record
producer, reflects on a lifetime in the music business -- and his doings with
the likes of Aretha Franklin, Phil Spector and Otis Redding.

THAT'S THE WAY I SEE IT. By David Hockney. Edited by Nikos Stangos. (Chronicle
Books, $35.) The second volume of the artist's reminiscences, tape-recorded by
Mr. Stangos, is a long, perky monologue -- autobiography with ruminations about
art.

THE THEATRICAL NOTEBOOKS OF SAMUEL BECKETT. General editor, James Knowlson.
Volume 2: ENDGAME. Edited by S. E. Gontarski. Volume 3: KRAPP'S LAST TAPE.
Edited by James Knowlson. (Grove Press, $75 each.) Beckett's deliberative method
and concern for structure come through vividly in these working notebooks. We're
still waiting for "Godot," the first volume of the series.

THEIRS WAS THE KINGDOM: Lila and DeWitt Wallace and the Story of the Reader's
Digest. By John Heidenry. (Norton, $29.95.) A hugely detailed, engagingly
written history of a single bright idea and the "preacher's kids" who turned
that idea into a multibillion-dollar global enterprise.
 TO GIVE THEM LIGHT: The Legacy of Roman Vishniac. Edited by Marion Wiesel.
(Simon & Schuster, $45.) The sting of the nearly 140 black-and-white photographs
of Eastern European Jews, taken secretly between 1936 and 1938 to warn the world
of the Jews' doom, is that they are so understated -- portraits of ordinary
lives that would soon be no more.

TRAGIC MUSE: Rachel of the Comedie-Francaise. By Rachel M. Brownstein. (Knopf,
$30.) A discerning analysis of the life of the Alsatian waif Rachel Felix, who
dominated French theater and much of French society in the mid-19th century.

WHAT'S IT ALL ABOUT? An Autobiography. By Michael Caine. (Turtle Bay, $24.) From
the charity wing of a London hospital to "Alfie" and Prince Andrew's wedding,
Mr. Caine presents, in his own words, his fun-loving, philistine self.

Biography & Memoir

 ALWAYS RUNNING. La Vida Loca: Gang Days in L.A. By Luis J. Rodriguez.
(Curbstone Press, $19.95.) A chilling, unblinking testimony of the poet's life
in the 1960's, when he was running with gangs in East Los Angeles and the San
Gabriel Valley.

ANTHONY TROLLOPE. By Victoria Glendinning. (Knopf, $30.) A smart and winning
biography, stuffed with details that come from knowing all of Trollope's work
and taking the Victorians seriously.

THE BEGINNING OF THE JOURNEY: The Marriage of Diana and Lionel Trilling. By
Diana Trilling. (Harcourt Brace, $24.95.) A conversational, direct, dignified
memoir that perforates the hygienic Trilling package. The couple, once revered
for their reasonableness, also deserve high marks for coping with the
irrational.

BENJAMIN BRITTEN: A Biography. By Humphrey Carpenter. (Scribners, $30.) An
audacious attempt to provide psychosocial, erotic explanations for practically
every piece of music that Benjamin Britten ever composed.

BERTRAND RUSSELL: A Life. By Caroline Moorehead. (Viking, $30.) With the benefit
of newly available material -- including the diaries of Russell's wives and
lovers -- Ms. Moorehead plumbs the character, ideas and dubious morals of the
British philosopher.

CHARLES SANDERS PEIRCE: A Life. By Joseph Brent. (Indiana University, $35.) A
biography of a great American thinker that not only renders the thought but
explains the disastrous life.

COMING UP DOWN HOME: A Memoir of a Southern Childhood. By Cecil Brown. (Ecco,
$24.95.) Mr. Brown's story, redolent of the sights and sounds of rural North
Carolina at midcentury, also tackles the relationships, until recently little
explored, of black fathers and sons.

CURRICULUM VITAE: Auto biography. By Muriel Spark. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.)
The straight facts of a life sufficiently courageous but quite unlike, thank
goodness, the eccentric, elegant, mystifying, desperate world of her novels.

DANIEL BOONE: The Life and Legend of an American Pioneer. By John Mack Faragher.
(Holt, $27.50.) A fine biography, based on the best eyewitness accounts and
voluminous secondary material, of the man who led the first white settlers into
Kentucky in 1775.

DAPHNE DU MAURIER: The Secret Life of the Renowned Storyteller. By Margaret
Forster. (Doubleday, $25.) An insightful biography of the popular author whose
resentment at being born female never led her to challenge the social
arrangements that depressed the status of women.

DAYS OF GRACE: A Memoir. By Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf, $24.)
Reflections by the tennis star on the many roles he played: sportsman, protester
against racial injustice, person with AIDS.

DIDEROT: A Critical Biography. By P. N. Furbank. (Knopf, $30.) Twenty years
after Arthur M. Wilson's classic biography, Mr. Furbank takes up Diderot's life
again and shows us, engagingly, why of all the 18th-century demigods he is the
most humane and modern.

DOROTHY L. SAYERS: Her Life and Soul. By Barbara Reynolds. (St. Martin's,
$25.95.) By simply relying on her subject's letters, Ms. Reynolds lays to rest
the charges that Sayers was a classist snob.

THE DOWNING STREET YEARS. By Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins, $30.) Lucid,
wide-ranging, opinionated memoirs of the woman who was for 11 1/2 years one of
the most remarkable British prime ministers ever.

DREAM MAKERS, DREAM BREAKERS: The World of Justice Thurgood Marshall. By Carl T.
Rowan. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A syndicated columnist's ahistorical account of
the Supreme Court Justice who died this year at the age of 84.

ELIZABETH BISHOP: Life and the Memory of It. By Brett C. Millier. (University of
California, $28.) A lucid and sympathetic, if at times scolding, work about the
unhappy, troubled, proper woman who was once called "a poet's poet's poet."

EXTRA INNINGS: A Memoir. By Doris Grumbach. (Norton, $22.) Well into her 70's,
Ms. Grumbach says she is trying to "learn to sit still" and mining what she
calls her "mental compost heap."

FIDEL CASTRO. By Robert E. Quirk. (Norton, $35.) An indictment, often
devastating, of its ego-driven subject and his works, drawn chiefly from public
materials by orthodox scholarship.

FLY FISHING THROUGH THE MIDLIFE CRISIS. By Howell Raines. (Morrow, $22.) The
editorial page editor of The New York Times nobly describes his passionate
fishermanship and the fly-fishing guru who helped him attain it.

FDR. Into the Storm 1937-1940: A History. By Kenneth S. Davis. (Random House,
$35.) Mr. Davis's fourth and penultimate volume on Franklin D. Roosevelt casts
him as a weak leader in his second Presidential term. The encyclopedic
documentation is unmatched.

FRENCH LESSONS: A Memoir. By Alice Kaplan. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) In
this skillful and engaging weaving of inquiry and memoir, Ms. Kaplan evokes the
feeling of falling in love with a foreign language.

G. M. TREVELYAN: A Life in History. By David Cannadine. (Norton, $32.95.)
Trevelyan (1876-1962), a Cambridge historian and Whig aristocrat, hoped to see
decent liberal values established in Europe in the 20th century, but lived to
see them disappear everywhere.

GENET: A Biography. By Edmund White. (Knopf, $35.) A monumental biography,
meticulously researched, that places Genet's literary vision squarely in his
homosexuality and confronts the mystery of how a man who left school at 12
became a great master of the French language.

HODDING CARTER: The Reconstruction of a Racist. By Ann Waldron. (Algonquin,
$23.95.) The rich and intriguing biography of the editor of The Delta
Democrat-Times who paid the price for questioning white supremacy in the Deep
South.

IL DUCE'S OTHER WOMAN. By Philip V. Cannistraro and Brian R. Sullivan. (Morrow,
$25.) Margherita Sarfatti, rich, beautiful, Jewish and a member of many elites,
took up with Mussolini for 19 years, even writing books about how wonderful he
was. The authors' research on this self-made victim is deep and original.

IN NO UNCERTAIN TERMS: A South African Memoir. By Helen Suzman. (Knopf, $25.) An
anecdotal memoir of moral and political outrage by a brash and energetic woman
who fought the duplicities of South Africa's apartheid Government from the
inside, as a member of Parliament for 36 years.

KAFKA WAS THE RAGE: A Greenwich Village Memoir. By Anatole Broyard. (Carol
Southern/Crown, $18.) A nostalgic portrait of New York's bohemian life in 1946
and 1947, written by a book reviewer for The New York Times who died in 1990.

KING OF THE CATS: The Life and Times of Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. By Wil Haygood.
(Peter Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A balanced and broad biography that
has a sure feel for its flamboyant subject, who turned his power in a Harlem
pulpit into political clout unfettered by loyalties.

THE LANCE AND THE SHIELD: The Life and Times of Sitting Bull. By Robert M.
Utley. (John Macrae/Holt, $25.) Using every available source, Mr. Utley has
written a careful and clear biography that turns the icon of the Lakota
resistance into a flesh-and-blood man.

LENI RIEFENSTAHL: A Memoir. By Leni Riefenstahl. (St. Martin's, $35.) That she
put her art at the service of the Nazis is not seriously addressed in this
nevertheless spellbinding autobiography by the film maker, actress, mountaineer,
dancer and all-round uberachiever.

LIFE WORK. By Donald Hall. (Beacon, $15.) Donald Hall, a poet and writer who has
done many things well and who now, at 65, faces a mortal illness, tells us what
he thinks matters about himself in this sort-of-autobiography.

LINCOLN: An Illustrated Biography. By Philip B. Kunhardt Jr., Philip B. Kunhardt
3d and Peter W. Kunhardt. (Knopf, $50.) Powerful images, mostly from the
authors' family's archives, dominate this companion volume to ABC's Lincoln
documentary.

THE LONG-DISTANCE RUNNER: An Autobiography. By Tony Richardson. (Morrow, $25.)
This high-spirited memoir carries the film maker, who died of AIDS in 1991, up
to 1985 and reads like the ruminations of a man counting up his good times for
the last time.

THE MAN WHO WASN'T MAIGRET: A Portrait of Georges Simenon. By Patrick Marnham.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.) A thoughtful, convincing account of a man whose
diligence -- 76 Maigret books, 117 other "serious" novels and more than 200
others -- makes his claim to have made love to 10,000 women seem plausible.
After his mother died, he stopped writing. Odd.

MARGUERITE YOURCENAR: Inventing a Life. By Josyane Savigneau. (University of
Chicago, $25.) Yourcenar (1903-87), author of "Memoirs of Hadrian," intense,
cerebral, fascinated by sexual ambiguity, has found a perfect biographer in the
patient, wise, industrious Ms. Savigneau.

MARY RENAULT: A Biography. By David Sweetman. (Harcourt Brace, $24.95.) A kindly
account of the author who disdained to preach the liberal attitude toward
homosexuality that is implicit in her splendid historical novels.

MUDDY BOOTS AND RED SOCKS: A Reporter's Life. By Malcolm W. Browne. (Times
Books/ Random House, $23.) The memoir of a bold foreign correspondent who has
seen 20th-century mayhem from Indochina to the Persian Gulf.

NEVER STOP RUNNING: Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American
Liberalism. By William H. Chafe. (Basic Books, $28.) A historian captures the
rootlessness and personal insecurity of an aggressive reform politician from New
York who could accomplish almost anything except getting himself elected.

NEW YORK DAYS. By Willie Morris. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) Mr. Morris's memoir of
his star-crossed romance with Harper's Magazine, where he became editor in chief
in 1967, just in time for the weirdest part of the 60's, and held on till 1971.

OTTOLINE MORRELL: Life on the Grand Scale. By Miranda Seymour. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, $30.) The languid and affected bohemian whom Bloomsbury writers loved to
loathe gets a sympathetic hearing at last.

PACK MY BAG: A Self-Portrait. By Henry Green. (New Directions, $18.95.) All of
his early life the enigmatic novelist chose to reveal. Published in Britain in
1940.

THE PASSION OF MICHEL FOUCAULT. By James Miller. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.)
Neither a biography nor a survey but a narrative analysis of Foucault's quest to
transcend the constructed realities of life through extreme sexual experiences.

PHILIP LARKIN: A Writer's Life. By Andrew Motion. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$35.) Pre-eminently the modern poet of death, Larkin in this biography by a poet
and friend is overtaken in life by the postures of his poetry.

PRESIDENT KENNEDY: Profile of Power. By Richard Reeves. (Simon & Schuster, $30.)
A journalist's judicious appraisal that casts Kennedy as a pragmatic cold-war
power broker and a manager of international confrontation.

REMEMBERING DENNY. By Calvin Trillin. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.) Though in
the end Roger (Denny) Hansen remains elusive, Mr. Trillin's protest against the
unfulfilled promise of an all-American guy who became an isolated crank and then
took his own life is provocative.

SADE: A Biography. By Maurice Lever. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) A life of
the French aristocrat and novelist (1740-1814) so wicked they renamed wickedness
in his honor, so to speak.

SECOND SIGHT. By Robert V. Hine. (University of California, $20.) A splendid,
highly literate personal account by the fortunate recipient of a miracle, a
distinguished historian who slowly lost his eyesight and suddenly got it back.

THIS I CANNOT FORGET: The Memoirs of Nikolai Bukharin's Widow. By Anna Larina.
(Norton, $24.95.) After her husband's execution by Stalin in 1938, Ms. Larina
survived more than 20 years in the gulag to write this lyrical memoir of a love
that inspired her and of the doings of Bolshevism's inner circles.

THIS LITTLE LIGHT OF MINE: The Life of Fannie Lou Hamer. By Kay Mills. (Dutton,
$24.) A full and riveting biography of the woman whose life, from 1962 until her
death in 1977, was inseparable from the Mississippi civil rights movement.

TRACINGS: A Book of Partial Portraits. By Paul Horgan. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$22.) An appreciator's delightful sketches: Edmund Wilson's reluctant handshake,
Chaliapin swabbing cold cream on his face, and lots of reverence for Igor
Stravinsky, T. S. Eliot, Alice Longworth, Minnie Maddern Fiske and others.

TRANSLATED WOMAN: Crossing the Border With Esperanza's Story. By Ruth Behar.
(Beacon, $25.) An experimental ethnographic biography in two parts -- one about
the short-fused, furious Mexican Indian woman who manages to use the author, an
anthropologist, to take revenge on her disdainful neighbors; the other about the
anthropologist's own rage and redemption.

TSVETAEVA. By Viktoria Schweitzer. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) The life and
apocalyptic times (1892-1941) of a great Russian poet, a woman no revolution
could contain.

TURMOIL AND TRIUMPH: My Years as Secretary of State. By George P. Shultz.
(Robert Stewart/Scribners, $30.) Mr. Shultz defends the incremental procedures
that led to good relations between President Ronald Reagan and the former Evil
Empire.

THE WARBURGS: The Twentieth-Century Odyssey of a Remarkable Jewish Family. By
Ron Chernow. (Random House, $30.) Mr. Chernow's vast Warburg saga follows the
fates of a rich, thoroughly secularized German Jewish family betrayed by the
nation and culture they loved.

WILL ROGERS: A Biography. By Ben Yagoda. (Knopf, $27.50.) In this biography the
humor of the amiable, ridiculously successful and beloved fellow is suffused
with the sadness that comes of realizing that he lived and died in gentler
times.

Business & Economics

 BEAR TRAP: Why Wall Street Doesn't Work. By Paul Gibson. (Atlantic Monthly,
$22.) Mr. Gibson, a veteran financial journalist, contends that mismanagement,
inflated pay and shoddy ethics are slowly strangling Wall Street.

BEATING THE STREET: The Best-Selling Author of "One Up on Wall Street" Shows You
How to Pick Winning Stocks and Develop a Strategy for Mutual Funds. By Peter
Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A homespun strategy for
investing from the former manager of the Magellan Fund: find a business that's
booming and buy its stock.

BIG BLUES: The Unmaking of IBM. By Paul Carroll. (Crown, $24.) This devastating
portrait of IBM and its slow, self-inflicted decline captures the rules and
rituals of the perfect corporate culture, right down to the bureaucratization of
company jokes.

BLOW: How a Small-Town Boy Made $100 Million With the Medellin Cartel and Lost
It All. By Bruce Porter. (HarperCollins, $20.) A former editor and writer for
Newsweek relates, with great affection, the improbable adventures of an affable
drug smuggler named George Jung.

THE COST OF TALENT: How Executives and Professionals Are Paid and How It Affects
America. By Derek Bok. (Free Press, $22.95.) Mr. Bok, formerly president of
Harvard, examines, documents and analyzes the trends that have given David
Letterman an income more than 50 times that of President Clinton.

THE ENDANGERED AMERICAN DREAM: How to Stop the United States From Becoming a
Third World Country and How to Win the Geo-Economic Struggle for Industrial
Supremacy. By Edward N. Luttwak. (Simon & Schuster, $24.) A plea, or more
accurately a demand, for an economic diplomacy red in tooth and claw.

FOR GOD, COUNTRY AND COCA-COLA: The Unauthorized History of the Great American
Soft Drink and the Company That Makes It. By Mark Pendergrast. (Scribners,
$27.50.) Everything knowable about the potation of the 20th century.

FULL FAITH AND CREDIT: The Great S&L Debacle and Other Washington Sagas. By L.
William Seidman. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) The former chairman of the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation gives an engaging account of how the
banking system fell apart.

GAME OVER: How Nintendo Zapped an American Industry, Captured Your Dollars, and
Enslaved Your Children. By David Sheff. (Random House, $25.) A nuts-and-bolts
history of the world-bestriding Japanese video game colossus.

THE LAST EMPIRE: De Beers, Diamonds, and the World. By Stefan Kanfer. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $25.) A lively history of the world's most enduring cartel and
its control of the diamond market, regardless of war, peace or revolution.

MURDOCH. By William Shawcross. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) A sprightly life of
the media emperor Rupert Murdoch, portrayed as an un demonized capitalist more
dedicated to making money than to ruling the world through journalism.

NIGHTMARE ON WALL STREET: Salomon Brothers and the Corruption of the
Marketplace. By Martin Mayer. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A history of the
investment firm, with an emphasis on its transgressions in the 1980's and
1990's.

POST-CAPITALIST SOCIETY. By Peter F. Drucker. (Harper Business/HarperCollins,
$25.) Like a star professor, Mr. Drucker lectures sweepingly about the
transition from the Age of Capitalism to the Age of the Knowledge Society, from
the decline of the megastate to the rise of organizations.

S&L HELL: The People and the Politics Behind the $1 Trillion Savings and Loan
Scandal. By Kathleen Day. (Norton, $24.95.) Ms. Day, who covered the affair for
The Washington Post, analyzes the fiasco she says could cost $13 billion a year
in interest forever.

21ST CENTURY CAPITALISM. By Robert Heilbroner. (Norton, $17.95.) In a pleasing
and penetrable style, a distinguished economist argues that the collapse of
Soviet Communism defeated the socialist vision and cleared the way for
capitalism and unbridled acquisitiveness to dominate the entire world.

UNDUE INFLUENCE: The Epic Battle for the Johnson & Johnson Fortune. By David
Margolick. (Morrow, $23.) Mr. Margolick, a Times reporter, skillfully explicates
the fabulous litigation between the wife and the offspring of a man who left
$402 million.

Children's Books

 THE DRAGONS ARE SINGING TONIGHT. By Jack Prelutsky. Illustrated by Peter Sis.
(Greenwillow. $15.) Spiny rhymes about dragons and enchanting illustrations that
include dragons in the bath and under the weather. (Ages 5 and up)

FOR THE LIFE OF LAETITIA. By Merle Hodge. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $15.) To
attend secondary school, Laetitia must leave her loving extended family in rural
Trinidad and board in town with her abusive father and his new wife and family.
The taut, lyrical novel captures the social and personal stress she experiences
as she comes of age. (Ages 12 and up)

FREEDOM'S CHILDREN: Young Civil Rights Activists Tell Their Own Stories. By
Ellen Levine. (Putnam, $16.95.) This wonderful account of the civil rights
movement is told episodically and chronologically through the experiences of 30
black Americans who were children or teen-agers in that period. (Ages 12 and up)

GRANDFATHER'S JOURNEY. Written and illustrated by Allen Say. (Houghton Mifflin,
$16.95.) In this carefully written and beautifully illustrated story, the
narrator tells about his Japanese grandfather who "went to see the world,"
settled in California, then returned to Japan. (Ages 4 to 8)

HUNTING THE WHITE COW. By Tres Seymour. Illustrated by Wendy Anderson Halperin.
(Orchard, $15.95.) Set in the hills of southern Kentucky sometime during the
Depression, this laconic story is about a white cow with a mind of her own who
"went wild." (Ages 4 to 7)

I'LL SEE YOU IN MY DREAMS. By Mavis Jukes. Illustrated by Stacey Schuett.
(Knopf, $15.) This storybook about a little girl who goes to visit her dying
uncle provides lasting and evocative metaphors for saying goodbye, combining
transcendent, elegiac prose and dreamy, painterly illustrations. (Ages 7 to 11)

LYDIA, QUEEN OF PALESTINE. By Uri Orlev. Translated by Hillel Halkin. (Houghton
Mifflin, $13.95.) A feisty young Romanian heroine, sent to Palestine during
World War II, wages her own hilarious private wars. (Ages 10 to 14)

THE MYSTERY OF THE CUPBOARD. By Lynne Reid Banks. (Morrow, $13.95.) The fourth
novel about Omri, the appealing British schoolboy, his family, his friends and
the small plastic creatures that come to life in the cupboard, contains the
story of Omri's splendid great-great-aunt, Jessica Charlotte Driscoll, an
extraordinary character. (Ages 10 and up)

SHIZUKO'S DAUGHTER. By Kyoko Mori. (Holt, $15.95.) Yuki was 12 years old in 1969
when her mother, Shizuko, an artist, committed suicide. This spare and moving
first novel tells of the daughter's life in episodes that move backward and
forward and deal with issues of loss, growth and art. (Ages 12 and up)

STEPHEN BIESTY'S CROSS-SECTIONS: MAN-OF-WAR. By Richard Platt. Illustrated by
Stephen Biesty. (Dorling Kindersley, $16.95.) A battleship based on Lord
Nelson's 100-gun Victory is presented from stem to stern, in 20 detailed slices.
(Ages 5 and up)

Crime

 AFTER ALL THESE YEARS. By Susan Isaacs. (HarperCollins, $23.) A wisecracking
comic mystery set on Long Island, in which a schoolteacher named Rosie becomes a
murder suspect when her estranged husband is found dead on her kitchen floor.

BODIES ELECTRIC. By Colin Harrison. (Crown, $20.) An urban thriller in which a
corporate executive does a good deed and unknowingly sets perilous events in
motion.

BUCKET NUT. By Liza Cody. (Perfect Crime/ Doubleday, $18.50.) An Amazonian who
keeps watch, with two attack dogs, over a London junkyard is displeased when she
is set up as a murder instrument in a gang war.

CLEOPATRA GOLD. By William J. Caunitz. (Crown, $20.) In this well-researched
thriller by a former New York police officer, cunning, terrifically
well-equipped Latin American drug cartels are taking over our country and only a
nightclub crooner can save us.

THE CROCODILE BIRD. By Ruth Rendell. (Crown, $22.) A coolly composed allegorical
suspense tale (not dependent on a detective) about a girl who accepts her
mother's tyranny though seeming to know that the woman is a murderer.

CRUEL AND UNUSUAL. By Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $21.) In Ms. Cornwell's
expertly engineered, grimly fascinating forensic mystery, Dr. Kay Scarpetta,
chief medical examiner for the state of Virginia, is unnerved when a criminal's
execution doesn't stop his special style of killing.

DON'T ASK. By Donald E. Westlake. (Mysterious Press/Warner, $18.95.) Mr.
Westlake's eighth novel featuring John Dortmunder is one of his best, with
plenty of Runyonesque New York low life and a lighthearted, psychology-free plot
revolving around the rival attempts of Tsergovia and Votskojek, two Eastern
European countries, to gain admittance to the United Nations.

DRAWING DEAD. By Pete Hautman. (Simon & Schuster, $21.) Mr. Hautman's first
novel is a wacky crime caper with a cast of con artists -- Dickie Wicky, Joey
Cadillac and various tootsies -- in search of vintage comic books.

FINNEGAN'S WEEK. By Joseph Wambaugh. (Morrow, $22.) A frappe, a hoot, a frolic
about a nebbish detective who teams up with a "goop cop" and a gumshoe to track
down a 55-gallon drum of lethal liquid.

THE MEXICAN TREE DUCK. By James Crumley. (Mysterious Press/Warner, $19.95.) Mr.
Crumley's fourth private-eye novel is a crazy, dope-fueled road trip that
provides the adventuring hero, C. W. Sughrue, with new direction and hope for a
violent redemption.

NO HAPPY ENDING. By Paco Ignacio Taibo 2d. (Mysterious Press/Warner, $17.95.)
The hero, a private detective named Hector Belascoaran Shayne, plunges into an
existential and political crisis when he finds a corpse dressed as a Roman
centurion in the bathroom of his office in Mexico City.

PLEADING GUILTY. By Scott Turow. (Farrar Straus & Giroux, $24.) On the trail of
missing money and a missing colleague, the endearing Mack Malloy breaks the rule
of great detectives: he finds an enthusiastic and satisfying lover for himself.

PRONTO. By Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $21.95.) Mr. Leonard's latest antihero, a
cheapo operator for the Miami syndicate, flees to Italy, pursued by the Feds and
by two quaint thugs who can't keep their minds on their work.

SARATOGA HAUNTING. By Stephen Dobyns. (Viking, $19.) A body discovered under a
pool hall leads Charlie Bradshaw to come face to face with his misguided self
from 20 years ago.

SEASON OF THE MONSOON. By Paul Mann. (Fawcett Columbine, $20.) An Anglo-Indian
detective's investigation into the death of a young actor provides a platform
for Mr. Mann's mournful view of the corruption and chaos in modern-day India.

SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW. By Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) This
seductive meditation on the human condition by a Danish writer takes the form of
a suspense novel whose irresistible heroine is a Greenland Eskimo.

32 CADILLACS. By Joe Gores. (Mysterious Press/Warner, $18.95.) In this
fall-down-funny caper, the King of the Gypsies wants to be buried in a pink
Eldorado, Cadillacs disappear all over the San Francisco Bay area, and the repo
firm D.K.A. is hot on the trail.

THE WAY THROUGH THE WOODS. By Colin Dexter. (Crown, $20.) The winner of
Britain's 1992 Gold Dagger Award, this is Mr. Dexter's best Morse mystery yet.
The prickly detective, ready to plunge into Jane Austen and billiards, gets
distracted by some cryptic verses about a missing Swede.

Essays, Criticism & Letters

 THE COLLECTED ESSAYS AND CRITICISM. Volume 3: Affirmations and Refusals,
1950-1956. Volume 4: Modernism With a Vengeance, 1957-1969. By Clement
Greenberg. Edited by John O'Brian. (University of Chicago, $29.95 each.) These
two volumes of the complete and unrevised writings of the fearless enemy of
kitsch take us close to the end of his brilliant career.

CULTURE OF COMPLAINT: The Fraying of America. By Robert Hughes. (New York Public
Library/Oxford University, $19.95.) Mr. Hughes turns a cruel eye on the
political-cultural debates of the 1980's, the pressure to recognize cultural
diversity and the politicization of the contemporary art scene.

DELMORE SCHWARTZ AND JAMES LAUGHLIN: Selected Letters. Edited by Robert
Phillips. (Norton, $29.95.) The witty, paranoid voice of the poet Delmore
Schwartz dominates this volume of letters between the poet and his sane and
affectionate publisher, James Laughlin.

DOUBLE AGENT: The Critic and Society. By Morris Dickstein. (Oxford University,
$23.) A clear-thinking advocate of both literature and criticism examines the
growing fissure between them.

THE ELECTRONIC WORD: Democracy, Technology, and the Arts. By Richard A. Lanham.
(University of Chicago, $22.50.) Some appropriately ancient perspectives --
Sophist and Platonic -- on the political consequences of the fact that text is
being displaced by hypertext.

FLAUBERT-SAND: The Correspondence. Based on the French edition by Alphonse
Jacobs. (Knopf, $35.) The record of a 10-year friendship that follows the events
of a historic decade (1866-76) with lucidity and refreshing, passionate
disagreements.

THE GONNE-YEATS LETTERS: 1893-1938. Edited by Anna MacBride White and A. Norman
Jeffares. (Norton, $35.) Though this record of the friendship, torn by politics,
is incomplete (many of Yeats's letters to Maud Gonne were burned), there is
ample evidence that these two mystics were, after all, parents to each other.

GUNFIGHTER NATION: The Myth of the Frontier in Twentieth-Century America. By
Richard Slotkin. (Atheneum, $40.) In a work of wide-ranging cultural criticism,
the author interprets everything from westerns to imperialism as expressions of
our favorite myth.

JAPAN THROUGH AMERICAN EYES: The Journal of Francis Hall, Kanagawa and Yokohama,
1859-1866. Edited by F. G. Notehelfer. (Princeton University, $49.50.) The
attraction of these journals lies more in the daily life of the wry, whimsical
Hall -- teacher, botanist, bookseller, philanthropist -- than in his daily
reports about two Japanese towns on the brink of modernization.

THE LAST INNOCENT WHITE MAN IN AMERICA: And Other Writings. By John Leonard.
(New Press, $21.95.) A respected cultural critic's collection of unrepentantly
liberal political essays and book reviews.

LITERARY REFLECTIONS: A Shoring of Images, 1960-1993. By R. W. B. Lewis.
(Northeastern University, $24.95.) Penetrating, durable exercises in humane
scholarship and criticism.

MANUSCRIPTS DON'T BURN. Mikhail Bulgakov: A Life in Letters and Diaries. By J.
A. E. Curtis. (Overlook, $25.) A moving record tells how, despite the Soviet
Government's vicious attacks, the author of "The Master and Margarita" managed
to write and die as he wished.

THE MORAL SENSE. By James Q. Wilson. (Free Press, $22.95.) The distinguished
social scientist asks 18th-century moral questions -- the nature of fairness,
self-control, duty and sympathy -- and scours 20th-century psychology,
anthropology and sociology for answers.

PAST IMPERFECT: French Intellectuals, 1944-1956. By Tony Judt. (University of
California, $30.) Mr. Judt, a professor of European studies at New York
University, argues forthrightly that Sartre and his generation obstinately
refused to get anything right.

THE ROAD TO SAN GIOVANNI. By Italo Calvino. (Pantheon, $19.) In these five
revealing autobiographical essays, Calvino turns his puckish techniques for
tracing personality onto himself as a writer.

SEEDS IN THE HEART: Japanese Literature From Earliest Times to the Late
Sixteenth Century. By Donald Keene. (Holt, $50.) A comprehensive and valuable
history of the first millennium of Japanese writing, encompassing poems,
legends, myths, diaries, songs and Noh plays.

THE SIXTIES: The Last Journal, 1960-1972. By Edmund Wilson. Edited by Lewis M.
Dabney. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) The fifth and final volume recorded by
the great, voracious man of letters, on whom nothing was lost.

THINKING OUT LOUD. By Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays about current
topics by the New York Times columnist.

UNITED STATES: Essays 1952-1992. By Gore Vidal. (Random House, $37.50.) In
essays and articles written over four decades, the author expounds on sex,
politics, literature and other phenomena, including himself.

WHAT IS FOUND THERE: Notebooks on Poetry and Politics. By Adrienne Rich.
(Norton, $20.) A distinguished poet's reflections on the work of poetry, its
social and cultural authority, its power to help us "invent what we desire."

THE WOUNDED RIVER: The Civil War Letters of John Vance Lauderdale, M.D. Edited
by Peter Josyph. (Michigan State University, $29.95.) Edited with skill and
devotion, these letters of a doctor contracted to the Union Army show a
lighthearted man gradually sensitized to the carnage of war.

Fiction

 ALMOST PERFECT. By Alice Adams. (Knopf, $23.) Social and business pressures
drive emotions in this painful, funny novel about a young woman on the rise who
loves a crazy man.

THE ANGEL CARVER. By Rosanne Daryl Thomas. (Random House, $20.) This tender
novel with its nightmarish momentum is about a Marilyn Monroe look-alike and two
artists, one who carves her likeness in wood and the other who imagines how she
might be perfected with surgery.

ANGELS & INSECTS: Two Novellas. By A. S. Byatt. (Random House, $21.) Two long
novellas, and very clever ones, in which insect life is an analogue of Victorian
society and literary immortality is compared to the real thing.

ARC D'X. By Steve Erickson. (Poseidon, $20.) Part of this serious, fantastical
novel is set in Jeffersonian times, the other half in a modern America with
streets named Desolate and Unrequited.

ARE YOU MINE? By Abby Frucht. (Grove, $19.95.) Ms. Frucht's witty and sensual
third novel explores sexuality and its consequences, humanizing even a political
issue like abortion.

THE BEST INTENTIONS. By Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $22.95.) The Swedish director
playfully calls this book about his parents a novel. Whatever it is, it's lush
and devastating at once.

A BIG STORM KNOCKED IT OVER. By Laurie Colwin. (HarperCollins, $22.) Colwin's
last novel, completed just before she died at the age of 48, is full of her wit
and spirit, a happy story about lovers and friends who fill up the empty space
family used to occupy.

BODY & SOUL. By Frank Conroy. (Seymour Lawrence/ Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) An
old-fashioned (deliberately) novel about a poor boy who grows up to be a famous
pianist and composer, and a totally sincere love song to the 1950's, when such
things were possible.

BONE. By Fae Myenne Ng. (Hyperion, $19.95.) A sophisticated first novel about
youth in San Francisco's Chinatown, about leaving it and about the unbearable
disloyalty of "assimilation."

THE BOOK OF NIGHTS. By Sylvie Germain. (Verba Mundi/ Godine, $22.95.) In this
work of magical realism by a French philosopher living in Prague, the protean
world of the Brothers Grimm meets Nazi Germany.

A BOWL OF CHERRIES. By Shena Mackay. (Moyer Bell, $16.95.) An adroit novel that
incisively but compassionately deploys a dysfunctional family with familiar
problems -- isolation, failed hopes, mutual deceit -- in comic configurations.

THE BOY WITHOUT A FLAG: Tales of the South Bronx. By Abraham Rodriguez Jr.
(Milkweed Editions, paper, $11.) A first book of fiction, in which brutality is
controlled by sophistication.

BUFFALO SOLDIERS. By Robert O'Connor. (Knopf, $22.) Mr. O'Connor's first novel
successfully involves us with a self-absorbed nihilist, a drug-peddling Army
clerk of impoverished moral sensibility but acute esthetic intelligence.

THE BUNGALOW. By Lynn Freed. (Poseidon, $21.) The glorious South African
landscape, the hermetic lives of white middle-class South Africans, tea at 4,
the cataclysm yet to come.

THE BUTCHER BOY. By Patrick McCabe. (Fromm International, $19.95.) A grueling
and all too believable novel that enters the deranged mind of a love-starved
Irish schoolboy who endures horrors and perpetrates them.

BUTTERFLY STORIES. By William T. Vollmann. (Grove, $21.) A novel in the form of
linked short stories, mainly about prostitutes, narrated by a customer in a
vivid prose that sometimes seems motivated by authorial aggression.

CAPE OF STORMS: The First Life of Adamastor. By Andre Brink. (Simon & Schuster,
$16.) Grave and tragic can be expected in a fable of the first interracial
contact in South Africa; Mr. Brink, a longtime opponent of apartheid, makes it
diverting and witty as well. Miraculous!

CAST A SPELL. By Bette Pesetsky. (Harcourt Brace, $21.95.) A witty, observant
novel (the author's fifth) that exposes the sad reality of the life of Miz
Magic, a professional illusionist.

CHARMS FOR THE EASY LIFE. By Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) Like all Ms.
Gibbons's fiction, this novel concerns itself with strong women: a bookish
narrator, her mother, her grandmother, all of them prevailing through fierce
survival instincts and folk wisdom handed down from prior generations.

CHIMNEY ROCK. By Charlie Smith. (Holt, $22.50.) Mr. Smith's novel appropriates
the language and vision of Southern Gothic to the dwellers in a nasty, dusty
Hollywood through a narrator who represents a complete absence of ethical
consciousness.

CLEOPATRA'S SISTER. By Penelope Lively. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ms. Lively's
charming and intellectually resonant novel concerns an English couple whom fate,
or Fate, conspires to place on a plane bound for just the wrong North African
destination.

THE COLLECTED STORIES. By John McGahern. (Knopf, $24.) These stories, by a
master of clean, powerful description that conveys the immaterial significance
in material things, offer a vision in which love is not an end but a means of
gaining the world.

THE COLLECTED STORIES. By Reynolds Price. (Atheneum, $25.) 50 stories over a
30-year span that show off the author's distinctive ability to strike a
near-perfect balance between written and spoken discourse and to render
unsentimental nostalgia, pain and simple happiness.

COMPULSORY HAPPINESS. By Norman Manea. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) Four
cranky, brilliant novellas about the soul's deterioration in a totalitarian
state by a Romanian who came to America in 1986.

CONSIDER THIS, SENORA. By Harriet Doerr. (Harcourt Brace, $21.95.) A stunningly
precise and evocative novel about American expatriates in the 1960's who look to
the Mexican landscape to change their lives.

CRAZY IN ALABAMA. By Mark Childress. (Putnam, $22.95.) Southern American humor
yet again, but in a novel that pounds every convention of the genre into
submission; not even the dead bodies interfere with the funniness.

CRY ME A RIVER. By T. R. Pearson. (Holt, $22.) A crime story, narrated by a cop
and loser whose comrade's death brings us, eventually, into contact with a
gallery of driven figures.

CUERVO TALES. By Robert Roper. (Ticknor & Fields, $19.95.) Ten interlinked
stories that follow a burned-out survivor of the luminous, excessive 1960's into
the downer decades that followed.

THE CZAR'S MADMAN. By Jaan Kross. (Pantheon, $31.50.) First published in 1978,
this witty, disciplined novel from Estonia, translated into English by Anselm
Hollo, a Finnish poet, is cast as a diary kept by a peasant's son.

DIVINE DAYS. By Leon Forrest. (Another Chicago Press/Norton, $32.50.) Narrated
by a black playwright, this boldly musical epic detective story has elements of
parable, philosophical argument, boxing, opera, blues and cartoons.

DR. HAGGARD'S DISEASE. By Patrick McGrath. (Poseidon, $20.) In the (appropriate)
guise of a Gothic horror tale, Mr. McGrath produces a myth of the creator
sacrificed to his creation in the person of a surgeon who sees his onetime lover
in her son.

DREAM OF FAIR TO MIDDLING WOMEN. By Samuel Beckett. Edited by Eoin O'Brien and
Edith Fournier. (Arcade Publishing in association with Riverrun Press, $21.95.)
Samuel Beckett's first novel, which took 60 years to find its publisher, is full
of wild thoughts and echoes of his future works.

EINSTEIN'S DREAMS. By Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) Spare, poetic fantasies
about what Einstein might have dreamed when he was still a 26-year-old patent
clerk in Switzerland.

THE EMPTY LOT. By Mary Gray Hughes. (Another Chicago Press, cloth, $22.50;
paper, $10.95.) This absorbing novel concerns a ruthlessly ambitious divorcing
couple who struggle over the house that stands in for the ordered values they
seem to have forgotten.

EXPOSURE. By Kathryn Harrison. (Random House, $20.) This almost didactic novel
yields a thoughtful discussion of the artist's effect on the world, through the
story of the breakdown of a famous photographer's daughter, her father's
favorite model.

FABLES OF THE IRISH INTELLIGENTSIA. By Nina FitzPatrick. (Penguin, paper, $9.)
Thirteen bright, vigorous stories, featuring mostly poets, priests and
academics, set in Ireland or wherever the Irish are. There is lots of drinking
and even more talk.

FAMILY NIGHT. By Maria Flook. (Pantheon, $21.) Ms. Flook's astute first novel
examines the erotic undercurrents in an extended family of bright, twerpy people
who are reaching their 30's but are basically career teen-agers at heart.

FEARLESS. By Rafael Yglesias. (Warner, $18.95.) In this smooth, almost slick,
novel about an airplane crash and its harrowing aftermath, the survivors do not
merely survive; they live on in the reader's mind.

FEATHER CROWNS. By Bobbie Ann Mason. (HarperCollins, $23.) In Kentucky in 1900,
the birth of quintuplets stirs apocalyptic speculation and brings plenty of
unwanted change to the population of this substantial, attentive novel.

FIMA. By Amos Oz. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/ Harcourt Brace, $22.95.) A novel whose
idealistic hero lives mostly in his head, daydreaming about seizing power or
bringing peace to Israel, while barely able to cope with his own life.

FLOOD! A Novel in Pictures. By Eric Drooker. (Four Walls Eight Windows, $15.95.)
A vision of alienation in a New York peopled by the blighted and despairing,
told virtually without words.

FOR LOVE. By Sue Miller. (HarperCollins, $23.) A vivid, fine-grained, realistic
and honest novel whose characters are mainly over 40 and in love for far from
the first time.

THE FOURTEEN SISTERS OF EMILIO MONTEZ O'BRIEN. By Oscar Hijuelos. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $22.) A capacious, marvelously complicated novel that is Mr.
Hijuelos's paean to femininity and to family life as it is actually lived.

FOXFIRE: Confessions of a Girl Gang. By Joyce Carol Oates. (William
Abrahams/Dutton, $21.) A dark and troubled epic of women who revenge themselves
on men, set in the slow-witted 1950's, before female bonding had been
discovered.

FRAUD. By Anita Brookner. (Random House, $21.) A novel that explores
relationships between aged parents and adult children, returning repeatedly to
ask: when does love become destructive?

FROM THE HEAT OF THE DAY. By Roy Heath. (Persea, $19.95.) The trapped lives of a
married couple suffer irruptions of revelation or transcendence in a Guyanese
poet's lucid novel.

THE FURIES. By Janet Hobhouse. (Doubleday, $22.50.) Hobhouse's fourth and last
novel is haunting, an autobiographical novel that shows she was still searching
for answers about her life, her choices, her family when she died in 1991.

GHOSTS. By John Banville. (Knopf, $21.) Rattling around in the Irish writer's
witty and startling new novel are echoes of "The Tempest," entrancing visual
elements, an obscure and intricate mystery, violence and a houseful of
threatening oddballs.

THE GIRL WHO TROD ON A LOAF. By Kathryn Davis. (Knopf, $23.) A heated, dramatic
novel narrated by Francie, an underachieving composer who finds redemption by
completing an inherited unfinished opera.

THE GRISLY WIFE. By Rodney Hall. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) This volume of
Mr. Hall's Australian trilogy is narrated by a female missionary who has seen 32
years of dark and bloody doings since coming to New South Wales.

GUEST OF A SINNER. By James Wilcox. (HarperCollins, $20.) Mr. Wilcox's sixth
novel is a precise satirical urban comedy about a bunch of nobodies bumping
around Manhattan.

THE HEATHER BLAZING. By Colm Toibin. (Viking, $20.) A novel that explores the
Irish national psyche, concentrated in the forces that collide and are
reconciled within a single family.

HELLO DOWN THERE. By Michael Parker. (Scribners, $20.) This serious, memorable
novel shows a deep affection for its chief characters: a man who is hooked on
morphine and jazz and the high-school student he falls in love with.

HENRY JAMES' MIDNIGHT SONG. By Carol De Chellis Hill. (Poseidon/Simon &
Schuster, $23.) A grand, ebullient novel, set chiefly in 1890's Vienna, where
James, Freud, Jung and Edith Wharton are up to some naughty conduct.

THE HOLDER OF THE WORLD. By Bharati Mukherjee. (Knopf, $22.) A woman of today
celebrates the life of a woman who lived three centuries ago and across two
cultures in this brilliantly conceived and executed novel.

HOMELAND. By John Jakes. (Doubleday, $25.) With detachment and sympathy, a
master of historical fiction chronicles the life of a street urchin from Berlin
who makes good in America at the turn of the century.

HONEY: Stories. By Elizabeth Tallent. (Knopf, $22.) In her third fine
collection, set mainly in New Mexico, Ms. Tallent's characters are tempered in
the crucible of marriage while their creator revels in comely language and
summons accurately the sensations of daily life.

HOTEL PASTIS: A Novel of Provence. By Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $23.) A sensual novel
in which an advertising executive abandons London for Provence, where he floats
toward happiness on a river of alcohol.

HOW I CAME WEST, AND WHY I STAYED: Stories. By Alison Baker. (Chronicle, paper,
$9.95.) Fiction about adventurous souls who find that the final frontier is
themselves.

IF YOU KNEW ME. By Anne Roiphe. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The evocative language
of this novel supports the improbably successful grasp at happiness of a newly
met middle-aged couple.

I KILLED HEMINGWAY. By William McCranor Henderson. (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's,
$18.95.) A 93-year-old eccentric claims to have murdered Hemingway (the rat
published the old man's work as his own!) in this complex, amusing, palpably
symbolic novel, concerned with issues from Oedipal to spiritual.

IN A COUNTRY OF MOTHERS. By A. M. Homes. (Knopf, $22.) A surprising New York
love story, tuned to the insults of urban life, about the relationship between a
young woman frightened by emotional attachments and her psychotherapist, who
believes her patient may be her daughter.

THE INFINITE PLAN. By Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ambitious and large,
Ms. Allende's novel follows the disastrous life of a preacher's son and doubles
as a cameo history of the United States, running from World War II to the
1990's.

THE INNER SIDE OF THE WIND: Or, the Novel of Hero and Leander. By Milorad Pavic.
(Knopf, $22.) A retelling of the ancient myth in which a brutal coincidence of
time connects two stories set centuries apart.

IN SEARCH OF BERNABE. By Graciela Limon. (Arte Publico, paper, $9.50.) This
stark, resonant first novel follows the lives of several characters, most
notably a mother and her two sons (one a revolutionary, one a death squad
commander), caught up in El Salvador's bloody civil war.

INSHALLAH. By Oriana Fallaci. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $25.) Ms. Fallaci
renders the confused universe of political factions in Beirut strangely rational
in this muscular novel whose title means "God willing."

IN TROUBLED WATERS. By Beverly Coyle. (Ticknor & Fields, $19.95.) This brilliant
novel, exposing the hypocrisy of political correctness, is about a 91-year-old
widower who hires two boys -- one black, one white -- to take his son-in-law
fishing.

THE INVENTION OF TRUTH. By Marta Morazzoni. (Knopf, $18.) An absorbing novella
about artists and lookers at art; it concerns John Ruskin and 300 women working
on the Bayeux Tapestry.

JAPANESE BY SPRING. By Ishmael Reed. (Atheneum, $20.) A funny, explosive novel
about political jockeying in the university; it spares no one who has ever
sought power or had an opinion.

THE KOMMANDANT'S MISTRESS. By Sherri Szeman. (HarperCollins, $17.50.) A powerful
novel, forged from refractory materials: the personal narratives of a death camp
commander and the Jewish woman he chose as his mistress.

LEMPRIERE'S DICTIONARY. By Lawrence Norfolk. (Harmony, $22.) Not a dictionary
but a first novel, droll, ferocious and intricate, set in the late 18th century,
treating of a young man whose life is sidetracked by Ovidian myths and other
irruptions.

A LESSON BEFORE DYING. By Ernest J. Gaines. (Knopf, $21.) Set in a fictional
town in Louisiana in the 1940's, this novel about a primary school teacher who
tries to restore the dignity of prisoner before his execution powerfully evokes
the emotions of the Deep South.

LET THE DOG DRIVE. By David Bowman. (New York University, $19.95.) Fresh, fun
and smart, this novel is told in the voice of an 18-year-old intellectual always
on the lookout for new obsessions.

THE LIBERTY CAMPAIGN. By Jonathan Dee. (Doubleday, $22.) Very large questions of
good and evil and the low moral stakes in everyday American life inhabit Mr.
Dee's provocative novel about a suburban executive whose neighbor is accused of
monstrous crimes in Brazil.

LITTLE KINGDOMS: Three Novellas. By Steven Millhauser. (Poseidon, $21.) Three
tales from the lush otherwhere that is Mr. Millhauser's imagination, where human
complexity and folly are embodied in dwarfs and dungeons and artists willing to
sacrifice other satisfactions for art.

THE LOOP. By Joe Coomer. (Faber & Faber, $21.95.) A deadpan novel whose tender
protagonist has the job of clearing road kill and debris from the beltway
circling a city.

LOST IN JERSEY CITY. By Paula Sharp. (HarperCollins, $20.) The city is exploited
with zest in this risky novel about a colorless woman and her two children
slowly ensnared in a world of violence.

LOVE ENTER. By Paul Kafka. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) In this clever epistolary
novel, a subintern in a maternity ward chronicles his Paris interlude of four
years before -- his love affair with two women in love with each other -- by
entering a series of letters into the hospital's computer.

LOVING DAUGHTERS. By Olga Masters. (Norton, $21.95.) First published in
Australia in 1984, this subtly passionate novel concerns a humanly imperfect
rural family on whom the outside intrudes in the form of a handsome, single
English clergyman.

THE MAN IN THE TOWER. By Michael Kruger. (Braziller, $19.95.) A mordant, funny
novel about a reclusive German painter who lives in the south of France and
broods on many things.

THE MAN WHO DREAMT OF LOBSTERS. By Michael Collins. (Random House, $19.) Stories
by an Irish-born writer that happen not in the Ireland of myth but in a squalid
third-world country.

THE MARRIAGE OF CADMUS AND HARMONY. By Roberto Calasso. (Knopf, $25.) Greek
mythology retold for the 90's, conspicuously lacking in the Victorian innocence
and decorum that inform the versions most of us are familiar with.

MARTIN AND JOHN. By Dale Peck. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) A daring, honest,
dark debut novel about a gay hustler who travels from Kansas to New York and
back to care for his lover, who is dying with AIDS.

MONKFISH MOON. By Romesh Gunesekera. (New Press, $16.95.) Everyone feels afraid
and guilty in this melancholy first collection of fiction from Sri Lanka, a
rapidly imploding nation.

A MOTHER'S LOVE. By Mary Morris. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $17.50.) A haunting,
disturbing tale of the fear and loneliness of a New York mother who decides to
go it alone.

MUSTANG SALLY. By Edward Allen. (Norton, $19.95.) Mr. Allen's regrettably
accurate second novel is the first of the college campus satires to take on
political correctness.

MYSTERY RIDE. By Robert Boswell. (Knopf, $22.) An irresistible novel about a
family (she given to causes, he ineffectual, their daughter a rotten kid) who
try to puzzle out their own history.

NO OTHER LIFE. By Brian Moore. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $21.) A brilliant
meditative novel about a place that is and is not Haiti and a visionary who is
and is not Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the former President of Haiti.

THE NORTH CHINA LOVER. By Marguerite Duras. (New Press, $19.95.) Set in Vietnam,
this novel about a French girl obsessed with a Chinese man began as notes toward
a script for the movie "The Lover" (adapted from Ms. Duras's earlier novel).

NOT WHERE I STARTED FROM. By Kate Wheeler. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) This
first collection of stories is about searchers shopping for enlightenment and
the cross-cultural dislocations that come from such a hunt.

NOW YOU KNOW. By Michael Frayn. (Viking, $21.) Mr. Frayn's eighth novel explores
a profound ethical territory -- the borderlands between public and private life
-- in a manic comedy whose protagonist, an English politico, trips over his
principles.

OPERATION SHYLOCK: A Confession. By Philip Roth. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A
character named Philip Roth confronts another character named Philip Roth, and
at least one of them is full of impermissible thoughts in this deeply serious,
farcical novel.

THE ORACLE AT STONELEIGH COURT: Stories. By Peter Taylor. (Knopf, $22.) Mr.
Taylor's latest superb collection (a novella, 10 stories, 3 plays) explores the
ghostly influences from the past that can decide much of our destinies before we
are born.

PARTICLES AND LUCK. By Louis B. Jones. (Pantheon, $22.) In Mr. Jones's second
novel, a young physicist spends 24 hours learning the difference between reality
as described in theoretical journals and reality as people live it day to day.

THE PEACEABLE KINGDOM: Stories. By Francine Prose. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$20.) Eleven stories, smartly observed and deftly written, present the weird
jungle of modern life through the eyes of a wry and mordant writer.

PIGS IN HEAVEN. By Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.) Picking up where
"The Bean Trees" left off, Ms. Kingsolver's heart-twisting, fiercely moral novel
is about a single mother faced with the prospect of losing her daughter, a
Cherokee girl who was unceremoniously dropped into her car years before.

POOR THINGS: Episodes From the Early Life of Archibald McCandless M.D., Scottish
Public Health Officer. By Alasdair Gray. (Harcourt Brace, $21.95.) The
experimentally minded Scottish artist-novelist's heroine is a female suicide,
reanimated by a wizard surgeon and given her unborn daughter's brain.

THE PORCUPINE. By Julian Barnes. (Knopf, $17.) A short, edgy, gloomy political
novel in which a well-meaning Eastern European prosecutor learns that the fall
of the old system has brought not energy and purpose but an ironically bourgeois
alienation.

A PORTRAIT OF MY DESIRE. By MacDonald Harris. (Simon & Schuster, $20.) This
nicely evasive writer, who died in July at the age of 71, gives us the sense
that there is more to his story about a selfish, cowardly widower than we know.

PROOFS: And Three Parables. By George Steiner. (Granta/Penguin, paper, $10.)
"Proofs," to which the "Parables" are appendages, is Mr. Steiner's arresting
novella of the collapse of Communism among some of its last adherents.

THE PUGILIST AT REST: Stories. By Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $18.95.) A
collection of short stories that portray prizefighters and war heroes surviving,
but just barely.

THE QUEEN AND I. By Sue Townsend. (Soho, $22.) When the British royal family is
packed off to a housing project in this audacious novel, Prince Philip goes mad,
Princess Anne picks up plumbing, and the Queen endures.

RAMEAU'S NIECE. By Cathleen Schine. (Ticknor & Fields, $19.95.) This inventive
comic novel, a literary hybrid, is both an essentially 18th-century moral tale
and a parody of post-modern form.

REBEL POWERS. By Richard Bausch. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.)
The narrator of this novel, a thoughtful man trying to proceed honestly,
examines his family, imperiled by the clash of old verities and threatening new
ideas.

REMEMBERING BABYLON. By David Malouf. (Pantheon, $20.) Mr. Malouf's adroit
seventh novel confronts a band of settlers in Australia with Gemmy, a boy born
white and raised by aborigines; they dread that their own identities might be
compromised like his.

THE REST OF LIFE: Three Novellas. By Mary Gordon. (Viking, $22.) Each of these
cautionary tales concerns an alive, complex, contemporary woman, and each of the
women is wounded by an obsessive, unequal relationship with a man.

A RIVER SUTRA. By Gita Mehta. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $20.) The setting for
these interlocking stories is an idealized India, free of political and
religious violence.

THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE. By T. Coraghessan Boyle. (Viking, $22.50.) There are
major characters but no heroes in this antiromance of 1907 in Battle Creek,
Mich., where Dr. John Harvey Kellogg, the Edison of clean living, presides over
pilgrims who hope to escape the ills and smells that flesh is heir to.

THE ROBBER BRIDE. By Margaret Atwood. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $23.50.) Ms.
Atwood's funniest novel in years concerns three women who are friends and the
mini-skirted Iago who worms her way into their lives.

RUIN CREEK. By David Payne. (Doubleday, $22.50.) The characters speak in
Southern dialect, drink whisky, eat grits, and they do it all believably in this
novel about innocence lost, set on the North Carolina coast in the 1950's.

SACRED COUNTRY. By Rose Tremain. (Atheneum, $21.) A large novel, Ms. Tremain's
sixth, in which three generations of Britons try to sort out who they are and
how they might be happy.

SAFE CONDUCT. By Elizabeth Benedict. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) Touching
down in New York, Leningrad, Istanbul, Brussels and Washington, this slim novel
portrays, with great sensitivity, the panic of a woman whose husband's
passionate affair with a Soviet beauty is rekindled after the cold war ends.

SAVE ME, JOE LOUIS. By Madison Smartt Bell. (Harcourt Brace, $23.95.) The
grifters and drifters in this novel think they're pretty good guys, but their
actions suggest otherwise.

SAVING ST. GERM. By Carol Muske Dukes. (Viking, $21.) A truly original novel in
which a stubborn, puttering biochemist who forgets she has a body, a job, a
family, is finally jolted out of her blessed state.

THE SECRET OF CARTWHEELS. By Patricia Henley. (Graywolf, paper, $11.) The
author's second collection of short stories presents brave and life-worn
characters, unsettled, cast loose; but when they are brave enough, they manage
to land on their feet.

SEPARATE ROOMS. By Pier Vittorio Tondelli. (Serpent's Tail, paper, $14.99.) An
Italian novel of imperfect love and urgent grief, by a young writer who died of
AIDS in 1991.

SHADOW PLAY. By Charles Baxter. (Norton, $21.95.) Mr. Baxter's confident second
novel concerns primarily Wyatt Palmer, a bright boy who grows up into a dull job
and an atmosphere of compromise in a town where evil is both profound and
boring.

SHAMAN. By Noah Gordon. (Dutton, $23.) This intricate historical novel follows
an impious doctor, making his way from Boston to the territories of Illinois and
the battlefields of the Civil War.

THE SHIPPING NEWS. By E. Annie Proulx. (Scribners, $20.) In Ms. Proulx's third
book of fiction, a man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland, where he
works on a newspaper whose boss magically senses what will most annoy his
employees.

SIGNS OF DEVOTION: Stories. By Maxine Chernoff. (Simon & Schuster, $19.) Smart,
antic short stories in which people understand new experiences by recalling old
ones, and the trivial is examined until its importance transpires.

SILENT PASSENGERS. By Larry Woiwode. (Atheneum, $18.) In Mr. Woiwode's
collection of short stories, events matter less than epiphanies, mystical
networking, usually intrafamilial, between human beings.

A SIMPLE PLAN. By Scott Smith. (Knopf, $21.) Each bad deed leads to a worse one
in this disturbing first novel, a morality tale told by an ordinary man who
became a multiple murderer.

SLEEPING BEAUTIES. By Susanna Moore. (Knopf, $22.) This eloquent, disturbing
novel, concerned with personal and historical identity, squeezes its heroine
between outdated notions of femininity and repulsive exemplars of womanhood.

THE SLOW NATIVES. By Thea Astley. (Putnam, $21.95.) A caustic and ferocious
satire about people running in pursuit of passion and away from it, by the
winner of the 1989 Patrick White Award, originally published in Australia in
1965.

SO FAR FROM GOD. By Ana Castillo. (Norton, $19.95.) Magic realism in New Mexico:
a girl who levitates at the age of 3 performs other miracles as required to save
her three sisters from fates as grave as death or worse.

SOLITUDE. By Victor Catala (Caterina Albert i Paradis). (Readers International,
cloth, $19.95; paper, $11.95.) Guaranteed a long obscurity by its first
publication in Catalan under a pseudonym in 1905, this overtly feminist novel
sets a lowland peasant girl against a threatening mountain landscape and
society.

THE STORIES AND RECOLLECTIONS OF UMBERTO SABA. By Umberto Saba. (Sheep Meadow
Press, $22.50.) Melancholy short stories and sketches of Jewish life in Trieste
by an Italian writer, much esteemed in his own country, who died in 1957.

STRANGE ANGELS. By Jonis Agee. (Ticknor & Fields, $21.95.) The conflicts in this
emotional, precisely written story are the elemental ones of Greek tragedy, but
the setting is a working ranch in Nebraska.

STRANGE ATTRACTORS. By Rebecca Goldstein. (Viking, $21.) A bold first collection
of short fiction populated by refugee rabbis, intellectual women and insecure
mathematicians.

STRANGE PILGRIMS: Twelve Stories. By Gabriel Garcia Marquez. (Knopf, $21.) Some
nearly 20 years old, all these stories were rewritten before publication; their
overall mood is celebratory, relishing the oddness and incongruity of life.

STREETS OF LAREDO. By Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) In the sequel to
"Lonesome Dove," the Texas ranger rides again, accompanied by his Brooklyn
accountant.

STRIP TEASE. By Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The author, a reporter for The Miami
Herald, delights to foul his front yard in hilarious fiction. What a horrible
place! One nice woman in the book only makes things worse, the poor thing.

A SUITABLE BOY. By Vikram Seth. (HarperCollins, $30.) A multitude of characters
and events throng the 1,349 pages of this vast novel that strives to re-create
the life of post-British India.

SWIMMING IN THE VOLCANO. By Bob Shacochis. (Scribners, $22.) This novel by a
short-story veteran, full of huge, informative digressions, is more about the
fictional Caribbean island of St. Catherine than about the plot or characters
who happen to be there.

TAKE LEAVE AND GO. By Karel Schoeman. (Sinclair-Stevenson/Trafalgar Square,
$24.95.) This novel about the inner life of an Afrikaans poet presents only
indistinct fragments of the political world and so raises a difficult question:
To what extent is an artist justified in detaching himself from society to save
his soul?

A TIDEWATER MORNING: Three Tales From Youth. By William Styron. (Random House,
$17.) The author's memory plays upon the painful moments of his life at the ages
of 10, 13 and 20; the result is a trio of stories, each of whose sadness is
multiplied by the presence of the others.

TIME REMAINING. By James McCourt. (Knopf, $21.) The master of high-camp fiction
ravishes us with his wit, his cast of intrepid characters, resplendent in drag,
and his exquisite portrait of old gay New York.

TINTIN IN THE NEW WORLD: A Romance. By Frederic Tuten. (Morrow, $22.) An
American novelist introduces a French comic strip hero to the temptations of the
real world.

TROUBLE. By Fay Weldon. (Viking, $21.) A bitterly funny novel about an unhappy
woman, her unscrupulous husband, her therapist (who nearly rapes her) and her
therapist's wife (who is her unscrupulous husband's therapist).

ULVERTON. By Adam Thorpe. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) This promising first
novel deals with English history through linked tales in voices from the
Cromwellian to the modern documentary.

UNTIL YOUR HEART STOPS. By T. M. McNally. (Villard, $20.) A harrowing first
novel of suburban Arizona, in which violence, from personal through cosmic, is
visited on nearly everyone; though not especially wicked, they all seem to
deserve it.

VAN GOGH'S ROOM AT ARLES: Three Novellas. By Stanley Elkin. (Hyperion, $22.95.)
A subtle, complicated, sometimes astonishing collection; in the title story, a
provincial American teacher is overwhelmed by his encounter with formidable
world-class academics while living in the painter's very bedroom.

VERTIGO PARK: And Other Tall Tales. By Mark O'Donnell. (Knopf, $18.) Expertly
paced mock essays, playlets, yarns, poems and even cartoons by a lively, fertile
humorist.

A VERY LONG ENGAGEMENT. By Sebastien Japrisot. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.)
In this evocative, outlandishly realistic French novel, a young woman pieces
together how her fiance became a casualty of World War I.

VINDICATION. by Frances Sherwood. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) An urgent,
enthusiastic novel that is based, rather loosely and speculatively, on the life
of Mary Wollstonecraft, the author of "A Vindication of the Rights of Woman."

THE VIRGIN SUICIDES. By Jeffrey Eugenides. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.) A
disarming novel with unlikely premises: five suburban sisters take turns at
suicide, and a gang of curious boys grow into their 30's trying to figure out
why.

WHAT REMAINS AND OTHER STORIES. By Christa Wolf. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.)
These eight fiction pieces by the former East Germany's most discussed author
contain insights that are sometimes blocked by a puritan, didactic tone.

WHILE ENGLAND SLEEPS. By David Leavitt. (Viking, $22.) England and Spain in the
1930's are the settings for a novel that indicts exploitation by sex, by class
and by using other people's wars to work out personal frustrations.

WHISTLING AND OTHER STORIES. By Myra Goldberg. (Zoland Books, $19.95.) A
generous and occasionally satirical voice confronts a New York City that has
lost much of its appeal.

THE WINE-DARK SEA. By Patrick O'Brian. (Norton, $22.) The 16th irresistible
volume in the continuing adventures of the bluff, violin-playing seaman Jack
Aubrey and his great friend, the philosophical surgeon Stephen Maturin.

WOMAN OF THE INNER SEA. By Thomas Keneally. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $21.) A
picaresque, often hilarious novel about a wealthy woman's search for love
following a family tragedy; it ponders how individuals achieve spiritual
wholeness.

WORKING MEN: Stories. By Michael Dorris. (Holt, $19.95.) Insightful and generous
about human foibles, these stories tap into an essential American oddity -- that
we are what we do.

A WORLD FOR JULIUS. By Alfredo Bryce Echenique. (University of Texas, cloth,
$45; paper, $19.95.) This masterpiece of Latin American fiction, finally in
English 23 years after its publication in Spanish, concerns the amoral,
insulated superrich in Lima, Peru, of the 1940's and 50's.

THE WRESTLER'S CRUEL STUDY. By Stephen Dobyns. (Norton, $22.95.) Probability has
no place when wrestling and metaphysics meet in this entertaining post-modern
novel, governed by the presence of a wrestler's manager who talks and thinks
like Friedrich Nietzsche.

WRITTEN ON THE BODY. By Jeanette Winterson. (Knopf, $20.) This ambitious work is
both a love story and a meditation on the body as our literal embodiment, the
part of us that really loves.

History

 THE AGE OF FEDERALISM. By Stanley Elkins and Eric McKitrick. (Oxford
University, $39.95.) This magnificent, dense history of the tumultuous years of
the new republic, culminating in the election of 1800, documents how the
disagreements that emerged during the writing of the Constitution elicited a new
form of partisan politics.

THE AMERICAN QUILT: A History of Cloth and Comfort 1750-1950. By Roderick
Kiracofe with Mary Elizabeth Johnson. (Clarkson Potter, $60.) Weaving together
the evolution of quilt making with the history of America, this fascinating and
profusely illustrated book shows that quilts are conscious works of art, not
relics of frugality and need.

AMERICAN SLAVERY, 1619-1877. By Peter Kolchin. Consulting editor, Eric Foner.
(Hill & Wang, $25.) A solid introduction to the perplexing institution that
mocked the nation's aspirations to universal equality.

ASIA IN THE MAKING OF EUROPE. Volume 3: A Century of Advance. By Donald F. Lach
and Edwin J. Van Kley. (University of Chicago, four-book cloth set, $300.) The
third volume of this immensely learned survey of European interchanges with Asia
takes us up to 1700.

CASE CLOSED: Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of JFK. By Gerald Posner.
(Random House, $25.) On the 30th anniversary of the Kennedy assassination, a
lucid, durable account laying out the overwhelming evidence that Oswald murdered
the President all by himself.

CAVALIERS & ROUNDHEADS: The English Civil War, 1642-1649. By Christopher
Hibbert. (Robert Stewart/Scribners, $27.50.) Wonderful narrative, well-chosen
anecdotes, exciting descriptions of battles and a gloomy conclusion: thousands
of men died in vain.

CHANCELLORSVILLE 1863: The Souls of the Brave. By Ernest B. Furgurson. (Knopf,
$25.) An account of Lee's victory in the only great Civil War battle in which
the day was carried by mobility and maneuver instead of the attrition of men by
metal.

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT IN AMERICAN HISTORY. By Lawrence M. Friedman. (Basic Books,
$30.) A law professor's impressive panoramic history of the criminal justice
system, which, he argues, hasn't controlled crime since Plymouth Rock and will
not control it now.

"DADDY'S GONE TO WAR": The Second World War in the Lives of America's Children.
By William M. Tuttle Jr. (Oxford University, $30.) A historian finds that some
"home front children" still feel indoctrinated in fright and hate, while others
believe the war enhanced their understanding of this country and its culture.

THE DEBATE ON THE CONSTITUTION: Federalist and Antifederalist Speeches,
Articles, and Letters During the Struggle Over Ratification. Edited by Bernard
Bailyn. (Library of America, two volumes, $70.) Proof that our founding document
came by debate, not divine revelation; we owe much to its opponents, who were no
fools.

DECISION IN THE WEST: The Atlanta Campaign of 1864. By Albert Castel. Maps by
Laura Kriegstrom Poracsky. (University Press of Kansas, $29.95.) A stunning,
daunting challenge to the legend that William Tecumseh Sherman was a brilliant
commander.

DENYING THE HOLOCAUST: The Growing Assault on Truth and Memory. By Deborah E.
Lipstadt. (Free Press, $22.95.) A historian untangles the perverse and ingenious
arguments of those who say there was no Holocaust.

THE FIFTIES. By David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) The era of tail fins,
shameless consumerism and mean politics, presented as a series of bite-sized
biographies.

FIREWORKS AT DUSK: Paris in the Thirties. By Olivier Bernier. (Little, Brown,
$24.95.) Mr. Bernier's eighth book is a lively, thorough chronicle of the
momentous decade that saw the Third Republic, the Third Reich, World War II,
Picasso, Gide, Ernst, Miro, Celine, Renoir.

THE GOLDEN THIRTEEN: Recollections of the First Black Naval Officers. Edited by
Paul Stillwell. (Naval Institute Press, $21.95.) From interviews with eight of
the first 13 black American naval officers and three of the white officers who
trained them, Mr. Stillwell has created a moving oral history. Gen. Colin L.
Powell contributes the foreword.

HEISENBERG'S WAR: The Secret History of the German Bomb. By Thomas Powers.
(Knopf, $27.50.) Did the Nobel laureate deliberately retard Germany's progress
toward an atomic bomb? Mr. Powers, in this thorough, exciting book, says that he
did.

HISTORY AND ITS IMAGES: Art and the Interpretation of the Past. By Francis
Haskell. (Yale University, $50.) An unusually eloquent history of scholars'
attempts to reach the past through pictures, beginning with the Renaissance.

A HISTORY OF WARFARE. By John Keegan. (Knopf, $27.50.) Mr. Keegan, the most
readable and original of military historians, argues that war is an omnipresent
cultural ritual of mankind, from which the ruthless modern notion of disciplined
total war was an aberration.

IN AN ANTIQUE LAND. By Amitav Ghosh. (Knopf, $23.) Medieval and modern life in
the Levant illuminate and complement each other in this study by an
anthropologist.

LET THE SEA MAKE A NOISE . . . : A History of the North Pacific From Magellan to
MacArthur. By Walter A. McDougall. (Basic Books, $30.) Lively narrative, bold
analysis and prodigious research adorn this popular history of a vast sea
surrounded by mutually mistrustful peoples.

THE NEW DEALERS: Power Brokers in the Age of Roosevelt. By Jordan A. Schwarz.
(Knopf, $27.50.) Through a series of biographical profiles, the author drives
home his arresting message -- that the New Deal was state capitalism, a system
to modernize the underdeveloped West and South.

OPERATION EPSILON: The Farm Hall Transcripts. Introduction by Sir Charles Frank.
(University of California, $30.) Eavesdropping on the private and unremorseful
conversations of 10 German scientists during their internment by the Allies in
1945.

THE PATH TO GENOCIDE: Essays on Launching the Final Solution. By Christopher R.
Browning. (Cambridge University, cloth, $39.95; paper, $10.95.) A magisterial,
rigorously meditated study of how Nazi Germany instituted the industrialized
murder of millions of men, women and children.

THE SCHOOLHOUSE DOOR: Segregation's Last Stand at the University of Alabama. By
E. Culpepper Clark. (Oxford University, $25.) Old-fashioned narrative history,
built around two stories: Autherine Lucy's abortive attempt to integrate the
University of Alabama in the mid-1950's and Gov. George C. Wallace's abortive
attempt to stop integration in the 1960's.

THE SEVENTH MILLION: The Israelis and the Holocaust. By Tom Segev. (Hill & Wang,
$27.50.) A frank and devastating chronicle, by a columnist for an Israeli
newspaper, of the uses and abuses of the Holocaust by political leaders in
Palestine and Israel.

TO THE GATES OF RICHMOND: The Peninsula Campaign. By Stephen W. Sears. (Ticknor
& Fields, $24.95.) How George B. McClellan, the general whom nobody loves, lost
the largest single campaign of the Civil War because he was unwilling to fight.

TURNING POINT: A Candidate, a State, and a Nation Come of Age. By Jimmy Carter.
(Times Books/ Random House, $22.) A thoughtful reappraisal of Mr. Carter's first
campaign, in 1962, when he was defeated in his bid for a seat in the Georgia
State Senate, challenged the returns and ultimately won.

Medicine & Psychology

A DANCING MATRIX: Voyages Along the Viral Frontier. By Robin Marantz Henig.
(Knopf, $23.) A highly readable account of how adept viruses are at finding new
pathways to new human populations.

FIRST, DO NO HARM. By Lisa Belkin. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A reporter conveys a
series of wrenching medical and ethical decisions and the people who make them.

THE FORGOTTEN PLAGUE: How the Battle Against Tuberculosis Was Won -- and Lost.
By Frank Ryan. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A sobering narration, with possible
implications for AIDS, of the 70-plus years and the generations of scientists it
took to cure tuberculosis (which is still around).

THE FOUNTAIN OF AGE. By Betty Friedan. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) In an age when
life expectancy keeps growing but "old" is still a dirty word, Ms. Friedan
discovers the mystique of life after age 60.

FREUD, JUNG, AND HALL THE KING-MAKER: The Historic Expedition to America (1909).
By Saul Rosenzweig. (Rana House/Hogrefe & Huber, $27.50.) Freud, 53, got an
honorary degree from Clark University. What an occasion! Mr. Rosenzweig
re-creates it.

GENIE: An Abused Child's Flight From Silence. By Russ Rymer. (HarperCollins,
$20.) Raised speechless and in isolation for her first 13 years, Genie inspired
heroic efforts to rehabilitate her and to study important principles of language
-- mostly in vain.

GIRL, INTERRUPTED. By Susanna Kaysen. (Turtle Bay/Random House, $17.) A memoir
describing how the author, "interrupted in the music of being 17," spent two
years of her youth as a mental patient.

NOBODY NOWHERE: The Extraordinary Autobiography of an Autistic. By Donna
Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) That Ms. Williams is able to decode
the closed vernacular of autism -- the rocking, the headshaking and the
scrunching up of toes -- is a testament to how remarkable her journey has been.

OLD FRIENDS. By Tracy Kidder. (Richard Todd/ Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.)
Presenting the friendship of two old men thrown together in a nursing home, Mr.
Kidder asks us to rethink our ideas of successful aging.

ON KISSING, TICKLING, AND BEING BORED: Psychoanalytic Essays on the Unexamined
Life. By Adam Phillips. (Harvard University, $19.95.) A children's
psychotherapist writes poetically about the dangers of vigilance and the
pleasures of carelessness.

TRANSLATE THIS DARKNESS: The Life of Christiana Morgan. By Claire Douglas.
(Simon & Schuster, $25.) This remarkable woman plumbed the depth of her
unconscious as a member of the Jung circle in the 1920's, discovering, Ms.
Douglas argues, a recognizable protofeminist inside.

YOU MUST BE DREAMING. By Barbara Noel with Kathryn Watterson. (Poseidon, $21.)
The courageous first-person account of the moral awakening of a woman who was
drugged and raped by an old, world-renowned psychiatrist, and then, against all
advice, sued him for malpractice.

Men, Women & Children

ANNA: A Daughter's Life. By William Loizeaux. (Arcade, $19.95.) This memorial to
the author's daughter, who died in infancy, tracks the process of becoming a
parent and of bereavement with an honesty that has no fear of pathos or
embarrassment.

THE CREATION OF FEMINIST CONSCIOUSNESS: From the Middle Ages to
Eighteen-seventy. By Gerda Lerner. (Oxford University, $27.50.) A rough-hewn
history of how the exclusion of women from history has left them "adrift in an
eternal present."

DAUGHTERS OF FEMINISTS. By Rose L. Glickman. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A
historian's reassuring report on 50 daughters of feminist mothers: the progeny
turn out to be proud, brilliant adults who applaud their mothers' values.

FATHERHOOD IN AMERICA: A History. By Robert L. Griswold. (Basic Books, $24.) The
modern American dad, this historian says, has changed a lot since World War II
-- he's now more pal than patriarch.

FIRE WITH FIRE: The New Female Power and How It Will Change the 21st Century. By
Naomi Wolf. (Random House, $21.) A rambunctious book calling for women to lay
siege to America's crumbling male-centered, male-controlled social structure, to
claim the victory they have already won.

GENDER PLAY: Girls and Boys in School. By Barrie Thorne. (Rutgers University,
cloth, $35; paper, $12.95.) A sociologist finds that the fun and games of
childhood are rehearsals for the domination and subservience of adulthood.

MEN, WOMEN, AND AGGRESSION. By Anne Campbell. (Basic Books, $22.) Why are men
more violent than women? Learned attitudes, says this inquiry into the roots of
aggression.

THE MORNING AFTER: Sex, Fear, and Feminism on Campus. By Katie Roiphe. (Little,
Brown, $19.95.) A tough book by a 25-year-old who argues that women are too
brave and too smart to fit the role of eternal victim imposed on them by some
ideologies that expand the meaning of rape.

MOTHER DAUGHTER REVOLUTION: From Betrayal to Power. By Elizabeth Debold, Marie
Wilson and Idelisse Malave. (Addison-Wesley, $22.95.) An exciting synthesis of
contemporary feminism, with a persuasive message: the way to end the tensions
between daughters and mothers is feminist mothering.

OUTERCOURSE: The Be-Dazzling Voyage. By Mary Daly. (HarperSanFrancisco, $24.)
More radical cheek from the philosopher, theologian, mythologist, explorer,
pirate, warrior, witch, fairy and leprechaun who gave us "Gyn/Ecology."

THE PEOPLE IN THE PLAYGROUND. By Iona Opie. (Oxford University, $23.) The
Rabelaisian humor and poetic language of English children at play, presented by
a woman who has watched them for 40 years.

PROTECTING SOLDIERS AND MOTHERS: The Political Origins of Social Policy in the
United States. By Theda Skocpol. (Belknap/Harvard University, $34.95.) This
history of the welfare state is a sensitive examination of the occasions when
parsimony and individualism were not the main determinants of American policy.

RIGHTEOUS DISCONTENT: The Women's Movement in the Black Baptist Church,
1880-1920. By Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham. (Harvard University, $34.95.) A
sophisticated and inspirational study of the time when black women, in the
interest of survival and resistance, made the Baptist church their institutional
base.

SEX CRIMES. By Alice Vachss. (Random House, $21.) A passionate former prosecutor
gives frightening glimpses of rapes and angry depictions of the sloppy
detectives, cowardly prosecutors and lenient judges who seem to favor the
rapists.

SEXUAL VIOLENCE: Our War Against Rape. By Linda A. Fairstein. (Morrow, $23.)
Manhattan's chief sex crimes prosecutor explains recent sensible changes in the
law and walks readers through some successful prosecutions.

A TASTE OF POWER: A Black Woman's Story. By Elaine Brown. (Pantheon, $25.) In
1974, Ms. Brown was appointed leader of the Black Panther Party; hence this
chilling, entertaining account of a woman in a movement rich in nihilism, sexism
and misogyny.

UNBEARABLE WEIGHT: Feminism, Western Culture, and the Body. By Susan Bordo.
(University of California, $25.) This excellent study links the fear of women's
fat with a fear of women's power and shows that as opportunities for women
increase, their bodies dwindle.

UNSPEAKABLE ACTS: The Ordeal of Thomas Waters-Rimmer. By Greggory W. Morris and
Thomas J. Waters. (Morrow, $23.) A young man who lived with a pedophilic foster
father for 12 years sues a state agency in Ohio for negligence and then, with
his co-author, uncovers more family horrors -- incest, murder and alcoholism.

THE WORST OF TIMES. By Patricia G. Miller. (Aaron Asher/HarperCollins, $22.) Ms.
Miller, a lawyer specializing in matrimonial law, interviewed some 50 people
with firsthand experience for this memoir of abortion before Roe v. Wade.

WRITING WOMEN'S WORLDS: Bedouin Stories. By Lila Abu-Lughod. (University of
California, $30.) An anthropologist recounts the conversations, stories, jokes
and songs of Muslim Arab women living in the Western Desert of Egypt.

Poetry

 THE FATHER. By Sharon Olds. (Knopf, $20.) For years Sharon Olds has highlighted
sex and death in her poetry, and here these concerns come together in powerful,
sometimes breathless, scrupulously honest poems about her father dying of
cancer. These poems examine grief with surprising delicacy and in startling
depth.

GILGAMESH: A New Rendering in English Verse. By David Ferry. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, cloth, $15; paper, $10.) Only a handful of poets could come close to the
subtlety and intelligence of the verse in this translation of the Babylonian
epic, which is so masterly that it belongs as much to David Ferry as to its
original poet. The intensity of this story of love, loyalty and the search for
eternal life makes it a very modern, and profoundly moving, experience.

IF IT BE NOT I: Collected Poems, 1959-1982. By Mona Van Duyn. (Knopf, $25.)
FIREFALL: Poems. By Mona Van Duyn. (Knopf, $20.) The first seven volumes of
capacious, particular poetry by a vigorous Midwesterner, collected as one and
published simultaneously with her eighth.

NEW & SELECTED POEMS. By Stephen Berg. (Copper Canyon, cloth, $21; paper, $12.)
A hard spareness marks the poetry of Stephen Berg and the world he has presented
in work over the 20 years covered in this volume; and the world of literature
and the mind becomes a refuge. The light he throws on life may be too sharply
focused for some readers; he makes us remember what we need to, but might
forget.

NEW AND SELECTED POEMS. By Mary Oliver. (Beacon, $20.) Poems from 30 years that
astonish by their consistent tone. Mary Oliver's concerns are public, her poetry
sustaining; she so completely controls the rhythm and pacing of her lines that
her poems teach us how to read them. This volume received the 1992 National Book
Award.

SELECTED POETRY. By John Hollander. (Knopf, $27.50.) TESSERAE: And Other Poems.
By John Hollander. (Knopf, $20.) A selection from 14 earlier books of poetry by
a subtle, learned, major American master; published simultaneously with his
strong-as-ever new book.

TRAVELS. By W. S. Merwin. (Knopf, $20.) Sturdily written, wonderfully
entertaining verse tales of an assortment of displaced characters make this a
book
rich in incident and irony. Few contemporary poets can tell stories as well as
these are told, in a blend of romantic rhetoric and plain-spoken imagery that
transports them into the realm of legend.

Politics & Current Affairs

ACROSS THE WIRE: Life and Hard Times on the Mexican Border. By Luis Alberto
Urrea. (Anchor/ Doubleday, paper, $9.) Not for the fainthearted, this book of
linked vignettes presents a tough, subjective view of the suffering, the trash
heaps and the slums of Tijuana.

THE ARABISTS: The Romance of an American Elite. By Robert D. Kaplan. (Free
Press, $24.95.) A thoughtful, balanced view of the inbred State Department
specialists whose fluffs (like their dealings with Saddam Hussein) have received
more attention than their successes (like the exodus of the Ethiopian Jews).

AT THE HIGHEST LEVELS: The Inside Story of the End of the Cold War. By Michael
R. Beschloss and Strobe Talbott. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A useful and readable
account of events of great magnitude by two keen observers who enjoyed unusual
access.

THE BALTIC REVOLUTION: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and the Path to Independence.
By Anatol Lieven. (Yale University, $29.95.) A correspondent for The Times of
London investigates the social and economic consequences of the Baltic
independence movements.

BETRAYAL: The Untold Story of the Kurt Waldheim Investigation and Cover-Up. By
Eli M. Rosenbaum with William Hoffer. (St. Martin's, $25.95.) One of the deputy
directors in the Justice Department's office for prosecuting Nazi war criminals
contends that the exposure of Mr. Waldheim's Nazi past was stalled by, of all
people, the Nazi hunter Simon Wiesenthal.

THE BIRTH OF FREEDOM: Shaping Lives and Societies in the New Eastern Europe. By
Andrew Nagorski. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A lively, vivid work of journalism
about life in post-Communist Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Poland, where, Mr.
Nagorski believes, the idea of a middle way between capitalism and socialism has
completely vanished.

BOILING POINT: Republicans, Democrats, and the Decline of Middle-Class
Prosperity. By Kevin Phillips. (Random House, $23.) A thorough and acerbic
analysis of how the American middle class, over the last 20 years, has been
losing its cash and its access to services, education, advancement and baseball
tickets.

CATHOLIC SCHOOLS AND THE COMMON GOOD. By Anthony S. Bryk, Valerie E. Lee and
Peter B. Holland. (Harvard University, $37.50.) This rare mix of social history,
number crunching and case study is meant to disabuse us of the idea that all
Catholic schools are suburban, affluent, stuffy and white.

CONDUCT UNBECOMING: Lesbians and Gays in the U.S. Military, Vietnam to the
Persian Gulf. By Randy Shilts. (St. Martin's, $27.95.) A landmark history that
explores the ferocity and tenacity of those who have carried out -- with
physical and psychological intimidation -- the purges against lesbians and gay
men in the military.

CRUELTY AND SILENCE: War, Tyranny, Uprising, and the Arab World. By Kanan
Makiya. (Norton, $22.95.) The cruelty is that of the Saddam Hussein regime in
the author's native Iraq; the silence, that of the Arab intellectuals who
condone or assist it.

CULTURE AND IMPERIALISM. By Edward W. Said. (Knopf, $25.) Mr. Said argues for
the centrality of imperialism to European high culture, especially when it hides
itself in the periphery.

DEAD MAN WALKING: An Eyewitness Account of the Death Penalty in the United
States. By Helen Prejean. (Random House, $21.) Governments should stop killing
people, says a nun who has often seen death row up close.

THE END OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY AND THE END OF THE MODERN AGE. By John Lukacs.
(Ticknor & Fields, $21.95.) For one thing, Mr. Lukacs says, it was a short
century, beginning in 1914 and ending with the fall of Communism. Now, he argues
provocatively, the world will be ruled by intransigent nationalism.

AN EVIL CRADLING. By Brian Keenan. (Viking, $22.50.) The Irish poet is
omnipresent in Mr. Keenan's beautiful and adroit memoir of the four and a half
years he was held hostage in Beirut.

THE EXILE: Cuba in the Heart of Miami. By David Rieff. (Simon & Schuster, $21.)
Drawing on conversations with Cubans of all stripes living in Miami, Mr. Rieff
concludes that this diaspora is losing its sense of nostalgia for the homeland.

EXIT INTO HISTORY: A Journey Through the New Eastern Europe. By Eva Hoffman.
(Viking, $23.) Seeking out the ordinary, Ms. Hoffman, a Polish-born writer with
a touch of American objectivity, makes a tour of Mitteleuropa, returning with
subtle insights about a world in transition.

THE FBI: Inside the World's Most Powerful Law Enforcement Agency. By Ronald
Kessler. (Pocket Books, $22.) Not to be overtaken by recent events, this
impressive study of the modern F.B.I. by an investigative reporter runs all the
way up to William S. Sessions's dismissal in July.

THE GULF CONFLICT 1990-1991: Diplomacy and War in the New World Order. By
Lawrence Freedman and Efraim Karsh. (Princeton University, $29.95.) The fullest
history yet of George Bush's famous victory, by two accomplished military
scholars.

HATE ON TRIAL: The Case Against America's Most Dangerous Neo-Nazi. By Morris
Dees and Steve Fiffer. (Villard, $21.) Mr. Dees, the trial lawyer for the
Southern Poverty Law Center, tells, with great moral power, how he successfully
sued Tom Metzger, a white supremacist, for inciting the murder of an Ethiopian
student in Oregon.

HEROES OF MY TIME. By Harrison E. Salisbury. (Walker, $19.95.) With a decidedly
earthbound definition of heroism, Salisbury, a former correspondent and editor
for The New York Times who died this year at the age of 84, recounts his
remarkable meetings with the likes of Nikita Khrushchev, Zhou Enlai and Malcolm
X.

INSIDE GORBACHEV'S KREMLIN: The Memoirs of Yegor Ligachev. (Pantheon, $27.50.)
The recollections of a tough, honest Bolshevik who was instrumental in bringing
Mikhail S. Gorbachev to power but could not follow where Mr. Gorbachev wanted to
go.

LIFE'S DOMINION: An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom.
By Ronald Dworkin. (Knopf, $23.) Mr. Dworkin contends that the relevant choices
cannot depend on anyone's "right to live" (or to die), but must proceed from the
idea that life is sacred, and that therefore the state must not interfere.

MARTYR'S DAY: Chronicle of a Small War. By Michael Kelly. (Random House, $23.) A
personal account of extremely vivid experiences during and after the Persian
Gulf war, by a journalist who later became a correspondent for The New York
Times.

THE NEW REICH: Violent Extremism in Unified Germany and Beyond. By Michael
Schmidt. (Pantheon, $23.) A German journalist's vivid picture of the brutal,
alienated, well-organized neo-Nazis in Germany.

PANDAEMONIUM: Ethnicity in International Politics. By Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
(Oxford University, $19.95.) Senator Moynihan, one of ethnicity's prime
explorers, argues that modern politics has culpably slighted the subject and
that national self-determination has proved a perilous principle.

PEACE PROCESS: American Diplomacy and the Arab-Israeli Conflict Since 1967. By
William B. Quandt. (Brookings Institution/University of California, cloth,
$38.95; paper, $15.95.) In what may prove to be the definitive account of the
United States' role in the Arab-Israeli peace talks, a senior fellow at the
Brookings Institution shows how America's ever-changing cast of diplomats has
undermined its mission.

THE PENTAGON WARS: Reformers Challenge the Old Guard. By James G. Burton. (Naval
Institute Press, $23.95.) A retired Air Force colonel's scathing and enormously
sad memoir declares that the business of buying the nation's weapons is
thoroughly corrupt.

PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY. By Paul Kennedy. (Random House, $25.)
The author of "The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers" undertakes to examine the
probable consequences of the world's present conduct. No nation will be
unscathed; many will be miserable; ours will decline more than some but less
than the most unfortunate.

RACE MATTERS. By Cornel West. (Beacon, $15.) What will turn our racial climate
more benign? Mr. West, an optimist but a wise one, thinks good will, hard work
and intelligence may yet help.

RETURN TO PARADISE. By Breyten Breytenbach. (Harcourt Brace, $22.95.) A bleak,
beautifully written and doggedly subjective collage of reminiscences, political
rants and prose poems -- the third panel of the Afrikaner poet's "triptych"
about his troubled sojourns in South Africa.

A SINGLE TEAR: A Family's Persecution, Love, and Endurance in Communist China.
By Wu Ningkun in collaboration with Li Yikai. (Atlantic Monthly, $21.) In this
poignant memoir the teacher Wu Ningkun, persecuted as a counterrevolutionary for
22 years in Maoist China, tries to answer the question: "Have I suffered and
survived in vain?"

SLEEPING ON A WIRE: Conversations With Palestinians in Israel. By David
Grossman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) An Israeli journalist explores, with
great force, the anguish of Israel's largest minority, an anonymous population
of a million Arabs, who since the founding of Israel have lived in suspended
animation -- rejected, detested, suspected by the state they live in.

THE SPIRIT OF COMMUNITY: Rights, Responsibilities, and the Communitarian Agenda.
By Amitai Etzioni. (Crown, $22.) A thoughtful commentary about and a promotion
of communitarianism, the ideology that aims to address the moral crises of our
day and restore civic responsibility to society.

SPY TRADER: Germany's Devil's Advocate and the Darkest Secrets of the Cold War.
By Craig R. Whitney. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) The story of an East
German lawyer who acted as middleman for the exchange of political prisoners
during the cold war.

SWORDFISH: A True Story of Ambition, Savagery, and Betrayal. By David
McClintick. (Pantheon, $25.) A grimly fascinating and sometimes funny account of
a successful sting operation by an entertaining lot of Federal drug agents
against a Colombian cocaine ring.

TALES OUT OF SCHOOL: Joseph Fernandez's Crusade to Rescue American Education. By
Joseph A. Fernandez with John Underwood. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The
school-reform wars as observed by a chief combatant, the tough, intelligent,
nimble and occasionally abrasive man who was ousted as New York City's Schools
Chancellor.

TWIN PILLARS TO DESERT STORM: America's Flawed Vision in the Middle East From
Nixon to Bush. By Howard Teicher and Gayle Radley Teicher. (Morrow, $23.) A
member of the National Security Council staff until 1987 and his wife vent their
anger over the shortsightedness of America's twin objectives in the Middle East
-- to block Soviet influence and to keep the oil coming.

UNDER FIRE: The NRA and the Battle for Gun Control. By Osha Gray Davidson.
(Holt, $25.) In this informative report about the National Rifle Association's
history and lobbying activities, Mr. Davidson argues that the organization has
been weakened by its uncompromising stance that American democracy depends on
unfettered access to guns.

UNDER A NEW SKY: A Reunion With Russia. By Olga Andreyev Carlisle. (Ticknor &
Fields, $21.95.) A detailed, insightful account of Russian intellectuals and
trends since 1960 by the daughter and granddaughter of pre-Revolutionary
literary figures.

Reference

 THE ANCHOR BIBLE DICTIONARY. David Noel Freedman, editor in chief. (Six
volumes, Doubleday, $360.) This monumental (7,035 pages) and truly ecumenical
work brings together the efforts of nearly 1,000 contributors writing on
innumerable major and minor biblical topics.

BARTLETT'S FAMILIAR QUOTATIONS: 16th Edition. Edited by Justin Kaplan. (Little,
Brown, $40.) Not striving to please everyone or even to find a cultural center,
the new book of quotations is a cultural montage; it embraces the oddball
fragments of our world and chucks out some gassy classics.

THE COLUMBIA ENCYCLOPEDIA: Fifth Edition. Edited by Barbara A. Chernow and
George A. Vallasi. (Columbia University/Houghton Mifflin, $125.) A 3,000-page
foot-high volume that gracefully succeeds the 1975 edition.

SAFIRE'S NEW POLITICAL DICTIONARY: The Definitive Guide to the New Language of
Politics. By William Safire. (Random House, $35.) A much-revised edition of the
jovial, idiosyncratic lexicon by The New York Times's weekday political
columnist and weekend word policeman.

Religion & Philosophy

 THE CHURCH AND THE LEFT. By Adam Michnik. (University of Chicago, $24.95.)
Published in Polish in 1977, Mr. Michnik's essay argues that the secular
opposition to Communism must reconsider the reflexive anticlericalism of the
left.

THE CULTURE OF DISBELIEF: How American Law and Politics Trivialize Religious
Devotion. By Stephen L. Carter. (Basic Books, $25.) A professor of law at Yale
examines what he calls a 20-year-old tendency to ban religion from public
discourse, and argues that a just balance of mutually respectful forces is
required, not a victory for church or secularism.

DAKOTA: A Spiritual Geography. By Kathleen Norris. (Ticknor & Fields, $19.95.) A
deeply moving book that is itself an act of devotion by a poet who is a married
Protestant and also a lay member of a Benedictine community on the Great Plains.

THE FRONTIERS OF CATHOLICISM: The Politics of Ideology in a Liberal World. By
Gene Burns. (University of California, $40.) A sociologist at Princeton
University, feeding on a broad range of events and texts, examines the
ever-widening ideologies of American bishops and nuns.

GOD'S POLITICIAN: Pope John Paul II, the Catholic Church, and the New World
Order. By David Willey. (St. Martin's, $18.95.) A BBC journalist who covers the
Vatican gives us a clear view of the first Slav Pope -- a courageous,
intellectual man chalking up great political achievements in Poland, Russia,
Haiti and South America.

ISLAM AND THE WEST. By Bernard Lewis. (Oxford University, $25.) Learned essays
on political culture, encounters and confrontations, including the author's
responses to the critics of the "Orientalism" they say he practices.

METAPHYSICS AS A GUIDE TO MORALS. By Iris Murdoch. (Allen Lane/Penguin, $35.)
Ms. Murdoch teaches us to be wary when approaching any philosophy, including her
own Platonic view that our moral sense depends on our imperfect apprehension of
perfection.

THE NEW COLD WAR? Religious Nationalism Confronts the Secular State. By Mark
Juergensmeyer. (University of California, $25.) This dispassionate study of
violent religious movements asks: are we about to witness a geopolitical battle
between zealots and Western secular societies?

ORDINARY TIME: Cycles in Marriage, Faith, and Renewal. By Nancy Mairs. (Beacon,
$20.) An account of spiritual growth and discovery by the author of "Remembering
the Bone House."

PAUL VI: The First Modern Pope. By Peter Hebblethwaite. (Paulist Press, $29.95.)
A former Jesuit's rich, vivid, almost day-by-day biography of Giovanni Battista
Montini, who, from the time he entered the papal service in 1923 until his death
in 1978, struggled to reform the church while keeping its structure.

SHAME AND NECESSITY. By Bernard Williams. (Centennial/University of California,
$25.) A clever, agile argument that the Homeric Greeks may have been wiser than
the great thinkers of Athens and possibly even wiser than we.

THE TIBETAN BOOK OF LIVING AND DYING. By Sogyal Rinpoche. (HarperSanFrancisco,
$22.) Tibetan Buddhism, an ancient, complex and mystical religion, gracefully
expounded by a native Tibetan authority (the Dalai Lama contributes a preface).

UPON THIS ROCK: The Miracles of a Black Church. By Samuel G. Freedman.
(HarperCollins, $22.50.) A report on a year spent with St. Paul Community
Baptist Church in a black section of Brooklyn and with its wise and
sophisticated pastor.

Science

 THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE: Science Without Legend, Objectivity Without
Illusions. By Philip Kitcher. (Oxford University, $39.95.) With great
originality, a philosopher argues that science's job is not to be intellectually
pure but to provide a means of uncovering truths about nature, an enterprise
served by the competitiveness and greed of its practitioners.

ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA. By John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) The last
of four volumes on American geology explores the construction of California out
of traveling rocks from all over the world in the last 100 million years.

BAD SCIENCE: The Short Life and Weird Times of Cold Fusion. By Gary Taubes.
(Random House, $25.) It seemed too good to be true and it was, showing that true
scientists, properly motivated, can deceive themselves like anyone else.

COMPLEXITY: Life at the Edge of Chaos. By Roger Lewin. (Macmillan, $22.) A vivid
account of the eccentric characters who are blazing fresh paths through biology,
physics and mathematics to create a new interdisciplinary science.

COMPLEXITY: The Emerging Science at the Edge of Order and Chaos. By M. Mitchell
Waldrop. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) Mr. Waldrop relays the exhilaration of the
scientists and enthusiasts at the Santa Fe Institute as they found a new field.

DREAMS OF A FINAL THEORY. By Steven Weinberg. (Pantheon, $25.) Finding austere
inspiration in the possibility that the universe may one day be reduced to bare
mathematical formulas, a Nobel laureate argues that we should plunge
wholeheartedly into that future.

THE END OF PHYSICS: The Myth of a Unified Theory. By David Lindley. (Basic
Books, $25.) Flattening every unified theory in his path, Mr. Lindley bravely
argues that physics is kaput right now, not because all the work is done but
because physics depends on elegant mathematical theories that can never be
experimentally verified.

EQUATIONS OF ETERNITY: Speculations on Consciousness, Meaning, and the
Mathematical Rules That Orchestrate the Cosmos. By David Darling. (Hyperion,
$19.95.) A graceful swan dive into cosmic speculation. At the bottom: the idea
that mind is the cosmos.

FUZZY LOGIC. By Daniel McNeill and Paul Freiberger. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) How
computer scientists generated programs to handle propositions like "40 percent
true," and why such programs are often more useful than plain old true/false
logic.

GENIUS IN THE SHADOWS. A Biography of Leo Szilard: The Man Behind the Bomb. By
William Lanouette with Bela Silard. (Robert Stewart/ Scribners, $35.) A
delightful, anecdote-rich biography of the Hungarian physicist who knew
everybody and everything but got no credit because his best friends could barely
stand him.

THE GHOST OF THE EXECUTED ENGINEER: Technology and the Fall of the Soviet Union.
By Loren R. Graham. (Harvard University, $22.95.) An authority on the history of
Soviet science pieces together the story of Peter Palchinsky, a Soviet engineer
who was executed in 1929 for treason; his life serves as a parable for the
failed Soviet technological experiment.

THE GOD PARTICLE: If the Universe Is the Answer, What Is the Question? By Leon
Lederman with Dick Teresi. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A Nobel laureate with a
gift for folksiness looks at the search for a unified theory of nature and for
the particle that could play a part in determining the properties of the
fundamental forces.

IN THE BEGINNING: After COBE and Before the Big Bang. By John Gribbin. (Little,
Brown, $22.95.) Nimbly applying Darwinian evolution to astrophysical systems,
Mr. Gribbin finds that the universe itself is alive and breeding baby universes.

NATURE'S MIND: The Biological Roots of Thinking, Emotions, Sexuality, Language
and Intelligence. By Michael S. Gazzaniga. (Basic Books, $25.) In a bold,
absorbing challenge to the tabula rasa theory of mind, a neurobiologist asserts
that drug addicts, alcoholics, depressives, musical geniuses and philosophers
are not made but born.

THE NEANDERTALS: Changing the Image of Mankind. By Erik Trinkaus and Pat
Shipman. (Knopf, $30.) A detailed historical perspective on the debate about the
extinct, thick-skulled, heavy-browed primate that may be closer kin to us than
we like to think.

THE NORTON HISTORY OF CHEMISTRY. By William H. Brock. (Norton, $35.) A
discipline that has formed society far more than any war or revolution is here
made clear and accessible.

THROUGH A UNIVERSE DARKLY: A Cosmic Tale of Ancient Ethers, Dark Matter, and the
Fate of the Universe. By Marcia Bartusiak. (HarperCollins, $27.50.) Writing with
clean intelligence and a gift for quotations, Ms. Bartusiak examines the very
human pursuit of seeing what the universe is made of.

Science Fiction

 THE DESTINY MAKERS. By George Turner. (Avonova/Morrow, $20.) The Australian
novelist dispassionately homes in on a tough issue: In a world of runaway
population growth, who decides which babies don't get born?

DREAM OF GLASS. By Jean Mark Gawron. (Harcourt Brace, $21.95.) A complex and
engrossing philosophical novel that explores, with great energy and flashes of
poetry, the future of freedom in a world dominated by computers.

THE HAMMER OF GOD. By Arthur C. Clarke. (Spectra/Bantam, $19.95.) Who but Mr.
Clarke could write such a bracing, cheerful story about scientists cooperating
to ward off an asteroid heading for Earth?

THE INNKEEPER'S SONG. By Peter S. Beagle. (Roc/Penguin, $20.) A beautifully
written tale of love and loss, set in a world of hard-edged magic where quests
don't necessarily end in triumph and moral lessons are teasingly complex.

NIGHTSIDE THE LONG SUN. By Gene Wolfe. (Tor/Tom Doherty, $21.95.) Mr. Wolfe,
master of the tightly focused epic, begins a new multivolume series about a
young priest whose faith leads him to disturbing discoveries about his world and
his gods.

VIRTUAL LIGHT. By William Gibson. (Bantam, $21.95.) The man who initiated
cyberpunk with his novel "Neuromancer" offers a mellower but no less gripping
view of the future, with likable characters and an upbeat ending.

WHITE QUEEN. By Gwyneth Jones. (Tor/ Tom Doherty, $19.95.) A stylistically
challenging novel about the profound bewilderment generated when humanoid aliens
in the 21st century land on an Earth transformed by political revolution and a
new pathogen.

Spies & Thrillers

 BRIDES OF BLOOD. By Joseph Koenig. (Grove, $19.95.) What makes this crackling,
shocking police procedural about a murdered prostitute wildly different is its
setting -- the hate-filled streets and prisons of present-day Iran.

HARD DRIVE. By David Pogue. (Diamond/ Berkley, paper, $4.99.) A company in
Silicon Valley, on the verge of unveiling a computer that takes dictation, is
foiled by a virus, and Armageddon begins.

THE JOURNEYMAN TAILOR. By Gerald Seymour. (Edward Burlingame/HarperCollins,
$20.) An Irish terrorist and a woman who is a British secret service agent
tangle in this morally complex, captivating novel.

MAESTRO. By John Gardner. (Otto Penzler, $23.) The Herbie Kruger trilogy has
become a tetralogy, because the old ace of British intelligence has come out of
retirement to interrogate one of his favorite conductors, a 90-year-old
German-born American suspected of being a Nazi and a K.G.B. informant.

THE NIGHT MANAGER. By John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) Mr. le Carre's solution to
the disappearance of the Soviet Union is to create an arms dealer-cum-drug lord
as smart as the Devil.

POINT OF IMPACT. By Stephen Hunter. (Bantam, $21.95.) This superbly written page
turner, about a sniper-turned-hunter who has been framed, teaches us, among
other things, the details of shooting at a target half a mile away.

THE SILENCER. By Simon Louvish. (Interlink, cloth, $24.95; paper, $10.95.) This
stingingly written novel about an Israeli journalist whose career is stymied by
a mysterious figure called the Silencer partakes of satire, surrealism, politics
and espionage.

Sports

 THE ERA. 1947-1957: When the Yankees, the Giants, and the Dodgers Ruled the
World. By Roger Kahn. (Ticknor & Fields, $22.95.) Eleven seasons of meaningful
lunacy as seen by a New York baseball bard.

JIM MURRAY: An Autobiography. By Jim Murray. (Macmillan, $20.) The Pulitzer
Prize-winning sportswriter covers his own eventful life with stinging wit.

THE LIP: A Biography of Leo Durocher. By Gerald Eskenazi. (Morrow, $23.) A
biography of the colorful player (Yankees, Reds, Dodgers and Cardinals) and
manager (Dodgers, Giants, Cubs and Astros), who mouthed off until his death in
1991 at the age of 86.

THE MAN IN THE DUGOUT: Baseball's Top Managers and How They Got That Way. By
Leonard Koppett. (Crown, $22.50.) A veteran sportswriter gives a breakneck,
boiled-down history of the game from the manager's perspective.

O HOLY COW! The Selected Verse of Phil Rizzuto. Edited by Tom Peyer and Hart
Seely. (Ecco, paper, $8.95.) Not just an elegy to the many moments of baseball
boredom but poetry that captures the confusion of the human mind, by the
longtime Yankee play-by-play announcer.

Travel, Nature & Adventure

 AT THE HAND OF MAN: Peril and Hope for Africa's Wildlife. By Raymond Bonner.
(Knopf, $24.) Mr. Bonner inspects nearly every relevant argument about
conservation in Africa and he finds that there will be none, without support by
intelligent exploitation.

THE AYE-AYE AND I: A Rescue Mission in Madagascar. By Gerald Durrell. (Arcade,
$22.95.) Mr. Durrell's 24th book, written in support of grave efforts to save a
rare mammal and its environment, is a sharply detailed romp in an enchanted
landscape of unique flora and fauna.

THE CRYSTAL DESERT: Summers in Antarctica. By David G. Campbell. (Houghton
Mifflin, $21.95.) Mr. Campbell, a biologist, spent three seasons in the
Antarctic and returned with eerily clear perceptions of that sere and
uninhabitable place.

DRUMS ALONG THE CONGO: On the Trail of Mokele-Mbembe, the Last Living Dinosaur.
By Rory Nugent. (Houghton Mifflin, cloth, $21.95; paper, $10.95.) And was it
found? Well, something was, and the trip was loads of fun.

EXTREME CONDITIONS: Big Oil and the Transformation of Alaska. By John
Strohmeyer. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A journalist's account, full of
old-fashioned outrage, of the self-destruction of a nouveau riche state.

GOING BACK TO BISBEE. By Richard Shelton. (University of Arizona, cloth, $35;
paper, $15.95.) A memorable ride through time and experience from booming Tucson
to struggling Bisbee, Ariz., with fascinating sidetracks into botany, history
and biology.

THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS. By Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Peter Davison/Houghton
Mifflin, $18.95.) What do dogs want, feel, even think? A close, sympathetic
observer's data make this a profoundly unsilly question.

KAYAKING THE FULL MOON: A Journey Down the Yellowstone River to the Soul of
Montana. By Steve Chapple. (HarperCollins, $23.) Self-discovery by an arduous
journey into the wilderness is a literary device that works just fine in this
instance for the author and his family.

KING LEOPOLD'S DREAM: Travels in the Shadow of the African Elephant. By Jeremy
Gavron. (Pantheon, $23.) An Englishman's boundlessly energetic quest finds
elephants distinctly less endangered, in some places, than they used to be.

NATURAL OPIUM: Some Travelers' Tales. By Diane Johnson. (Knopf, $21.) The
distinguished essayist meditates frugally and perceptively on the psychological
strangeness of travel, from Tanzania to Mormon Utah.

NOAH'S GARDEN: Restoring the Ecology of Our Own Back Yards. By Sara Stein.
(Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) Ms. Stein's argument is persuasive and succinct: You
have no ground to bemoan the fate of the rain forests unless you've cultivated
diversity in your own patch of suburbia.

PICTURING NATURE: American Nineteenth-Century Zoological Illustration. By Ann
Shelby Blum. (Princeton University, $59.50.) This clear, critical narrative by a
former archivist at Harvard University's Museum of Comparative Zoology shows
that 19th-century American illustrations of animals form a record of how science
looked, in both the passive and active sense.

ROAD SCHOLAR: Coast to Coast Late in the Century. By Andrei Codrescu. (Hyperion,
$19.95.) A poet and author mounts a red '68 Caddy for a journey in essay
writing, a countertravelogue that visits lots of spots important in the less
orthodox history of America.

SONGBIRDS, TRUFFLES, AND WOLVES: An American Naturalist in Italy. By Gary Paul
Nabhan. (Pantheon, $22.) A personal, informative and entertaining tour of
Tuscany and Umbria, by an ethnobotanist who has set out to see whether the
example of St. Francis has served the land well.

VISIONS OF CALIBAN: On Chimpanzees and People. By Dale Peterson and Jane
Goodall. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) This odd and moving dialogue between an
English professor and a chimp expert centers on the master-slave relationship
between humans, who often act like brutes, and chimps, who are remarkably human.

WHOREDOM IN KIMMAGE: Irish Women Coming of Age. By Rosemary Mahoney. (Houghton
Mifflin, $21.95.) Having traveled through Dublin and Corofin talking to women --
nudists, nuns, poets and preteens -- Ms. Mahoney captures some stunning shards
of Irish life.

True Crime

 DEATH BENEFIT: A Lawyer Uncovers a Twenty-Year Pattern of Seduction, Arson, and
Murder. By David Heilbroner. (Harmony/Crown, $20.) How a straight-arrow lawyer
ran to earth the appalling psychopath who killed a client's daughter.

EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED: A True Story of Obsessive Love, Murder, and
Betrayal. By Ann Rule. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A harrowing look at a murderous
modern-day Southern psychopath.

THE MISBEGOTTEN SON. A Serial Killer and His Victims: The True Story of Arthur
J. Shawcross. By Jack Olsen. (Delacorte, $21.95.) A fascinating and forceful
account of a life of torture, mutilation and homicide.

ONCE UPON A TIME: A True Story of Memory, Murder, and the Law. By Harry N.
MacLean. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A true-crime tale that transcends its genre in
its examination of the sudden return of a witness's buried memory.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              206 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 5, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Collection

BYLINE: By LAUREL GRAEBER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 88; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2016 words


This selection of paperbacks is from the New & Noteworthy column since the 1993
summer reading issue.

AFRICAN LAUGHTER: Four Visits to Zimbabwe
By Doris Lessing. Harper Perennial, $13.
An author reports on her homeland and its hardships.

AFTER HENRY
By Joan Didion. Vintage International, $12.
Essays on subjects ranging from politics to the death of a beloved editor.
AFTER THE WAR WAS OVER: Hanoi and Saigon
By Neil Sheehan. Vintage, $9.
A look at present-day Vietnam.
ALL STORIES ARE TRUE
By John Edgar Wideman. Vintage Contemporaries, $10.
Short fiction evoking the author's inner-city boyhood.
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES
By Cormac McCarthy. Vintage International, $12.
Winner of the National Book Award, a novel about a teen-age horse trainer in
1950's Texas.
AMERICAN GIRL: Scenes From a Small-Town Childhood
By Mary Cantwell. Penguin, $10.
Remembrances of Bristol, R.I., in the 1930's.
THE ANT AND THE PEACOCK: Altruism and Sexual Selection From Darwin to Today
By Helena Cronin. Cambridge University, $19.95.
Explaining behavior that Darwinian philosophy won't.
BAILEY'S CAFE
By Gloria Naylor. Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
Fiction about the men and women who frequent a restaurant in a black Brooklyn
neighborhood in 1948.
BALANCING ACTS: Essays
By Edward Hoagland. Touchstone/
Simon & Schuster, $11.
A collection ranging from travel writing to political commentary.
BAND OF BROTHERS: E Company, 506th Regiment, 101st Airborne From Normandy to
Hitler's Eagle's Nest
By Stephen E. Ambrose. Touchstone/
Simon & Schuster, $13.
The story of a rifle company during World War II.
BECOMING A MAN: Half a Life Story
By Paul Monette. HarperSanFrancisco, $12.
An author's struggle to accept his homosexuality.
BEFORE AND AFTER
By Rosellen Brown. Dell, $5.99.
The impact of a murder charge on a fictional family.
BERLIN JOURNAL: 1989-1990
By Robert Darnton. Norton, $10.95.
How Germans responded to the fall of the wall.
BERNARD SHAW: The Concluding Volume
The Lure of Fantasy, 1918-1950,
and The Last Laugh: An Epilogue, 1950-1991
By Michael Holroyd. Vintage, $18.
The last third of the playwright's long life.
A CHORUS OF STONES: The Private Life of War
By Susan Griffin. Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.
An examination of the relationships between individual lives and national
destinies.
THE CHANGE: Women, Aging and the Menopause
By Germaine Greer. Fawcett Columbine, $12.50.
How menopause can lead to creativity and renewal.
CHANGING FORTUNES: The World's Money and the Threat to American Leadership
By Paul A. Volcker and Toyoo Gyohten.
Times Books/Random House, $14.
International monetary affairs explained.
CHINATOWN: Portrait of a Closed Society
By Gwen Kinkead. Harper Perennial, $12.
A vivid exploration of New York City's Chinatown.
THE CIVIL WAR IN THE AMERICAN WEST
By Alvin M. Josephy Jr. Vintage Civil War Library, $15.
How both sides exploited the Western territories.
DE GAULLE: The Ruler, 1945-1970
By Jean Lacouture. Translated by Alan Sheridan.
Norton, $15.95.
A biography of the general as France's leader.
THE DIAMOND LANE
By Karen Karbo. Tusk/Overlook, $13.95.
A fictional sendup of life in Hollywood.
DOWN FROM TROY: A Doctor Comes of Age
By Richard Selzer. Back Bay/Little, Brown, $10.95.
Memoirs of a physician's youth in upstate New York.
A DUBIOUS LEGACY
By Mary Wesley. Penguin, $10.
Fiction about the postwar lives of an English couple.
THE EVENING STAR
By Larry McMurtry. Pocket Books, $5.99.
Another novel about the eccentric Aurora Greenway.
FACES AT THE BOTTOM OF THE WELL:
The Permanence of Racism
By Derrick Bell. Basic Books, $10.
Dialogues and fables revealing racial attitudes.
THE FAMISHED ROAD
By Ben Okri. Anchor/Doubleday, $12.
Fiction about Nigeria on the eve of independence.
FOOLSCAP
By Michael Malone. Washington Square/
Pocket Books, $10.
A professor's fictional travails following the writing of a mock-Elizabethan
play.
A GOOD SCENT FROM A STRANGE MOUNTAIN
By Robert Olen Butler. Penguin, $10.
Winner of the Pulitzer Prize, a collection of short fiction about Vietnamese
immigrants.
THE GREAT WORLD
By David Malouf. Vintage International, $12.
A novel about two men, both imprisoned by the Japanese during World War II.
HISTORY OF AIDS: Emergence and Origin of a Modern Pandemic
By Mirko D. Grmek. Translated by Russell C. Maulitz and Jacalyn Duffin.
Princeton University, $16.95.
The author argues that the viruses causing AIDS might have existed for
centuries.
IN MY PLACE
By Charlayne Hunter-Gault. Vintage, $11.
A memoir of life as one of the first two black students at the University of
Georgia.
IN SEARCH OF ANTI-SEMITISM
By William F. Buckley Jr. Continuum, $13.95.
Why American support for policies that undermine Israel is tantamount to
anti-Semitism.
INTELLECTUAL MEMOIRS: New York 1936-1938
By Mary McCarthy. Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $9.95.
Politics, literature and love affairs.
INTOXICATED BY MY ILLNESS: And Other Writings on Life and Death
By Anatole Broyard. Edited by Alexandra Broyard. Fawcett Columbine, $10.
An author's determination to live fully while dying.
THE INVISIBLE EPIDEMIC: The Story of Women and AIDS
By Gena Corea. Harper Perennial, $12.
How the medical establishment has ignored the particular needs of the female
victims of HIV.
JFK: Reckless Youth
By Nigel Hamilton. Random House, $15.
The years from the President's birth to his first election to public office.
KISSINGER: A Biography
By Walter Isaacson. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $16.
The life of a statesman who was almost as powerful as the Presidents he served.
JAGUAR OF SWEET LAUGHTER: New & Selected Poems
By Diane Ackerman. Vintage, $11.
Poetry celebrating the natural world.
THE JOURNALS OF JOHN CHEEVER
Ballantine, $14.
Diaries covering more than 30 years of the author's life.
THE LAST MAGICIAN
By Janette Turner Hospital. Ivy, $5.99.
Fiction examining the consequences of a childhood game that ended tragically.
LET THE DEAD BURY THEIR DEAD: And Other Stories
By Randall Kenan. Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $10.95.
Interrelated pieces about the fictional town of Tims Creek, N.C., and its black
inhabitants.
LEVIATHAN
By Paul Auster. Penguin, $11.
Fiction in which a writer analyzes the life of one of his late peers.
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG:
The Words That Remade America
By Garry Wills. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $12.
The Pulitzer Prize-winning analysis of our nation's most famous Presidential
address.
LOVE MEDICINE: New and Expanded Version
By Louise Erdrich. Harper Perennial, $12.
The author's first novel of Indian life, with new chapters added and existing
ones resequenced.
LOVE'S MANSION
By Paul West. Tusk/Overlook, $13.95.
Fiction about the long marriage of childhood sweethearts, inspired by the
author's parents.
THE MAGIC LANTERN: The Revolution of '89 Witnessed in Warsaw, Budapest, Berlin
and Prague
By Timothy Garton Ash. Vintage, $10.
A firsthand report on the collapse of Communism.
A MAN'S PLACE
By Annie Ernaux. Translated by Tanya Leslie.
Ballantine, $9.
Autobiographical fiction about the author's father.
MEETING AT THE CROSSROADS: Women's Psychology and Girls' Development
By Lyn Mikel Brown and Carol Gilligan.
Ballantine, $12.50.
A study of 100 girls reveals that adolescence often means the sacrifice of
independence.
MEMORIES OF THE FORD ADMINISTRATION
By John Updike. Fawcett Crest, $5.99.
Fiction about the life of a college professor and his reflections on two
Presidencies.
MR. MANI
By A. B. Yehoshua. Translated by Hillel Halkin.
Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $12.95.
Five one-sided "conversations" revealing the history of a Jewish family.
NATURAL HISTORY
By Maureen Howard. Harper Perennial, $12.
The aftermath of a murder as experienced by a cast of characters in Bridgeport,
Conn.
OTA BENGA: The Pygmy in the Zoo
By Phillips Verner Bradford and Harvey Blume.
Delta, $12.95.
The sad history of an African put on display in the United States at the turn of
the century.
OVER THE EARTH I COME:
The Great Sioux Uprising of 1862
By Duane Schultz. Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $12.95.
The circumstances in Minnesota leading to one of the nation's bloodiest ethnic
conflicts.
PLAN B FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS: Stories
By Ron Carlson. Penguin, $10.
Short fiction about uneasy accommodations to life.
PLAYING IN THE DARK:
Whiteness and the Literary Imagination
By Toni Morrison. Vintage, $9.
How white American writers use black characters.
POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY
By Alice Walker. Pocket Star, $5.99.
A novel in which an African woman seeks her cultural identity by submitting to
ritual clitoridectomy.
REGENERATION
By Pat Barker. William Abrahams/Plume, $10.
Fiction featuring the poet Siegfried Sassoon and his psychiatrist in the midst
of World War I.
ROUND UP THE USUAL SUSPECTS
The Making of "Casablanca" -- Bogart, Bergman, and World War II
By Aljean Harmetz. Hyperion, $12.95.
An illuminating study of a much-loved film.
THE SECRET HISTORY
By Donna Tartt. Ivy, $6.99.
A novel about college students involved in a murder.
SHOW BUSINESS
By Shashi Tharoor. Arcade/Little, Brown, $11.95.
Fiction exploring India's film industry and its politics.
SUMMER MEDITATIONS
By Vaclav Havel. Translated by Paul Wilson.
Vintage, $11.
Reflections by the president of the Czech Republic.
TELLER'S WAR: The Top-Secret Story Behind the Star Wars Deception
By William J. Broad. Touchstone/
Simon & Schuster, $13.
The physicist Edward Teller and the pursuit of the Strategic Defense Initiative.

THEODORE DREISER: An American Journey
By Richard Lingeman. Wiley, $19.95.
The troubled life of a writer in young urban America.
THROUGH THE IVORY GATE
By Rita Dove. Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
A novel by the Poet Laureate of the United States about the memories of a young
black female musician.
TIME AND TIDE
By Edna O'Brien. Warner, $10.99.
Fiction about an Irish woman trapped in misery.
TO THE END OF TIME: The Seduction and Conquest of a Media Empire
By Richard M. Clurman. Touchstone/
Simon & Schuster, $13.
What happened when Time Inc. decided to wed Warner Communications.
TRAUMA AND RECOVERY
By Judith Lewis Herman. Basic Books, $14.
An investigation of post-traumatic psychological disorder, particularly among
women.
THE TRENCH: Volume 2 of the "Cities of Salt" Trilogy
By Abdelrahman Munif. Translated by Peter Theroux. Vintage International, $14.
A fictional Arab town and the discovery of oil.
TROLLOPE: A Biography
By N. John Hall. Oxford University, $17.95.
An examination of the author's life and art.
THE TRUELOVE
By Patrick O'Brian. Norton, $10.95.
More of the author's trademark fiction about the high seas and the Napoleonic
Wars.
UP IN THE OLD HOTEL: And Other Stories
By Joseph Mitchell. Vintage, $14.
New Yorker pieces on the city, from 1938 to 1965.
THE VOLCANO LOVER: A Romance
By Susan Sontag. Anchor/Doubleday, $12.
A historical novel about Lord Nelson and the Hamiltons.
WHAT IT TAKES: The Way to the White House
By Richard Ben Cramer. Vintage, $15.
An analysis of the 1988 campaigns of six candidates.
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE . . . AND YOUNG
Ia Drang: The Battle That Changed the War in Vietnam
By Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway.
Harper Perennial, $13.
Looking back on November 1965 and the bloodiest campaign of the war.
WHITE BUTTERFLY
By Walter Mosley. Pocket Books, $5.50.
The black detective Easy Rawlins on another case.
WOMAN OF VALOR: Margaret Sanger and the Birth Control Movement in America
By Ellen Chesler. Anchor/Doubleday, $14.95.
A portrait of the crusader for contraception.
YOUNG MEN & FIRE
By Norman Maclean. University of Chicago, $9.95.
The story of the fatal 1949 Mann Gulch fire in Montana, and the implications of
such tragedies for all our lives.
YOUR BLUES AIN'T LIKE MINE
By Bebe Moore Campbell. Ballantine, $12.
Fiction revolving around a racially motivated murder.
    LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              207 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 5, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
For Foreign Films, the Rules For an Oscar Are Set in Sand

BYLINE: By ANN HORNADAY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 30; Column 4; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1471 words


When the Academy Award nominations for best foreign language film are announced
in February, it is already certain there will be one conspicuous absence.
"Blue," a film by the Polish director Krzysztof Kieslowski about a French woman
mourning her dead husband and daughter, has not been accepted for competition,
even though it shared the Golden Lion with "Short Cuts" at the Venice Film
Festival. The film opens today in New York.

The snub continues something of a tradition for the Academy of Motion Picture
Arts and Sciences, whose rules for submitting foreign films have been criticized
as arbitrary. In fact, the submission process -- which ended last month -- often
gets more attention than the nominations and winners.

"No one really knows how it works," says James Ulmer, the international editor
for the Hollywood Reporter, a trade paper. "First you have the politics of the
Academy and Hollywood, then you have the politics of the submitting country,
then you have the politics of the distributors."

According to the Academy's official rules, films made in English may not compete
for best foreign film. Countries submit their best foreign-language films (only
one per country), and a committee at the Academy whittles those submissions down
to five. A nomination can increase a movie's box-office receipts by up to 25
percent in the United States and is therefore eagerly pursued.

No one knows which five films will end up on the ballot when it is mailed to
voters in February. But the Academy last week announced the 35 films that fit
its set of requirements for consideration. The list includes "The Wedding
Banquet" (Taiwan), "Farewell My Concubine" (Hong Kong), "Belle Epoque" (Spain),
"The Slingshot" (Sweden), Kurosawa's "Madadayo" (Japan), "Hedd Wyn" (a film in
Welsh from the United Kingdom) and "The Scent of Green Papaya" (Vietnam), as
well as films from Slovenia and Slovakia. "Blue," although in French, could not
be nominated by France because the epic "Germinal" had already claimed that
honor.

To compete for an Oscar nomination, according to the committee's guidelines,
motion pictures must have been "first released in the country of origin between
Nov. 1, 1992 and Oct. 31, 1993, and first publicly shown in a commercial theater
for the profit of the producer and exhibitor. The picture need not have been
released in the United States."

That means that the movie "Like Water for Chocolate," which opened this year in
the United States, and has done a whopping $19 million in business, cannot be
nominated this year because it was submitted by Mexico last year. (It was passed
over by the Academy.)

The rules further say that "the print submitted for award consideration must be
identical in form with the final version in general release in the country of
origin." This rule stems from the controversy involving "Cinema Paradiso," which
started out in 1989 as a three-hour film in its native Italy but ended up in
America at about two hours long. Competing distributors argued that Italy should
submit the version Italians sat through. ("Cinema Paradiso" still managed to
take home the Oscar.)

To abide by the "identical in form" rule, the version of "Farewell My Concubine"
that is being submitted to the Academy has, in fact, just reopened in Hong Kong,
15 minutes shorter than the version that played there last January.

THE MOST PROBLEMATIC section of the rules states: "The submitting country must
certify that creative talent of that country exercised artistic control of the
film. Dialogue track must be predominantly in a language of the country of
origin, except when the story mandates that an additional non-English language
be predominant."

In new guidelines issued this year, the Academy tries to clarify this
requirement by suggesting that "the submitting country must be represented in at
least two of these categories: producer(s), director(s), writer(s)." In
addition, the country should be represented in at least three of these
categories: art direction, cinematography, costume design, editing, sound and
music. Finally, "talent from the submitting country should constitute a
significant element of the cast."

Critics (and there are many) insist the Academy hasn't acknowledged the
realities of international film co-production, an increasingly popular strategy
wherein movies -- often with polyglot casts and crew -- are funded by more than
one country. While the Academy claims it wants as many films in competition as
possible, the new guidelines could have eliminated such popular films as "The
Wedding Banquet," "Farewell My Concubine" and "The Scent of Green Papaya."

"The Wedding Banquet," a romantic comedy about a Taiwanese homosexual in the
United States made by the Taiwanese director Ang Lee, was co-produced using
American and Taiwanese money. The production team was American; the dialogue is
about half English, half Taiwanese, and the film was shot in New York.
Nevertheless, the committee ruled that it could be nominated from Taiwan.

"The Scent of Green Papaya," a tale of Vietnamese life in the 50's, directed by
Tran Ahn Hung, made history this year when it became the first film submitted to
the Academy from Vietnam, which had been subject to a trade embargo since 1975.
The movie won the top prize for a first film at the Cannes Film Festival this
year.

But the film could have run afoul of the Academy's rules about the creative
team's country of origin. The director, a Vietnamese based in Paris, made the
film on a sound stage in France, using French and Vietnamese crews; the project
was financed with French money and used a primarily French cast. The committee
ruled, nevertheless, that Vietnam could submit the film.

"Farewell My Concubine," an epic about two performers of Beijing Opera, had a
particularly tough time. When the movie was first released, China banned any
showing of it domestically, although the ban was subsequently lifted. Meanwhile,
the film had shared the top prize (with "The Piano") at Cannes. But because of
its harsh portrayal of China's Cultural Revolution, China instead submitted a
lesser-known movie called "Country Teachers." That left "Farewell My Concubine,"
with a Hong Kong production company, star and copyright, to be submitted by that
country.

Less fortunate was "Blue." The film, submitted by Poland, was not accepted for
competition because it was deemed by the Academy to have "no significant Polish
element" (although the writers, director, cinematographer and composer are all
Polish) and was in French.

"I don't think the rules take into account the realities of film making in
Europe," said Marin Karmitz, who produced "Blue." The film, he added, is the
first part of a trilogy (ironically, about the new, more culturally diverse
Europe). "All three films had crews from France, Poland and Switzerland. On the
sets, three or four languages were being spoken. I don't see how you can have as
a criteria the language of the film itself."

Defending the Academy's ruling, Bruce Davis, the executive director, said: "It's
a French setting, in French, about France. We felt that the picture was Polish
in the sense that 'The Secret Garden' or 'Chinatown' were Polish." ("The Secret
Garden" was directed by Agnieszka Holland and "Chinatown" by Roman Polanski.)

Every few years, a popular foreign film like "Blue" fails to dodge the Academy's
bullet. Foreign-language films "are certainly one of our more troublesome
categories," admits Mr. Davis, "and we're constantly tinkering with the rules
because of it."

Recent brouhahas involving foreign films include last year's 11th-hour
disqualification of "A Place in the World," which was made in Argentina,
directed by an Argentine, with an Argentine cast. But when Argentina passed up
the film, the producers decided to submit it from Uruguay, since one investor
and a co-writer were Uruguayan.

In the end, the Academy yanked the film's nomination at the last minute.  There
followed the new guideline specifying that "individuals with producer credit
whose contributions were essentially financial will not be regarded as
satisfying the requirement."

Two years ago, the highly acclaimed "Europa, Europa" was overlooked by Germany,
its country of origin, in what was seen as a paroxysm of cultural chauvinism.
Germany reasoned that the director, Ms.  Holland, was from Poland, not Germany.
Others thought the Germans were embarrassed by the movie's theme (about a Jewish
boy who pretends to be a Nazi during World War II) and therefore resisted making
"Europa, Europa" the official submission.

In 1990, China inexplicably sought to have its entry, "Ju Dou," rescinded just
as the nominations were to be announced. It was too late. "Ju Dou" went on to
lose to "Journey of Hope," a Swiss film about Turkish immigrants.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Juliette Binoche in Kieslowski's "Blue" -- It doesn't qualify as
the Polish submission for an Oscar. (Miramax Films)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              208 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 5, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Soul Central

BYLINE: By MICHEL MARRIOTT

SECTION: Section 9; Page 1; Column 1; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 1585 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


Moving as silently as dawn's approach, Art Manley walked over dew-dampened grass
one morning recently to an old, concrete fountain at the center of an acre of
municipal park land. The 31-year-old jazz musician took a long look out over the
slumbering neighborhood that stretched before him in blocks of neat,
pastel-colored houses, European-village-style shops and towering cypress, cedar
and palm trees.

Only then, as he had for months of mornings, did Mr. Manley plant his snakeskin
loafers in the sod, square his shoulders, close his eyes and lift his trumpet to
his expertly pursed lips.

For more than an hour, Mr. Manley -- smartly dressed in a gray Italian-cut suit,
starched white shirt, floral-print tie and pocket handkerchief -- blew a
jazz-steeped reveille for this square-mile chunk of predominantly black
southwest Los Angeles that is known as Leimert Park.

"I feel a lot of love around here," he said in a whispery voice as he returned
approving nods to passersby for his just-finished rendition of "Stella by
Starlight." "That's why I come here every morning.

"People really appreciate things over here," said Mr. Manley, who lives a
35-minute bus ride away and who never asks for contributions for his outdoor
concerts. "Nobody has ever told me to shut up." Nor is anyone likely to in
Leimert Park, which many see as a homespun cultural center in the making.

The neighborhood was created in 1927 by the developer Walter H. Leimert and
designed by Olmstead & Olmstead, the successor firm to that of the designer of
Central Park.

Leimert (pronounced luh-MERT) Park is situated just south of the Santa Monica
Freeway, northeast of the Los Angeles International Airport and north of the
city of Inglewood. More than 8,000 people live in this mostly middle-class
enclave, which is about 82 percent black. Asians and Hispanics make up most of
the remainder. More people own their homes than rent. Property values are
relatively high; crime is relatively low.

Despite an ailing local economy and the riots of April 1992, which also struck
this close-knit community, Leimert Park has become a haven for black musicians,
artists, artisans and entrepreneurs of African-American culture and tastes.
Still a long way from tourists' must-see lists, it has developed over the last
five years into an Afrocentric enclave, much like Fort Greene, Brooklyn.

Leimert Park has "excellent potential" to become a nationally recognized center
of Pan-African culture, arts and entertainment, said Charles E. Loggins,
professor of urban and regional planning at California State Polytechnic
University in Pomona. His students completed a study of the area last year.

But there are also stress lines beneath the successful surface. Some merchants
and artists believe the area is growing too fast for its own fragile good.

From dimly lit shops hardly larger than walk-in closets to the blond-planked
floors of sun-gorged galleries, anything from ceramic Aunt Jemimas to masks and
headpieces from the Yoruba of Nigeria is for sale.

At Brian Breye's Museum in Black, visitors can gaze at slave manacles under
glass and shop for that certain African or African-American symbol of
self-affirmation.

You can order halal short ribs and fish sausage from the menu at the Shabazz
Restaurant, which is owned by James Abdullah Butler, 49, an aerospace software
designer, and managed by his son, Darrell Butler, 28, a former math teacher in
the public schools.

"We know it's the black hub," said the younger Mr. Butler who, like his father,
is a Muslim. "This area seems to have had a renaissance," he said. "There is a
cultural consciousness here where people are 'brothers and sisters.' "

Jackie Kimbrough-Ryan, who owns Kongo Square, an African-American culture shop,
with her sister and brother, said there is a "diversity of opinions" in Leimert
Park about its future. Clashes occur. "We have a lot of other-mindedness here,"
she said with a weary smile.

A tectonic rift has been widening since August, when Leimert Park was the site
of many of the activities in the citywide L.A. Festival. Some of the more
recently arrived owners of arts and cultural shops find themselves on one side,
with many longtime operators of the area's many service businesses like beauty
salons on the other.

Some merchants like Ms. Kimbrough-Ryan, 56, say they want to bring more Saturday
festivals to the area in hopes of attracting still more new faces with dollars
to spend.

But Stewart, 39, a longtime Leimert Park resident and hairdresser who uses only
his first name, is opposed to the idea. "If they have festivals on Saturday they
want to close the street, and that's disruptive to my business," he said from
his small loft on Degnan Boulevard, where he lives and runs the Venusian salon.
"I have a Saturday crowd, and they want be able to get to me. Let them have
their festivals on Sunday when I'm closed."

More pressing, many say, is the concern that Leimert Park has also been
rediscovered by large developers and real-estate speculators. Residents fear
that outside interests could strip the neighborhood of its kente cloth and
cowrie shell ambiance and replace it virtually overnight with the tinsel and
neon of so many other Southern Californian commercial districts.

Marla Gibbs, an actress best known for her role as Florence the maid on "The
Jeffersons" and more recently as the star of the series "227," bought buildings
for an arts and theater complex in Leimert Park in 1990. She said blacks must
take the initiative in the neighborhood's further development. "When someone
else comes in, it's going to be redeveloped for their purposes, not for yours,
because it's their money," she said. Ms. Gibbs said she had invested more than
$2 million in her Vision Complex Theater and Crossroads Arts Academy.

Councilman Mark Ridley-Thomas, who moved to Leimert Park a year ago and whose
Eighth District newly includes the neighborhood, said some changes to the area's
core business district, known as Leimert Park Village, were inevitable.

"This area has the possibility of being a nice little cultural niche of small
businesses that can thrive with a kind of African motif," he said, adding that
there must always be a place for noncultural businesses, too.

One of first changes his office has successfully sought will be welcomed by all:
the planting of trees along the southern edge of Leimert Park Plaza, a
triangular city park that faces the neighborhood's business district and the
residential area beyond.

But others clamor for more drastic changes. James Dodson, the owner of Banjo's
Yogurt and Deli, offers what he calls his "radical plan," which calls for
cooperative economics among village merchants, who would simultaneously raise
money and raze the aging village buildings.

"We should rebuild from the ground up," said Mr. Dodson, 46, who also works as
an electrician and who is studying marketing. He said he had to invest $15,000
to upgrade the wiring in his rented building. Few merchants share Mr. Dodson's
view.

In the meantime, however, life in the area goes on, and so does its beat --
literally. Along the village's one-block strip on Degnan Boulevard between 43d
Place and 43d Street, live and recorded music seem to be everywhere, spilling
into the street even in daytime and mixing with the low growl of the occasional
passing car. For a cover charge of $3 to $10, anyone can pull up a seat in the
long-running neighborhood nightclub scene.

Less than six hours before Art Manley gave his sunrise serenade, he had added
his trumpet's piercing voice to the beat of an Afro-Latin jazz band at Fifth
Street Dick's Coffee Company on 43d Place, which is across the street from the
park.

Last month, Whitman Mayo, an actor best known for playing with Redd Foxx in the
television series "Sanford and Son," prepared to guide a crew from Black
Entertainment Television on a tour of the latest "in" neighborhood. "There are
so many major cities that don't have anything like this, a place for people to
proudly develop their culture," he said.

Leimert Park is also catching the eye of black film makers. Allen and Albert
Hughes came to Leimert Park to shoot scenes for their film "Menace II Society."
And earlier in the fall, Andre Young, better known as the "gangsta" rapper Dr.
Dre, brought a film crew and extras here to shoot his music video "Let It Ride."

On week nights, however, band members outnumber the audiences in local clubs
like the World Stage. But Richard Fulton, the owner and founder of Fifth Street
Dick's Coffee Company, a two-story coffeehouse and jazz spot, said he is not too
concerned about the sometimes light turnouts.

"Fifth Street Dick's is not going to make money," he said of his business, which
he opened a year and a half ago. "I just want to bring the people together."

A 50-year-old Vietnam veteran, he said he once wandered the streets homeless and
in an alcoholic stupor. He is also a force behind the nearby Alcoholics
Anonymous center, one of the largest in the city. Mr. Fulton said some 3,000
people visit the center daily.

Commodore Williams, who described himself as a recovering alcoholic, is a
weathered fixture around Leimert Park. Supporting himself on odd jobs and his
good humor, he said the neighborhood was blooming again because of people like
Mr. Fulton.

"It's simple," he said as he swept the pavement in front of the coffeehouse.
"He's a man that's been to hell. Now he's trying to bring us a little heaven."

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Art Manley, top, giving an early-morning trumpet serenede to
the Leimert Park section of Los Angeles. Above, Richard Fulton outside his cafe.
(pg.1); The actress Marla Gibbs, above, has put more than $2 million into an
arts education and theater center in Leimert Park. (Jan Sonnenmair for The New
York Times) (pg. 10); Map of Los Angeles, indicating location of Liemert Park.
(The New York Times) (pg.10)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              209 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 5, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Trying to Breach the Walls of Hatred

BYLINE: By JOHN DARNTON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1306 words

DATELINE: LONDON


AT the Vietnam peace talks, the first argument was over the shape of the table.
If "talks about talks" ever get under way on Northern Ireland, there will
probably be fights not just about the shape of the table but about what it's
made of, whether it's level, where it should be and of course who should sit at
it.

In the 25 years of sectarian warfare in the six provinces of Ulster there has
not been such a push for peace as now. Everything seems to conspire in favor of
it: a new pragmatism on the part of the Irish Republican Army, a vague despair
from the Protestant Unionists, and an all-around war weariness from the British
soldiers and politicians who do the policing and the governing. What's more, the
global winds are propitious for settling long-time conflicts, from the Middle
East to South Africa.

Yet for all the hopeful signs, realism demands a tempering skepticism. Rarely
has there been a conflict so convoluted, with so many parties pulling in so many
directions.  Rarely has there been a situation in which there is a broad
consensus that the time has come for some serious talking -- and yet so many
obstacles to bargaining in good faith.

To an outsider, the war is baffling. Several months ago a South African
journalist visited Northern Ireland and wrote: "It's as grim a war as any . . .
and extremely perplexing to white South Africans. We say, what's the problem?
They're all white, they all speak English, they're all Christians of some kind
or another, and yet there they are, locked in a cycle of violence that rivals
Bosnia or the West Bank or even our own Boers-vs-blacks shindig in terms of
sheer bloody-mindedness and absolute intractability."

Northern Ireland proves the adages that similarities repel and that civil wars
are the most vicious of all. The foot soldiers are poor Catholics and poor
Protestants, sometimes from adjacent neighborhoods in Belfast's slums. The
Catholics, a minority, feel persecuted by the Protestants. The Protestants bleed
for continued union with Britain because if Northern Ireland combined with
Ireland they would instantly become the minority. Britain has vowed never to
betray the Unionists' wishes. Ireland has a territorial claim on the North,
written into its Constitution. It is an irrational solar system of planets and
satellites whirling in colliding orbits.

Lost in the brouhaha that accompanied last week's revelations that the British
Government has contacted the I.R.A. in secret were memories of earlier peace
overtures. In 1972 Gerry Adams and Martin McGuinness, the top leaders of Sinn
Fein, which is the legal political face of the banned I.R.A., were secretly
flown to England for talks with a Government minister in a Chelsea townhouse.
Similar peace contacts followed the I.R.A. hunger strikes in prison in the early
1980's. None of them came anywhere near success because all sides were locked
into contradictory positions over issues that cannot easily be parsed. It is a
classic case of "the law of the excluded middle" -- either the British leave or
they stay, either Northern Ireland joins Ireland or it remains part of the
United Kingdom.

Now, however, there are some nuances and shadows because the positions have
eroded somewhat over the years. With the end of the cold war, Britain no longer
feels so urgent a need to protect her back door across the Irish Sea. And the
cost of stationing 17,000 troops in Ulster and pouring in money for
redevelopment is draining. London would just as soon wash its hands of the whole
thing, if it could do so honorably.

In Ireland, reunification still has emotional power and geographic logic. But
the generation of Charles Haughey, a romantic nationalist, has given way to
Prime Minister Albert Reynolds, a pet food manufacturer. And considering the
dislocations caused in Germany by reunification, the prospect of taking over the
North has lost some of its allure, especially if there should be resistance from
the 950,000 Protestants. Dublin, like London, regards the I.R.A. as terrorist
and its people were outraged by the bombings last spring in Warrington, England,
and in October on the Shankill Road in West Belfast.

The I.R.A. has changed too. What one expert calls "the sickening policy -- you
blow up enough buildings and the British will leave" -- has given way, he says,
to "a culture of debate."

The expert, an Irish writer who has written often about the conflict, said:
"They no longer see it as a colonialist struggle. There's a shift in thinking.
They're asking the question: What to do with the Protestants if the British
leave, what rights do they have?"

But for all of that, it is not known how many I.R.A. fighters (the number of
armed people actively deployed is estimated at between 300 to 400) would go
along with a peace settlement. There may well be divisions or factions,
especially since the structure of separate cells makes internal discussion
difficult. It is interesting that last March -- a point when the British-I.R.A.
contacts were looking fruitful, as we now know -- was the time of the Warrington
explosion.

Unionists Get Ready for War

One group that has not shifted its position perceptibly is the Unionist
extremists. Formed into two paramilitary organizations that send hit men out to
assassinate ordinary Catholic workers to sow panic, they are now responsible for
as many deaths as the I.R.A. They have warned that they are preparing for war.

The problem is that a cease-fire between the I.R.A. and the British troops, even
if one were somehow achieved, would not mean much if the Loyalist gunmen
continued their terrorism. Sooner or later, the I.R.A. would be hard put not to
respond. And at the moment, there seems to be no Protestant politician who is
building bridges to the Protestant terrorists the way John Hume, the Catholic
leader of the Social Democratic Labor Party, is with the Catholic terrorists
through his discussions with Mr. Adams.

Even more, it is hard to envision a grand solution to the overall problem. It is
not a question of how to bring a racial majority into power, as in South Africa.
Or of granting autonomy that may someday lead to statehood, as in the West Bank.
It is a question of which country -- the United Kingdom or Ireland -- Northern
Ireland should belong to. On this question, from the Unionist viewpoint, there
is nothing to gain and everything to lose if the status quo changes.

One conceivable proposal is for an administration shared between Ireland and
Britain, at least as an interim step until the larger question of sovereignty is
solved. What is necessary is to persuade the Unionists that this kind of change
will not threaten their security and well-being. This is why the British
Government is leaning on Ireland to change the articles of its Constitution that
call for dominion over the North, and why it clings to its pledge that there
will be no change in the status of the North without the consent of the majority
there. In return, Ireland is trying to get the British to recognize the validity
of the concept of self-determination for both North and South, something that
makes the Unionists nervous. Some plans call for simultaneous referendums -- in
the North on ties to Britain, and in the South on the Constitution. But it is
easy to imagine this leading to chaos unless the voters have confidence in the
outcome, each of the other.

Because the basic positions of the Republicans and Unionists are so far apart
and intractable, they cannot easily be papered over with language. There are now
four or five separate plans or lists of proposed principles in circulation. But
most of them are vague generalizations designed to be mainly confidence-building
measures. If talks get under way, the hardest part will not be just getting the
various parties to the table.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Firebrands like the Rev. Ian Paisley grow more isolated . . .;
. . . as officials like Ulster Secretary Patrick Mayhew grope for peace.
(Associated Press; Agence France-Presse) (pg. 1); Riots erupted throughout
Belfast, the day Bobby Sands died after a 66-day hunger strike in 1981. (Gilles
Peress/Magnum) (pg. 5)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              210 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 5, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Did Time. Fought Flood. Willing to Work.

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1888 words


"What are you looking for?" the woman behind the desk at the job placement
agency in downtown Chicago said to the broad-shouldered young man standing
before her.

"Anything," he said, clutching his cap nervously. "Anything."

The woman asked what his last job had been.

"Burger King."

And when was that?

His voice was low: "1991."

The woman asked what he had been doing since.

He swallowed. "I've been in boot camp." And then, in the silence, he added
quickly: "For young men going down the wrong road."

His name is Greg Yance. He is 23 years old, a convicted drug dealer four months
out of the Illinois Department of Corrections Marine-style boot camp. What he
did not tell the woman -- indeed, what he did not get the chance to tell anyone
at the downtown hotels, department stores, restaurants and drugstores where he
has been looking for work -- was that as part of boot camp he had fought the
Mississippi River last summer, and in that war he was a hero.

To the people doling out job applications, boot camp might just as well be
prison. But to Greg Yance, those four months transformed him. "We say: 'We
graduate from boot camp; we can do anything,' " he said.

Hurling sandbags along the levees was the best job he has ever had. "We had a
purpose," he said. "People thanked us."

The people of what used to be the tiny town of Niota, Ill., have given
testimonials about how for eight days last July Mr. Yance and his fellow inmates
gave their all to hold back the river and to try to save their town. The other
inmates nicknamed Mr. Yance Nature Boy because he was always pointing out the
rabbits and birds. He was also the one who wrote the songs they sang as they
worked. One refrain: "I'll be your sandbagger, baby; I'm gonna sandbag all night
long."

When the levee finally broke, Mr. Yance wept. He and the other inmates had to be
ordered away from the river. The people of Niota are white, the inmates mostly
black. "It didn't matter what color you was," he said. "The only thing mattered
was how loud can you sing, and how fast can you throw the bags."

After they had moved onto the next town -- people up and down the river were
pleading for their help -- the inmates received a thank-you card, covered with
signatures, "with love from your Niota family."

Mr. Vance's three-minute conversation with the woman at the employment agency
was the only interview he had in a day spent going from the Marshall Field
department store to six downtown hotels to a restaurant with a "help wanted"
sign in the window. In a month of looking, he said to a visitor to Chicago, he
had only one other interview, equally brief, at a new Walgreen's downtown.

He said he had a good feeling about Walgreen's. "I was sure they were going to
call me," he said. Mr. Yance says he spends three days a week looking for work
and two days at home waiting for phone calls -- calls that don't come.

What Greg Yance would like to tell all the personnel people downtown who seem
not to have noticed him is this: "I've worked 18-hour days for $3 a week --
throwing sandbags dawn to dusk, stepping in water with snakes, and insects I
never seen before. It was 110 degrees. Our uniform be soaked with sweat when we
finished. After all that, we still got to do our P.T. -- physical training,
push-ups, jumping jacks, stomach crunches. Then we jog our three miles. I'm a
hard worker. I'll start at the bottom. Making $3 an hour would be a big
accomplishment for me."

The Ability to Lead

One of Mr. Yance's references is John W. McCorkle, the superintendent of the
boot camp, in Roodhouse, Ill. Mr. McCorkle, a 6-foot, 5-inch Vietnam veteran who
specializes in intimidating inmates, said he would give Mr. Yance a glowing
recommendation.

"You could see Yance's leadership qualities," he said in a telephone interview.
"He was the one who came out singing. He noticed all the little things, like the
wildlife. He showed me he had a good heart, a strong heart. He's extremely
bright. I wish I could put him in a uniform and have him be an officer here.
Wouldn't he be great?"

For now, though, Mr. Yance is back where he started, in one of Chicago's poorest
and most violent neighborhoods, on the West Side, where when he was 8 years old
his father was shot to death. Mr. Yance himself carries a bullet in the back of
his neck, though he was shot in Rockford, Ill., where his mother had sent him to
live with relatives several years ago in the hope he would be safer there, but
where he ended up selling drugs.

Twenty years ago a young man like Greg Yance might have found work in the
neighborhood tool and die factories; today they are mostly shut down. The wire
factory that is open has a sign out front: "No Help Wanted." The one growth
industry, it seems, is drug dealing. Mr. Yance said that when he got home last
August the local kingpin himself extended a job offer. Asked if he had
considered it, he said: "I'm not going to lie to you. I've thought about it. I
be thinking I could make $100, then $200. I want to give it to my mama, but
she'll ask me where I got it."

Trying to Be Positive

And so the other morning, like many mornings since he got off his three-month,
at-home detention at the end of October, Mr. Yance went looking for legal work.
He put on the clothes his stepfather, William Wade, a disabled blast-furnace
worker, had bought him a month ago: black slacks he had hemmed himself, a white
shirt he had ironed the night before, a gray and black sweater and matching tie,
black loafers with the heels already worn down from job-hunting.

His mother, Yvonne Yance, 39, who for 13 years has worked as a secretary in the
state welfare office, had some advice for the oldest of her three children as he
left the house: "Be positive."

Squaring his shoulders, Mr. Yance raised his voice in the trademark boot camp
chant: "Hoorah!"

Talking at home two evenings earlier, he listed all the people he knew who had
been shot and killed in the last year or so : "My homey Alex dead. Carl got
shot. He was in boot camp, came back and got into the same thing, selling drugs.
Pookie got killed. He my best friend since sixth grade. Derrick got shot. And
Baby Ty. Frank shot dead in the head. He died two days before his 23d birthday."

Asked to name the young men he knew who had jobs, he could think of only one:
Demetrius Simpson, 26, a $6.40-an-hour grill server in the employee cafeteria at
the Hyatt Regency downtown. (Pointing out that he has no arrest record, Mr.
Simpson said it took three months of looking to land that job three years ago.)

Tough New Battles

Battling a wild river seems easy, compared to what Greg Yance faces now. Last
summer was war: It did not matter that he had been expelled from school in the
10th grade for packing a gun, nor that he had belonged to the Vice Lords, nor
that he sold drugs.

Now, he is looking for a job in a town where even law-abiding citizens cannot
find work. His resume: a piece of lined paper on which he has painstakingly
printed his former jobs: Burger King, setting up rooms for conventions at the
Holiday Inn O'Hare, selling hot dogs at the Lincoln Park Zoo, cooking at a
fast-food restaurant.

Walking briskly toward the subway on a cold morning last week, Mr. Yance passed
two young men, in black parkas and skullcaps, on a stoop a block from his house.
One called out: "When you gonna come back and get some duckets?"

"P-O," Mr. Yance said, and kept walking. To the visitor, he explained: "That
mean posse out, you're out, bye-bye." The young men, he said, were drug dealers.

A few steps farther, he pointed to an alley. "That's where I got arrested," he
said. One more block was an abandoned building. "My brother got arrested there
for selling drugs the day after me." Felix Yance, 20, got out of jail last
summer. He is living with a girlfriend; he does not have a job.

Paying the $3.60 round-trip fare with money borrowed from his sister, Crystal,
22, who was working in telemarketing until she had her baby last month, Mr.
Yance rode the subway downtown. First stop: Marshall Field; they might need
stock boys for the Christmas rush. On the street outside, he smoked a cigarette
while men and women hurried by with their briefcases. "I'm nervous," he said.

'They Might Call Me'

He took the small black-pearl stud from his left ear and removed his cap.
"Respect," he said. Walking past the Christmas displays -- which reminded him
that he had spent last Christmas in jail -- he arrived at the ninth-floor
personnel office.

One question on his job application: Have you ever been convicted of a felony?
Mr. Yance wrote "yes," with a note that he would explain in an interview. When
he handed the form to the receptionist, she informed him that all the Christmas
jobs were taken.

"That's O.K.," he said, heading back to the street. "Someone might quit. They
might call me."

For the next four hours, with a biting wind blowing up from Lake Michigan, he
walked from one hotel to the next, filling out applications for security guards,
cashiers and restaurant workers. Entering the Hyatt, he looked uncomfortable. "I
feel bad," he said. "I lied to my mama. I told her I had an interview at the
Hyatt. I felt it was necessary. When things aren't going right for me, seems
like she gets depressed. She thinks it's still the 70's. She thinks I can just
walk out the door and get a job."

One of his last stops was the new Sheraton, where a year ago 9,000 people, many
of them unemployed professionals, had waited in a brutal snowstorm for a chance
to be busboys and housekeepers. Five hundred were hired. There was nothing for
Greg Yance.

It was inside the Marriott on Michigan Avenue that he spotted the ADIA
employment agency. The woman there said she would keep him in mind for temporary
office and "light industrial" work. Afterward, Mr. Yance confided that he had
considered lying: "I wanted to tell her I was in college."

He earned his high school equivalency diploma in boot camp. He would like to go
to college. He has a lot of big dreams. He talks of becoming a psychologist. Or
moving to Niota. "I dream of Niota," he said. "Me with a farm, and corn."

Jobs Are Few

But right now Niota is just that, a dream. The 250 townspeople who once lived
there, many of them factory workers, are hoping the Federal Government will buy
their ruined homes so they can relocate. While they still talk reverently of the
inmates working with sandbags, they are too anxious about their own futures to
be in a position to try to help Greg Yance, or anyone else.

Jobs that Mr. Yance might once have got in Chicago -- driving a truck, say, or a
bus, or working in a factory -- seem beyond his imagination. Thinking wistfully
of last summer, he said he would like to work with his hands. "That's what I'm
best at," he said. "Backbreaking work."

The next morning he went downtown again, still searching. In a telephone call
that night, his voice was flat. "One of my friends got killed today," he said.
"He was out there selling drugs. Somebody drove by and shot him in the head. I
seen the ambulance when I was coming home."

No, Mr. Yance said, he did not cry. "Same old thing," he said. "Another life
wasted."

He didn't find a job last week. He plans to continue his search this morning.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Greg Yance, a convict four months out of a Marine-style boot
camp, is looking for work in Chicago. (Steve Kagan for The New York Times)(pg.
A1); I'm a hard worker," said Greg Yance. "I'll start at the bottom. Making $3
an hour would be a big accomplishment for me." Mr. Yance is a convicted drug
dealer who is four months out of an Illinois Marine-style boot camp. He looked
for a job recently at an employment agency in Chicago. (Steve Kagan for The New
York Times)(pg. B9)

Map of Illinois showing location of Chicago. (pg. B9)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              211 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 5, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Glorious Mosaic

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section 13; Page 1; Column 1; The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2621 words


IT may be hard to be a saint in the city, but it's not for lack of places to
worship. From sweat-soaked services at a storefront Pentecostal church in Red
Hook to midday prayers at a gleaming new mosque on the Upper East Side to
weekend vespers at the grandly unfinished Cathedral of St. John the Divine, the
changing religious terrain of New York reflects both the city's ethnic diversity
and people's need to make sense of their lives in terms that bind them to one
another and transcend the ordinary.

"Whatever you're comfortable with -- culturally, esthetically or emotionally --
you'll find it in New York," said the Rev. Patricia Reeberg, executive director
of the New York Council of Churches, "whatever your tastebuds fancy in a
spiritual way."

New York is home to some 6,000 churches, temples and mosques. What follows is a
look at six of them. Some are old, some new; some are traditional, some much
less so. Each is a window into the varieties of religious experience in New
York.



'A Lighthouse in the Darkness'

Red Hook Gospel Tabernacle

72 Vandyke Street, Brooklyn

Like an evangelist wandering through the wilderness, the Rev. James F. Towles
sought a barren area bereft of hope to preach the word of God. He found it on
the fringes of Red Hook, right between the massive housing projects and the
aging industrial waterfront.

For five years he has been the pastor of this Pentecostal church, a boxy
three-story building that serves as a reminder that God is everywhere, even in
this bleak corner of Brooklyn where last year a beloved grammar school principal
named Patrick Daly died in the crossfire between drug dealers.

"We try to provide a little comfort for the residents of Red Hook," Mr. Towles
said. "Hopefully they find the comfort from the church instead of the drug
dealers."

As in the hundreds of storefront churches in the city's impoverished
neighborhoods, the fervent brand of worship practiced here brings freedom from
the hard routine of everyday life. To some, the church is the best, even the
only, hope for survival.

"This is a place where people can come and be delivered from drugs and
violence," said Rachel McNair, who is 72 years old. "This church is a lighthouse
in the darkness."

The flock may be small, but its 80 members are proud -- from the elderly church
ladies to the new parents who enter cradling their children in their arms. With
arms raised and eyes closed, they give thanks for blessings large and small.

A glistening streak of tears marked Scott Draper's cheeks one recent Sunday as
he shouted out his thanks for the change that his faith has brought to his life.
He used to belong to a gang and use drugs, the only way he knew to ease the pain
of poverty.

"This is where I find my peace now," said Mr. Draper, who is 26. "Drugs didn't
make me feel good. God does."

To help others feel good, Mr. Towles plans to open a halfway house for young
women being released from prison. But in the end, there is always the word.

That Sunday, a guest evangelist named Margie Gordon preached the power of the
good book and the school book.

"You have the Lord," she said. "That's your weapon. Study, study hard because
when you get out there, don't think the Devil's going to protect you. If you
don't have the sword of the spirit and the shield of the spirit, the Devil's
going to get you."

Mr. Draper raised his arms heavenward and shouted one more time: "A-MEN!"



A Challenge in Harlem

St. Aloysius Roman Catholic Church

219 West 132d Street, Manhattan

Two by two, the blue-robed members of the choir clapped and swayed their way up
the center aisle, their procession heralded by breathy organ music and nods of
recognition from the congregation.

The Rev. James Pierce brought up the rear, slowly striding to the altar with a
smile on his face and a lively bounce to his step, slowing down to take a censer
offered by a white-robed altar boy. He circled the altar as he swung the censer,
bowing deeply and solemnly amid the wispy clouds of incense before turning to
the congregation and choir.

"My Lord," he said, in the tones of a Southern preacher. "This does sound good!"

Welcome to Catholicism, Harlem-style.

The gospel joy that fills this turn-of-the-century church, where gilded cherubs
rest atop thick columns and a dazzling fresco of Christ looms behind the altar,
is the latest affirmation that this parish refuses to die. Just as it averted
closing in the mid-1930's by reaching out to the blacks who rapidly replaced the
original Irish immigrants, St. Aloysius is one of several black Catholic
congregations trying to secure a future by embracing a form of worship more
often found in the black Protestant churches.

Sermons are as likely to be delivered from the aisle as from the pulpit. Prayers
can be for a deceased friend or for justice for the hungry and homeless. When
the congregants extend the sign of peace, the perfunctory handshakes found in
many churches are replaced by hugs and broad smiles.

"We try to be spirited, not uptight," said Daniel Coakley, the president of the
parish council. "That's the way it's supposed to be."

As the strip of kente cloth he had draped over one shoulder of his business suit
underscored, he is gratified that black traditions have found their way into the
church. "Our Afrocentricity is involved in our services," he said. "It's a way
to better reach out."

One of the more recent arrivals is Regis McDonald, who found services at the
Harlem church more to his liking than those at his home parish in Westchester.

"What struck me was the inclusiveness of the worship service," said Mr.
McDonald, who is white. "The way the priest draws the parish into celebrating
with him. The social message the priest speaks in his homily is I think quite
unique in the New York area."

As a Jesuit, Father Pierce is a member of a religious order usually associated
with academic pursuits. And, here in Harlem, he has not lost the academic bent.
The parish grammar school has started several programs for disadvantaged youths,
to sharpen their academic skills and to boost their confidence in themselves and
their ability to contribute to their community.

"We want to take children who are less able to make it in a regular Catholic
school and get them to the point of being able to get into a Jesuit high
school," he said. "That's a real enrichment for children like them. To give them
a willingness to take a challenge and in the way find a new way of life."

It is a challenge for him, too, in a time when parishes all over the city are
being forced to cut costs and to raise money. Still, he says, his nine years at
St. Aloysius have been the best in his 30 years as a Jesuit.

"Challenge," he said, "is my business."



Finding the Way in a New Land

Phap Hoa Temple

2222 Andrews Avenue, the Bronx

The Bronx has been dubbed the Borough of Universities, a nod to its dozen
institutions of higher learning. But for many in the growing Vietnamese
community in University Heights, the search for ultimate enlightenment leads to
the unprepossessing confines of the Phap Hoa Buddhist Temple.

The gentle hum of chanting filters out from the red and yellow house, the
sing-song cadences marked by the delicate tinkle of a bell or the hollow beat of
a wooden drum. Inside, past the porch where dozens of shoes are left, dozens of
worshipers sit cross-legged, their hands clasped before them. Yellow-robed monks
lead the services before an imposing statue of the Buddha that rests on an altar
covered with plants and bowls of fruit.

"The point of this temple is to have people come together and teach them how to
be a good person," said Thich Thien Chi, the chief monk. "To guide them out of
their suffering."

This core of the faith -- that life is suffering, and that suffering can be
overcome by following the path to transcendence -- holds a special meaning for
many of those who come here. After the Vietnam War, some endured re-education
camps or braved rickety boats only to land in refugee villages. In the last 14
years, 7,500 Vietnamese have settled in this Bronx neighborhood, which has one
of 55 Federal relocation centers.

The monks know that the demands of establishing a new life lead some to forget
about their religion.

"Life can be very busy and they take care of their problems first," Thich Thien
Chi said. "They come to the temple, listen to Buddhism and just go."

But he has found a high-tech answer to that age-old problem -- his weekly
discourses are videotaped for review at home.

As in other immigrant communities, the temple is much more than a house of
worship; it is a place where the young people can also learn the language and
culture of their ancestors.

"We like to have a Vietnamese community back again," said Johnny Luong, the
temple's vice president. "Most of the older Vietnamese don't speak English so it
is very hard for them. They get here and sit down and talk and share."

Tom Bo, who is 17, often comes to pray for his grandmother, whose ashes rest in
a colombarium inside the temple.

"We pray that wherever she is, she is happy and to have a good life after
death," he said. "If she is in a bad condition, we pray. But we'll never know if
she is in a good condition, so we pray for a lifetime."



Tradition, With a Difference

Congregation Baith Israel Anshei Emes

236 Kane Street, Brooklyn

The comfort of tradition and the challenge of the modern co-exist at the Kane
Street Synagogue -- home to Brooklyn's oldest Jewish congregation and the first
Conservative synagogue in the Northeast led by a woman.

With services still in Hebrew but with an approach that allows men and women to
participate equally, the old Dutch Reformed church-turned-shul is a blend of
both worlds, much like the surrounding Cobble Hill neighborhood of 19th-century
brownstones and late-20th century two-career couples.

"There's something about the neighborhood and the look of the synagogue and the
inside of the sanctuary that is this interesting blend of old and new,
traditional and progressive," said Debra Cantor, the rabbi for the last six
years. "There's a lot of history here. But it's also a very dynamic place."

Though the old church has been its home only since 1905, Congregation Baith
Israel Anshei Emes dates back to 1856. Like many urban religious institutions,
Rabbi Cantor said, the congregation lost membership in the 1950's and 1960's as
many families moved away to the suburbs. But that trend has been reversed, as
young couples began moving into the neighborhood and toward the more traditional
branches of Judaism.

Some 300 families now belong to the congregation, which, lacking either a paid
cantor or Torah reader, demands an unusual level of participation. Some of her
congregants, the rabbi says, are "seekers," adding: "People want to connect with
other people who are connecting with tradition, who are reaching out beyond
themselves and for some experience of God's presence."

That's what Marsha Zeesman, a television producer, was looking for when she
joined the congregation last summer, after having attended a Reform synagogue
that left her wanting a more traditional, Hebrew service.

At first, she said, it was odd seeing a female rabbi in a Conservative
synagogue. But she has come to love the services, and the fact that women are
counted in assembling the minyan, the traditional quorum of 10.

"It's plucked out of the old world with some 1990's additions," she said. "It's
exciting on Saturday morning to hear, 'We needed you,' and I'm the 10th person.
When I was younger, women didn't count."



'An International Mosque'

Islamic Cultural Center of New York

1711 Third Avenue, Manhattan

Bright noonday sunshine suffused the clean, cavernous mosque one recent Friday
as hundreds of people -- diplomat and dishwasher, executive and laborer, black,
Asian and white, man and woman -- filed in, trailing the muezzin's call to
prayer.

On this day, they sat on the mosque's pristine rugs and listened as their imam
preached a message of hope and help for their fellow Muslims before descending
from his brass and wood pulpit to lead prayers. This mosaic of worshipers,
dressed in everything from natty suits to African robes to faded jeans, was
ample testament to the diversity of the city and its Islamic faithful.

While other mosques tend to serve one ethnic group, "You can consider this an
international mosque," said Dr. Abdel Rahman A Osman, the senior imam. "It
enjoys the support of all the Muslim world." Indeed, the gleaming, domed mosque
graced by a slender minaret is the city's grandest, replacing a makeshift place
of worship in a private residence. Built with the assistance of the Kuwaiti
Government, it opened in 1991 and on holy days can draw thousands from all over
the metropolitan area.

"This is good for New York," said Ahmed Abouheif, as he strolled out of the
mosque with his family. "If you're a believer you have to be good to your
neighbors, colleagues in business and on the street."

Dr. Osman knows that political upheaval in the Middle East has maligned Islam in
the eyes of some, but he emphasizes that its true nature is not political, but a
message of peace through submission to God.

"If Christians, Muslims or Jews do something wrong, don't condemn the religion,"
he said. "Don't judge the truth by the man. Know the truth first, then look at
the man and see if they are complying with the truth."



A Drama in Light and Dark

Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine

112th St. and Amsterdam Ave. Manhattan

It's hard to believe that you're in the middle of the city when you're sitting
among the flickering candles and cool stillness inside New York's Episcopal
cathedral. On Sunday evenings, at vespers, it's hard to believe you're in this
century.

Soft harmonies well up seemingly out of nowhere, as the choir marches up the
aisle followed by the priest. In this sacred space, sung prayers, scripture and
a commentary are the gentlest of ends to a weekend.

This is an intimate service, where the congregation sits near the choir, filling
the thick, carved pews by the altar. At times, there are pauses so intensely
quiet that you can hear nothing but the sound of breathing.

"Because it's a service at the end of the day, it's very unlike the more
elaborate things we do for morning prayer and Communion," said John Felbinger, a
warden at the cathedral. "It closes off the day in a quiet and pleasant way
without a lot of whatever."

The drama of candle light and darkness hightens the spiritual message of the
evening. "They symbolize God's action of creation over the dark waters of chaos;
they symbolize Christ as the light of hope in a darkened world," reads a church
pamphlet.

For some, the celebration is the spectacle.

"Actually, the religious aspect is the least," said one woman, Christina
Lightfoot. "But the music and the voices and the ritual of it I find very
peaceful."

The cathedral draws all sorts of people, from the neighborhood and beyond, for
its array of spiritual, social and artistic offerings. Another woman at vespers,
Pamela Pauly, often attends to meditate.

"I'm not a Christian or a Catholic, I'm just a spiritual person," she said. "I
really enjoy the singing, the acoustics and the drama of the cathedral. It's
kind of a time to come to a quiet place instead of being preached at."

The service closes with the regal tones of organ music echoing through the
cathedral. Off to the side, two sad-faced young men sit close together. One has
his arm around the other, who rests his head in his hands.

The music ends. The young men hug and go out into the chilly night.

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos:
St. Aloysius Roman Catholic Church -- A social message and black traditions are
part of the service at this Harlem church. (Nancy Siesel/The New York Times);
Islamic Center of New York -- On holy days, the Manhattan center draws thousands
of black, white and Asian worshipers. (Edward Keating/The New York Times);
Congregation Baith Israel Anshei Emes -- Deborah Cantor is the rabbi for
Brooklyn's oldest Jewish congregation. (Nancy Siesel/The New York Times)(pg.
14); The fervent brand of worship practiced at the Red Hook Gospel Tabernacle, a
Pentecostal church inside a three-story building in Brooklyn, brings release
from the hard routine of everyday life. (Nancy Siesel/The New York Times)(pg. 1)


Graph: "New York, Faith by Faith" shows a religious breakdown of New York City.
(Source: "One Nation Under God" by Professors Barry A. Kosmin and Seymour P.
Lachman)(pg. 1)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              212 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 6, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Pay Phones for Hanoi

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 8; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 69 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Dec. 5


Schlumberger Technologies, the French unit of the multinational Schlumberger
Company, and Sapura of Malaysia are installing the first public pay telephones
in Hanoi, the two companies said last week. Technicians have already installed
dozens of call boxes around the Vietnamese capital ahead of field trials, which
are expected to last several months before a contract is awarded for a full
pay-phone system.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              213 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 6, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Women Tennis Pros Chose Cigarette Tie

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 304 words


To the Editor:

Billie Jean King correctly states that women tennis players who participate in
events like the Virginia Slims tournament are not "being used" to promote
smoking (letter, Dec. 2).

Like the cigarette executives she characterizes as "enlightened people" who
"acknowledge the possible hazards of smoking," those tennis players have made a
decision, either conscious or less examined, to accept prize money for
indirectly promoting cigarette consumption.

The relationship is a mutually profitable one. The only losers are the millions
of American women who suffer and die from the effects of cigarettes.

Ms. King argues that no tennis players have ever been asked by Philip Morris to
smoke. Presumably if she were so approached, she would decline the risks of
lung, esophagus, pancreas, kidney and bladder cancer, heart attack, stroke, high
blood pressure and low birth weight infants caused by her sponsor's product.

Perhaps Ms. King is not convinced of the medical evidence. After all she writes
"possible hazards." In last month's issue of the Journal of the American Medical
Association, Drs. Michael McGinnis and William Foege published the authoritative
study on the "Actual Causes of Death in the U.S." in 1990.

Tobacco was the number one contributor to external (nongenetic) mortality,
causing approximately 400,000 deaths a year. This figure exceeded the totals for
alcohol, firearms, motor vehicles and illegal drugs combined. Put another way,
every two months tobacco kills more Americans than were killed in the entire
Vietnam War, or enough to fill Giants Stadium.

I have admired Ms. King's commitment to women's tennis. I hope this letter
encourages her, and other female athletes, to embrace a larger commitment to
women's health.

EMIL WILLIAM CHYNN, M.D.
Boston, Dec. 2, 1993

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              214 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 6, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 328 words


The other night at Judith's Room, a women's bookstore in Greenwich Village,
several young women asked AMY SWERDLOW what relevance her book, "Women Strike
for Peace," recently published by the University of Chicago Press, might have
for them.

"I told them I wanted them to know how women once seized a historical moment and
found their political voice," she said. "I told them they don't have to reinvent
the wheel."

The book, excerpts of which she read at the bookstore, traces the history of a
women's movement that arose spontaneously in 1961 when what was then the Soviet
Union broke a atmospheric nuclear test ban. Under the Women Strike for Peace
banner, thousands of women took to the streets to protest nuclear testing by
either country. "What women were concerned about were the levels of radiation in
children's milk," said Ms. Swerdlow, a mother of three and a founder of New York
Women Strike for Peace.

"We were middle-class housewives working from Christmas card lists and church
rosters," she said. "We were the lady next door, we were concerned about our
children, not about political power."

After a test ban treaty was signed in 1963, the organization, which grew to 60
chapters and 10 offices, turned its attention to other military matters and
eventually to protesting United States involvement in the Vietnam War. When the
war ended, the organization faded away.

But the women in it were transformed. "We said we would go home when the testing
stopped, but we didn't," Ms. Swerdlow said. "Bella Abzug, our legislative
coordinator, went to Congress, Ruth Messinger, a draft counselor for us, to city
government."

Ms. Swerdlow earned her Ph.D. and is director of both the graduate program in
women's history and the women's studies program at Sarah Lawrence College.

Which lead her to write the book. "As a historian I wanted to restore Women
Strike for Peace to history, to put it on the record." she said.
    NADINE BROZAN

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              215 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 7, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Oliver Stone Returns To the Vietnam War; Let the Debate Begin

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1270 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Dec. 6


He's back.

Two years after his film "J. F. K." stirred more headlines and editorials than
any other movie in a long while, the director Oliver Stone has a new movie that
is -- big surprise -- both provocative and about a subject that obsesses him. In
this case, it's Vietnam.

"I've been classified as everything: a Vietnam freak, a 60's nostalgia buff, a
conspiracy nut," he said in a recent interview. "I don't seek out controversy. I
don't. It comes to me."

Whether Mr. Stone tries to avoid controversy is certainly debatable. "Heaven and
Earth," his latest film, is hardly likely to inflame passions the way "J. F. K."
did. But the new movie, which is to open in New York and other large cities on
Christmas, is almost certain to provoke the sort of contentious dialogue that is
now expected of any Stone film.

Vietnamese Memoirs

The film, which is set in Vietnam and in the United States and stars Tommy Lee
Jones and a newcomer, Hiep Thi Le, is an adaptation of two memoirs by a
Vietnamese woman, Le Ly Hayslip, "When Heaven and Earth Changed Places" (1989)
and "Child of War, Woman of Peace" (1993). The books recount Ms. Hayslip's
harrowing teen-age years in a rice farming village in central Vietnam during the
war, and her bleak life in the United States afterward.

"When I read them, I was just moved by the raw, almost naive emotions," said Mr.
Stone, who was seated in a room at an editing facility in West Los Angeles,
alternately sipping mineral water and black coffee.

"I loved all the roles she played," Mr. Stone said of Ms. Hayslip, who is now a
businesswoman in the San Diego area. "She was a beggar, a prostitute, an
American housewife, a traitor, a spy, a rape victim, a mistress to a rich man.
She had three children with three different men. All the men were military or
police people. All have similar traits in a strange way: very strong on the
surface but weak spots."

Three Oscars

The same traits could probably be applied, at least in directorial terms, to Mr.
Stone himself.

Mr. Stone won Academy Awards for his direction of two other Vietnam War films --
"Platoon" (1986) and "Born on the Fourth of July" (1989), a powerful saga about
the return home of a crippled Marine -- and for his screenplay adaptation of
"Midnight Express" (1978). Yet his gifts as a film maker are often obscured,
perhaps even diminished, by his polemics.

After the release of "J. F. K," which blurred fact and fiction, claiming that
people at the highest levels of the Government were involved in the
assassination of President John F. Kennedy, Mr. Stone spent months defending the
film, not against against movie critics so much as political columnists and
editorial writers, who said he had been reckless with the facts.

"How has 'J. F. K.' changed me?" the director said quietly. "It's probably
changed me for the rest of my life.

"It was a place I've never been before in my life. 'Born on the Fourth of July'
was controversial; it was attacked quite a bit. But nothing like 'J. F. K.' It
took me to another level. It made me more of a weather vane, more of a political
personality as opposed to a film maker. I did not fully understand the
implications of that."

From Director to Symbol

Mr. Stone said he had no regrets whatsoever about "J. F. K." But he's also aware
the film turned him, at least in the eyes of many filmgoers and critics, into
more of an ideologue than a film craftsman. No other top director is burdened
with such heavy political baggage.

He's ambivalent about it. "When you become a political personality, you turn
into a symbol, and when you become a symbol, then a lot of the humanity is
stripped from you and you're no longer a rounded person but a cartoon, an
ideologue," he said. "When you become an ideologue, the perception of you is
that you lose touch with your soul."

"There's too much hype, too much negativity, too much hatred up front," he went
on. "I guess I am paranoid about it. All I can do is keep my head down and go
about my business and make my movies."

Mr. Stone hopes that eventually the perception will change. "As long as I make
films that are good, the reassessment will set in," he said. "Eventually people
will see through the polemic to the films themselves."

In "Heaven and Earth," a Warner Brothers movie, Mr. Stone apportions the blame.
Ms. Hayslip is raped by a brutal gang of Vietcong. But the South Vietnamese and
the Americans are often seen as equally violent. And Mr. Stone depicts the
Americans Ms. Hayslip encounters in Southern California as grotesque and
narrow-minded.

Partly because of Vietnamese officials' antipathy toward Ms. Hayslip's books,
most of the film, which cost $23 million, was shot in Thailand, although some
scenes were made surreptitiously in Vietnam by a documentary team working for
Mr. Stone.

The part of Ms. Hayslip is played by Hiep Thi Le, a 23-year-old physiology major
at the University of California at Davis, who left Vietnam at the age of 9 in a
group of boat people. During an exensive talent search in the United States and
Asia, she was discovered at an audition in San Jose, Calif., to which she had
originally come simply to accompany a friend.

Mr. Stone recalled: "She walked in, and she just had the light. She just shined.
I thought, like, she was spectacular."

At age 46, Mr. Stone is enduring some personal travails. He is in the process of
a divorce (he and his wife have two children). He is spending more and more time
traveling, mostly in Asia. And he is studying Buddhism.

He is also working at a breakneck pace. He is now in the midst of editing
another film, "Natural Born Killers," a satire that also stars Mr. Jones, one of
his favorite actors. That movie is scheduled for release in June. Mr. Stone is
also intent on making a film version of the musical "Evita." And he has produced
or co-produced such successful films as "Reversal of Fortune" and "The Joy Luck
Club."

The director, who grew up in Manhattan, has dedicated "Heaven and Earth" to his
mother, Jacqueline Stone, who lives in New York and Paris. His father, Louis,
who worked on Wall Street, died in 1986. "Wall Street" (1987) was dedicated to
him.

His parents, Mr. Stone said, had a strong impact on him. "My mom is French," he
said. "She was a war bride. My father was a lieutenant colonel in Paris who
picked her up on the street actually. She married a man she hardly knew."

"She's quite a lady," he continued with a smile. "Very intense and far away at
the same time. Sometimes very glamorous, an Evita-like presence. Many friends,
many parties, and she loved movies. She dragged me to movies, Clark Gable and
Cary Grant. I grew up in a make-believe world, very French."

"My father also had a wonderful imagination," he said. "He was a failed
playwright. He wrote plays, he wrote poems. He took me to see "8 1/2" when I was
a kid. He was also a very strong character."

Mr. Stone's parents divorced when he was 16.

"The family just scattered to the wind," said the director, who has no siblings.
To his father's dismay, Mr. Stone dropped out of Yale, joined the Army and went
to Vietnam. After returning, he attended New York University's film school in
1971; then he moved to Los Angeles, where he wrote such films as "Midnight
Express" and "Scarface" before turning to directing.

Part of the reason that "Heaven and Earth" is dedicated to his mother, Mr. Stone
said, is that he had never before made a film where the primary character was a
woman.

"My mom always wanted me to make a 'Gone with the Wind' type movie," he said.
"This is as close as I can get right now."

NAME: Oliver Stone

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I don't seek out controversy," said the film director Oliver
Stone. "I don't. It comes to me." (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              216 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
Computer Disk About Vietnam

SECTION: Section D; Page 18; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 140 words


CBS, The New York Times Company and Apple Computer Inc. announced yesterday that
they would jointly produce an "interactive multimedia" encyclopedia of the
Vietnam War. Material for the CD-ROM encyclopedia will be drawn from the
archives and reporting of The New York Times and CBS News.

The product will include a time line that will allow users to pick any date
during the war and call up pictures and text on important events at that time in
Vietnam and in the United States.

Dan Rather, the anchor and managing editor of "The CBS Evening News," and R. W.
Apple Jr., the Washington bureau chief for The Times, will be the chief
correspondents for the encyclopedia, to be called "The Vietnam War."

The encyclopedia, scheduled for release in late 1994, will be published and
distributed by Apple's Starcore software group.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              217 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Book Notes

BYLINE: By Sarah Lyall

SECTION: Section C; Page 21; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words



Small-Press Convention

Marshall Hryciuk of Toronto, whose business card reads "Poet, Publisher, Sales
Agent," came to Manhattan last weekend to take part in the sixth annual Small
Press Book Fair, a free-for-all business and literary meeting place for some of
the smallest publishers around.

Standing at his exhibition spot in the Library of the General Society of
Mechanics and Tradesmen on West 44th Street, amid the books of 250 participating
presses, Mr. Hryciuk described how he started his own imprint, Nietzche's
Brolly, after larger companies were strikingly unwilling to publish his poetry.
"They would say, 'Shows promise -- keep working' or 'It's uneven' or 'It's great
but not for our program,' " Mr. Hryciuk said.

"So I started my own program."

For every multi-national publishing conglomerate with annual revenues in the
millions of dollars and a list of books in the hundreds, it seems there are
still dozens of tiny companies founded on almost no money, operating out of
small offices or even basements and garages. Some are vanity presses formed for
the owner's work; others publish books by a breadth of authors.

Tomorrow's Giants Today

"Small presses are independent publishers who want to provide an alternative
voice to the large publishers," said Karin Taylor, the executive director of the
Small Press Center, which sponsored the fair. In her opinion, large publishers
are devoting themselves increasingly to splashy blockbusters and tending to
ignore books of narrower but still worthwhile appeal. "For a first-time author,
it's so difficult to get published, but small presses provide that means," she
said. "The literary giants of tomorrow are probably being published by small
presses today."

In the reading room one flight down from Mr. Hryciuk's table, Len Fulton, who
runs Dustbooks, a press in Fulton, Calif., with five employees, explained small
presses this way: "They do niche publishing." And where else would you have
found, all in one place, "Hot and Hairy: A Day in the Life of a Hairdresser," by
Gloria Jean (Glamour City Press); "Surviving After High School: Overcoming
Life's Hurdles," by Arthur J. Heine (J-Mart Press); "War Tax Resistance: A Guide
to Withholding Your Support From the Military" (War Resisters' League and New
Society Publishers), and the 48 palm-sized titles put out by Hanuman Books,
named after the Hindu monkey god of devotion, yoga and grammar?

"To me it's like a calling, a way of life," said Gibbs Smith, whose company,
Gibbs Smith Publisher, operates out of a converted barn in his family's 100-acre
corn and hay farm in Layton, Utah. The company was founded in 1969 by Mr. Smith
and his wife, Catherine. ("We lived on $300 a month for five years," Mr. Smith
said.) It company now publishes about 30 titles a year, does its own
distribution and has been turning a profit for a while now.

"When I started, I contacted Alfred A. Knopf," said Mr. Smith, speaking of the
legendary publisher. "He was an old man by then, and I asked him if I could do
it. He wrote back and said, 'Yes, you can.' I still have his letter."

Scrooge at 150

Christmas is inexorably approaching, which means that television sets are jammed
with any number of movies, cartoons and other spinoffs of "A Christmas Carol,"
Dickens's classic Christmas story of the miserly Ebenezer Scrooge, the
downtrodden Bob Cratchit and the pathetic but inspirational Tiny Tim. At the
same time, an exhibition at the Pierpont Morgan Library at 29 East 36th Street
in Murray Hill provides a short and sweet reminder of where the whole thing
began, with the 66-page manuscript that Dickens wrote 150 years ago.

Even by the author's own high standards, his Christmas book, published by the
London firm Chapman & Hall, was an immediate runaway success, selling an
astounding (for the time) 6,000 copies between the date it was published, Dec.
19, 1843, and Christmas Eve of that year. The story arrived in the just-as-eager
United States soon afterwards. (A six-cent edition published in 1844 by Harper &
Brother, which the museum says may have been unauthorized, appears in the
exhibition.)

The show includes Dickens's sometimes undecipherable manuscript, complete with
heavily crossed-out and rewritten passages. A reproduction of the entire
manuscript is included in the 150th-anniversary edition of "A Christmas Carol,"
which was published by the Morgan Library and joins countless other editions of
the book in print.

Readers familiar with the current vogue for writing sequels to famous novels
might find it amusing that the practice went on even in the 19th century and
that imitators then didn't even wait until the original author was dead. The
exhibit includes several vintage books that were clearly spinoffs of "A
Christmas Carol," among them "The Faces in the Fire; the Shadows on the Wall,"
by George Frederick Pardon, and the anonymous " 'Christmas Eve' With the
Spirits." The latter is a sappy sequel to Dickens's book that has the reformed
Scrooge retire to the countryside to live with the Cratchits. At the end of the
book, he is on his deathbed, giving Tiny Tim (not tiny anymore) the chance to
re-utter his famous line: "God bless us every one!"

The Jordan Imprint

Fred Jordan, who has held a number of jobs in publishing and most recently was
the publisher of Pantheon Books, said this week that he planned to resurrect his
old imprint, Fred Jordan Books. The imprint's first book, "Nobody's Child," an
autobiography of an Irish woman who worked with street children in Vietnam by
Christina Noble with Robert Coram, is to be published in September by
Grove/Atlantic, Mr. Jordan said, but, in an unusual arrangement, his future
books may have other publishers. "By matching titles to different publishers,
the imprint was able to broaden its range and find the best distribution channel
on the most congenial list," he said of the earlier Fred Jordan line, adding
that he expects to seek a variety of publishers for his new books, too.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              218 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 599 words



The Economy

The Clinton Administration has proposed new standards to insure that banks end
discrimination in lending to members of minority groups and people with low
incomes. [Page A1.]

The Department of Energy plans initiatives to encourage the use of natural gas,
open up Federal lands for oil and gas exploration and expand drilling in the
Gulf of Mexico. [D2.]

The Federal Reserve System reported a strong start to holiday shopping but
warned of price pressures in its "beige book," a summary of regional business
activity. [D18.]

A proposed contract between the United Mine Workers and some of the nation's
biggest coal operators could change labor-management relations in the industry.
[B16.]

Companies

Several of the biggest video game makers and retailers plan to establish a
ratings board similar to the one used for rating movies to judge the sexual and
violent content of video games. [A1.]

The Xerox Corporation, which has been consistently profitable, plans to cut more
than 10,000 jobs, or about 10 percent of it work force, in three years to
improve productivity. [D1.]

The buyout effort by the unions at United Airlines raises the question of
whether employee ownership can work in such a large and complicated business.
[D1.]

The founder of Carl Karcher Enterprises, ousted as chairman in October, will
return to the chain as chairman emeritus.[D1.]

ITT plans to spin off its forest products subsidiary, ITT Rayonier, to the
company's shareholders. [D4.]

Georgia-Pacific is selling its envelope-making business to a subsidiary of the
Sterling Group. [D4.]

Litton Industries will buy the rest of Western Atlas International in a $558
million deal with Dresser Industries. [D4.]

Novell reported a 1 percent decline in earnings for the fourth quarter, despite
a 18.9 percent rise in revenues. [D4.]

A judge has ruled that Standard & Poor's is not required to disclose its notes
and records of meetings with companies. [D4.]

Westinghouse Electric has been told by the Department of Energy that it would
receive no bonus for the management of a Washington State nuclear reservation.
[A22.]

International

Asian and Latin American countries are angered by compromises on farm subsidies
and tariffs that were agreed to in side talks by the United States and the
European Community. [D1.]

South Korea announced that it would lift a ban on rice imports to help conclude
talks on a world trade agreement. [D2.]

The European Commission has proposed lowering minimum wages and cutting social
benefits to create 15 million jobs. [A5.]

Markets

The top firms in the municipal bond business announced guidelines for curbing
political donations from underwriters. [D1.]

Blue-chip stocks set another record, helped by gains in cyclical issues. The Dow
industrials rose 15.65 points, to 3,734.53. [D10.]

Silver prices climbed to their highest levels in four months. Gold and platinum
prices also rose. [D17.]

The dollar surged against the yen after a Federal Reserve governor said a
stronger yen was hurting Japan's economy. [D17.]

Today's Columns

Vietnam is a favorite to become the next Asian economy to post double-digit
growth. Peter Passell: Economic Scene. [D2.]

Some stock market contrarians are recommending National Medical Enterprises, a
hospital chain that has paid out millions of dollars in settlements from civil
suits. Market Place. [D10.]

General Motors is consolidating $800 million of its ad buying with the
Interpublic Group. Stuart Elliott: Advertising. [D20.]

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              219 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 9, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

ARRESTED OFFICIAL HIRED BY PENTAGON

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 738 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 8


The former acting Army Secretary, John W. Shannon, was hired as a high-paid
Pentagon consultant by a friend within weeks after Mr. Shannon was put on
administrative leave because of a shoplifting arrest, the Defense Department
said today.

The Pentagon gave Mr. Shannon a month-to-month contract on Nov. 17 to study
Defense Department stock inventories and advise civilian supply officials on
what parts and supplies to keep and what to get rid of, said Lieut. Col.
Stephanie Hoehne, a Pentagon spokeswoman.

Mr. Shannon was hired by James Klugh, a retired Army two-star general who is a
friend of Mr. Shannon and who is now the Deputy Undersecretary of Defense for
Logistics. Mr. Shannon will receive about $7,100 a month, or about $85,000 if he
stays with the project for a year, Colonel Hoehne said. Mr. Shannon had been
making $125,000 a year as the acting Army Secretary.

Smart Move or Favoritism?'No One Can Believe It'

It was unclear tonight whether Mr. Klugh created the job for Mr. Shannon and if
other people applied or were interviewed for the position.

Officially, the Pentagon defended Mr. Shannon's hiring as a smart move to tap
the talents of a veteran official experienced in logistics. Privately, though,
many Defense Department officials said the hiring appeared to be a case of
favoritism and poor judgment.

"No one can believe it; everyone's flabbergasted," said one Army officer who
knows Mr. Shannon. "The guy is not without experience and knowledge in logistics
and how to make things pop in this building, but I don't know if that's what
he's doing in this job."

The decision to hire Mr. Shannon reached the highest levels of the Pentagon,
where top advisers to Defense Secretary Les Aspin debated the merits of helping
out a dedicated public servant against the appearance of putting him on the
payroll shortly after his arrest. Pentagon officials said tonight that Larry
Smith, a top aide to Mr. Aspin, had approved the hiring.

Mr. Shannon was arrested on Aug. 26 outside the post exchange at Fort Myer, Va.,
after store detectives saw him put a woman's skirt and blouse worth about $30
into a shopping bag and leave the store without paying. The Pentagon put him on
administrative leave the next day.

The authorities dropped misdemeanor charges against Mr. Shannon after he agreed
to attend a nine-month shoplifting prevention program and perform 50 hours of
community service.

'Support Group for Each Other'

Mr. Shannon, 59, was appointed acting Army Secretary, the highest civilian job
in the military service, on Jan. 20 and had been serving pending the nomination
and confirmation of a new Secretary by the Clinton Administration.

Togo D. West Jr., a lawyer in Washington, was sworn in as the permanent Army
Secretary on Nov. 22.

The friendship between Mr. Shannon and Mr. Klugh dates back nearly four decades,
associates said.

"They were black officers together in the mid-1950's when the Army wasn't as
integrated as it is now," said a senior Army official. "They created a support
group for each other."

'He Has Great Qualifications'

Mr. Klugh is recruiting several people who are experts in logistics and
maintenance operations and whose skills he knows and values, the official said.

"General Klugh has some very difficult tasks to be done that the department as a
whole has not been able to come to grips with well," the senior Army official
said.

"He's trying to pull people in who know the business," the official said.  "Some
people may look at that and say he's playing favorites. I don't think so. It's
all how you look at it."

Mr. Klugh was traveling today and was not available for comment, an aide said.

Colonel Hoehne, the Pentagon spokeswoman, said Mr. Shannon was hired "on a
routine contract" because "he has great qualifications for the job." Colonel
Hoehne said she had no reason to believe Mr. Shannon was hired solely because of
his friendship with Mr. Klugh.

Mr. Shannon, a native of Louisville, Ky., had served since 1989 as the Under
Secretary of the Army, the No. 2 civilian position. In that job, which paid
$125,000 a year, he was responsible for the daily management and oversight of
internal operations, including training, readiness and mobilization.

A decorated Vietnam War veteran, Mr. Shannon was commissioned as a second
lieutenant in the infantry in 1955 and served 23 years before retiring at the
rank of colonel.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              220 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 9, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Economic Scene;
Success for Vietnam may depend on how well it copies China.

BYLINE: By Peter Passell

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 857 words


BY most accounts -- including the World Bank's -- Vietnam is an odds-on bet to
be the next Asian economy to wow the world with double-digit growth. Apparently
the only unanswered question is whether embargo-hobbled American investors will
be shut out by Japanese and European rivals.

But a panel of conservative American economists and Vietnamese expatriates,
recruited by the Pacific Basin Research Institute and the Donner Foundation,
aren't so sure. Their newly published report offers a cool-eyed view of a nation
and economy hobbled by bureaucracy and divided by region. "The basis for a truly
free market is not yet there," said Bui Diem, the director of the institute and
once South Vietnam's ambassador to America.

Who has the better case? Much depends on whether Vietnam has the right stuff to
mimic the Chinese, decentralizing the economy without freeing the political
system.

While United States air power failed to return Vietnam to the Stone Age, the
country's Marxist economic managers inadvertently made a good run at the task on
their own. Vietnam currently ranks among the world's poorest countries, in the
same league as Ethiopia, Bangladesh and Mozambique. It even shared a dubious
honor with sub-Saharan Africa as one of the last places on earth in the 1980's
where masses of people were at risk of starvation.

How could a nation that threw off the French colonial yoke and wore out the
world's mightiest military machine find itself in such a fix? The panel's report
makes it all too clear that an indefatigable will to sacrifice in the name of
nationalism doesn't necessarily translate into economic success.

After unification in 1975, Vietnam collectivized agriculture in the south along
with nationalizing all manufacturing and most services. By even the Government's
admission, though, "socialism building" was a disaster that left the
war-devastated economy barely able to feed the nation.

Economic liberalization followed in the early 1980's; price controls were eased
and enterprises permitted to sell to private markets once they fulfilled state
quotas. But while the reforms led to growth -- Vietnam has become a major
exporter of rice -- they also widened income differences between the north and
the commerce-minded south, leaving the warrior half of the country with little
to show for decades of suffering.

According to the Pacific Basin Research Institute, average incomes in Ho Chi
Minh City (once known as Saigon) are two and a half times greater than in Hanoi.
What's more, the Government's inability to collect a big share of the bounty in
taxes created runaway inflation that impoverished the nation's ponderous
bureaucracy.

By the late 1980's, Vietnam's rulers found themselves in a trap not unlike that
faced by the Soviet leadership. Going backward was unthinkable, given the utter
failure of state ownership and central planning. Plunging ahead, however, was
almost as perilous a prospect for the military and bureaucratic elites, who were
not unaware of the fate of their counterparts in the Soviet Union. That is where
the Chinese model, one in which the go-go south is given license to grow rich in
return for political acquiescence and a financial tithe to the north, fits in.

Can Hanoi pull it off? David Dollar, the senior economist working on Vietnam for
the World Bank (and one of the few dollars the World Bank has ever lent to
Vietnam), is "cautiously optimistic." As in China, he said, liberalization of
agriculture has produced gratifyingly rapid results. The unproductive
state-owned industrial sector actually represents a lesser drag than in China
since it employs a smaller fraction of the population. What's more, foreign
investment is likely to make a tangible difference very quickly in a country
with a relatively educated and disciplined work force. "It's not hard to grow if
you are starting at $200 per capita," Mr. Dollar said.

But the Pacific Basin Panel suggests weakness in the parallels. Unlike China,
Vietnam has yet to guarantee property rights or create a passably efficient
commercial banking system. Unlike the Chinese, Vietnamese save relatively
little; hence the rapid investment required for an economic miracle will depend
on foreign capital as well as foreign technology. And unlike China's, the
Vietnamese economy was until very recently closely integrated with (and
dependent on aid from) the Soviet economy.

Last but not least, Vietnam starts in a position of relative fiscal weakness.
While the Government managed to reduce the budget deficit to a modest 2 percent
of national income in 1992 by savagely cutting enterprise subsidies, failure to
keep state enterprise deficits in check or to collect revenue from the booming
cities of the south could once again let the inflation genie out of the bottle.

The great imponderable here is the same one faced by China in the 1980's:
whether liberal economics can coexist with authoritarian politics. "The root of
the problem is political legitimacy," Mr. Diem said -- whether the country can
tolerate the shock of rapid economic transformation without government of and by
the people.


LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              221 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 9, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

For Refugees, Help With Double Burden of Child-Rearing

BYLINE: By SUSAN CHIRA

SECTION: Section C; Page 4; Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1422 words


DANH HUM THI, a Cambodian refugee living in the Bronx, thought that being a good
mother in America meant feeding her children junk food so they would grow up
round and healthy, like American children. A neighbor, Yin Sok, complained that
her own teen-age son refused to obey her because he spoke English well and she
didn't. Another refugee, Sok Teang Pin, could not bring herself to say no to her
children because she wanted to make up for years of suffering in their flight
from Cambodia.

Such were the problems these women learned to solve at an unusual class for
parents who survived the Cambodian killing fields, people for whom the normal
stresses of parenthood and migration are compounded by their memories of
torture, starvation and loss.

Although set up for Cambodians, the project addressed a universal problem:
easing a painful transition that has set generations of immigrant parents and
children against each other. The Cambodian women, like other newcomers to
America, are struggling to preserve their culture while children are busy
learning a new one. It is a conflict that has been explored in recent films and
fiction, including Amy Tan's "Joy Luck Club" and Cristina Garcia's "Dreaming in
Cuban."

"Here they teach children to speak out," said Sara Phok, a Cambodian mental
health outreach worker at the Montefiore Family Health Center in the Bronx, who
helped teach an eight-week course there last year and continues to monitor the
16 women who took it. "In Cambodia, you are not supposed to look at parents in
the eye. I understand that even though I don't like it, we are raising them
between two cultures."

Bridging that gap was the aim of the course, sponsored by the Montefiore Medical
Center and the International Catholic Child Bureau as part of a broader project
on Southeast Asian refugee children. The course covered discipline, safety,
nutrition, spirituality and Western ideas of normal child and adolescent
development. The parents told the instructors they felt overwhelmed and
isolated, cut off in many cases from children growing up as Americans.

These parents may have other Cambodian families in their apartment buildings,
but their children walk out the door into a different life.

"Inside your building you live in one world; outside there is another world,"
said Lang Leang Kulen, a medical records clerk. "Inside, there is one language;
outside, another. A lot of parents just stop communicating with their kid. The
kid speaks English. They think, 'You know better than I.' They abandon their
duty as parents."

The demands of child-rearing loom even larger for parents who continue to
wrestle with the demons of Cambodia's past. Many of the women endured torture,
starvation, rape and forced labor under the four-year rule of the Khmer Rouge,
conditions that killed about one million Cambodians.

After Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1979, many Cambodians embarked on an arduous
flight to the Thai border, braving land mines and the certainty of death if
captured. Once in refugee camps, they and their children waited years, surviving
shellings and shortages of food and clothing before being resettled.

Many of the women in the project are now on their own, estranged from their
husbands, living with five or six children crammed into single rooms in
apartments in the Fordham section of the Bronx, where many Cambodians have been
resettled. Even after several years in America, some women in the class still
battle nightmares, flashbacks and depression, said Joyce Wong, the coordinator
of the Indochinese Mental Health Program at Montefiore Family Health Center and
a course instructor.

Sok Teang Pin is a quiet woman with haunted eyes. Four of her five children are
old enough to remember their three years in the refugee camps and the horror of
the Khmer Rouge. While her children are thriving in many ways -- one is a
college graduate, another attends college, two have scholarships to a
prestigious Upper East Side private school, and the youngest is in a public
elementary school -- she said she had been unable to deny them anything.

"I used to give them things because I felt bad for them because they never had
things before," she said. "I learned from the group that when they want
something and they cannot have it, I tell them, and they learn."

Danh Hum Thi remembers her harrowing flight to a Thai refugee camp with her
children, then 4 and 3. She spent nine years in the camps before arriving in the
Bronx four years ago. After years of malnutrition, she let her children feast on
the junk food she saw on television. "I saw a lot of children look a little
chubby," she said. "I said, 'Maybe that's good food.' "

But she changed her mind after Ms. Wong brought an armful of potato chips,
candy, cookies, soda and sugary cereals into class and talked about nutrition.
She urged them to stick with their traditional Cambodian diet, rich in grains
and vegetables.

Life in the refugee camps and then here eroded traditional Cambodian
child-rearing practices. In Cambodia, children were taught to defer to parental
authority, and rebellion was rare, said Ms. Phok, who has lived in New York for
six years. Arranged marriages were common; children did not date. There were
close ties between families and Buddhist temples. Extended family and neighbors
helped to raise children.

"In Cambodia, when I went somewhere, I yelled, 'Keep an eye on the children,'
and they did," said Yin Sok, who is separated from her husband. "Here I am by
myself."

Many parents found it difficult to rein in teen-agers. "Here we are a very small
population and our children get influenced by their friends," Ms. Yin said. "I
have a boy who was doing whatever he wanted. He never let me know where he would
be."

The instructors emphasized that the parents should be in charge. "We told them
you don't have to accept kids saying, 'You don't speak English so we don't have
to tell you,' " said Judith Berenson, assistant director of social service at
Montefiore Medical Center's Department of Psychiatry and a course instructor.

Ms. Yin then set a specific curfew and when her son did not meet it, grounded
him for three days.

American sexual permissiveness deeply worried many Cambodian mothers.

"When we are on the street we see people kissing each other and children want to
do that," Chum Hong said. "I tell them that is shameful in Cambodia. Or they see
commercials where children are wearing very sexy clothes. I tell my children
that is not appropriate."

Ms. Berenson said the teachers were careful to support such values. "We don't
want to be cultural missionaries," said Dr. Joseph Lurio, director of the family
health center. "We want them to be able to navigate the landscape."

So the teachers included a session on Cambodian culture and spirituality, where
Ms. Phok told how she requires her children to learn the Khmer language, visit
the local Cambodian temple on Marion Avenue, and use the traditional greeting of
bowed head and hands pressed together when they see adults. A strong ethnic and
religious identity, Ms. Wong suggested, can give children strength.

The course also introduced some Western ideas of child development. Ms. Berenson
outlined the essentially alien idea of adolescence as a time of rebellion, mood
swings and alternate rejection and need of parents. Rather than imposing rules
on teen-agers, she said, parents might try to discuss possible rules and
consequences.

They explained to the parents that traditional Cambodian discipline, like
refusing to speak to disobedient children for days or ejecting them, deeply
disturbed children. One mother was on the verge of throwing her child out of the
house because she had got a haircut without permission.

They also suggested alternatives to hitting children, an accepted form of
discipline in Cambodia, and urged parents to show affection, sometimes a
difficult task for women who feel overwhelmed. "In Cambodia, we hug children
when they are small, but not older," Ms. Yin said. "I used to push them away if
they wanted to hug me. Now I really try."

In the end, parents will have to find a balance between the old and the new. Ms.
Phok's two daughters, 13 and 15, are pressing her to let them date. "I said,
'uh-oh,' " she recounted. "I said: 'I'll let you date, but not at this time.
Maybe when you go to college.' She said, 'That long?'

"It is really hard. I want to keep my culture, but not be that strict. Here
everything is opposite to Cambodia. I try to stay in the middle."

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Cambodian emigres visit a Bronx temple, above. In a class for
parents, Chum Hong, right, said she worried about American sexual
permissiveness. (Photographs by Ruby Washington/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              222 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Demands to See Naturalized Citizens In Prison in Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 338 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Dec. 9


United States officials are pressing for access to at least four Vietnamese-born
American citizens who have been imprisoned by the Vietnamese Government, Western
diplomats said today.

Two of the prisoners are accused of involvement in bombing plots in Ho Chi Minh
City, the diplomats said, although the motives and targets are unclear.

The diplomats, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said they were aware of
five United States citizens who were being held in jail on charges including
smuggling and skyjacking.

United States officials have been allowed to meet with one of the prisoners, all
of whom were born in Vietnam and became naturalized Americans, and have
repeatedly asked to see the others, the diplomats said.

Under the Vienna Convention, United States consular officers are supposed to be
given access to imprisoned American citizens to monitor their welfare. But the
convention does not apply because the United States has no diplomatic relations
with Vietnam.

According to information from the diplomats and from Vietnamese press accounts,
four of the jailed Americans have been identified as Moun Van Nguyen, sentenced
to life in prison on Aug. 25 on charges of plotting with eight other overseas
Vietnamese to set off bombs in Ho Chi Minh City in March; Ly Tong, sentenced to
20 years in February on charges of hijacking an Air Vietnam plane from Bangkok,
Thailand, to Ho Chi Minh City on Sept. 4, 1992; Henry Long, sentenced to life on
Aug. 7 on charges of smuggling and to 15 years for bribery, and Jimmy Tran,
sentenced to 20 years on May 27 on charges of plotting with five other people to
make bombs and set them off in public buildings in Ho Chi Minh City.

The fifth man, who was not identified, was accused of being a deserter from the
Vietnamese Army during its occupation of Cambodia, the diplomats said. He made
his way through Thailand and then to the United States, where he became a
naturalized citizen. He was jailed when he returned to Vietnam in 1992 to visit
relatives.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              223 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

He's Down in the Polls, but Perot Warns a Health Care Fight Looms

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 830 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 9


In a warning to the political world not to count him out, Ross Perot said today
that he expected to keep himself as visible as ever next year and made clear
that President Clinton's health care proposal might be a major target.

Even after he said he had not decided whether he would support any of the
various health proposals that had been floated, Mr. Perot immediately began
criticizing the Administration's package.

"The real question everyone has about the Clinton plan is: Can we afford it?"
Mr. Perot said in a telephone interview from his office in Dallas. "Based on
everything I've read and everything I've heard, everybody seems to concur that
the financial side of it is soft."

Mr. Perot, who had commented very little about health care in recent months,
said the issue would be important in next year's mid-term elections and was more
relevant to voters than was the North American Free Trade Agreement, which he
fought a fierce, but unsuccessful, battle to defeat. He said he expected to
divide his time next year between the health care effort and promoting the
initiatives for a Government overhaul that he pressed in his campaign for
President last year.

"If you think they got excited about Nafta," Mr. Perot said, "wait till you hear
about health care. How do people feel when you tell them about not being able to
select a doctor that's going to deliver your baby? They look at you like you're
from Mars." He also questioned the insurance purchasing cooperatives called for
in the Clinton proposal, saying, "It's a giant Government bureaucracy that would
make the Pentagon in its worst days of buying $600 hammers look like a bunch of
ballet dancers."

Public opinion surveys have found that Mr. Perot's popularity suffered greatly
after his debate with Vice President Al Gore over the agreement setting up free
trade among the United States, Canada and Mexico. His favorable rating dropped
to 24 percent in a New York Times/CBS News poll conducted from Nov. 11 through
Nov. 14, down from 34 percent a month earlier.

Millions at His Disposal

Mr. Clinton's advisers said their polling showed that Mr. Perot did not carry as
much influence on the trade agreement as on issues that are particularly
important to disaffected voters, like changing the Government. So the question
is whether on an issue like health care -- with lobbyists on all sides already
out in full force -- Mr. Perot would significantly affect the debate.

Mr. Perot, a Texas businessman, still has millions of dollars in his personal
fortune at his disposal. And he still seems to have a loyal following among some
of the 19 million people who voted for him.

Mr. Perot said he would not hesitate to dip again into his own money for
television commercials to make his voice heard on health care or Government
overhaul. "Books, commercials," he said, "whatever it takes."

Jack Quinn, the Vice President's chief of staff, said those who think Mr. Gore
"pulled the rug from under Perot" in the confrontation on the Larry King
television program, should remember that "with $3 billion, Perot can buy a new
rug." He added, "Perot's not always exquisitely careful with the facts, so
there's always a danger that he can affect the debate and not for the better."

But James Carville, a political adviser to the President, said he was not
particularly concerned about Mr. Perot's opposing the health proposal because
the Texan's credibility has suffered. "There are many more people who could come
out in opposition to this that would worry me more than Ross Perot," he said.
"Every day that goes by, he gets more and more bitter and more and more
political. And people understand that."

Mr. Perot said the members of his organization, United We Stand America, would
express their views and this would guide his positions on health care and other
issues. But he was vague on how he solicits those views, saying only that "we've
got a very good communications system" and "when you travel around you talk with
people."

United After All These Years

Despite his drop in public esteem as registered in polls, Mr. Perot said his
organization's membership was "booming and blooming" since the debate with Mr.
Gore. But he continued to refuse to disclose its size.

Though Mr. Perot has suggested that his involvement in grass-roots politics
started with the Presidential campaign last year, he has demonstrated an
interest in affecting the public agenda as far back as the 1960's. He was
chairman of a group that published full-page newspaper advertisements supporting
the Nixon Administration's policies in Vietnam. The group also conducted
letter-writing campaigns in support of the President and called for computerized
polling techniques to gauge the public's mood on major issues.

The name of the then group: United We Stand.

Mr. Perot said today there was no relationship between his current organization
and the earlier one. "That group was dead for years," he said.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              224 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Note of Unity Pervades Peace Prize Ceremony

BYLINE: By JOHN DARNTON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 960 words

DATELINE: OSLO, Dec. 10


The two were opponents and collaborators: one the freedom fighter who suffered
nearly three decades in prison, the other the enforcer of the white power
structure who finally bowed to the imperative for change. Today they accepted
the Nobel Peace Prize for their great enterprise of bringing peace and nonracial
democracy within reach of South Africa.

In speeches that merged and diverged like tributaries of the Limpopo River,
Nelson Mandela and President F. W. de Klerk looked to a future of rejoicing and
prosperity for their country, shed of the fears and injustices of apartheid.

Both said the rewards of peace might someday be measured in the happiness and
welfare of children. Both said there were dangers ahead should the process of
negotiation and multiracial cooperation that they started be derailed by
militants. And both, at least this afternoon, were optimistic.

Dawn of a New Age

"Let a new age be born!" Mr. Mandela proclaimed at the end of his address,
beaming as thousands applauded inside a cavernous hall of marble and murals in
the Oslo City Hall. The new age is supposed to start in April, when the first
elections based on universal suffrage end the era of white minority rule. It
will be a time, Mr. Mandela said, when "all humanity will join together to
celebrate one of the outstanding human victories of our century."

"That triumph will finally bring to a close a history of 500 years of African
colonization that began with the establishment of the Portuguese empire," he
declared.

Mr. de Klerk said the election would "not be about blacks or whites, or
Afrikaners and Xhosas" or "apartheid or armed struggle."

"It will be about future peace and stability," Mr. de Klerk said, "about
progress and prosperity, about nation building.

Great Difference in Five Years

"Five years ago people would have seriously questioned the sanity of anyone who
would have predicted that Mr. Mandela and I would be joint recipients of the
1993 Nobel Peace Prize," he noted, and a titter of laughter from the audience
told him he was right.

Two previous human rights campaigners from South Africa, both black, have won
the Peace Prize. Chief Albert Luthuli of the Zulus, a predecessor of Mr. Mandela
as president of the African National Congress, won in 1960 for leading civil
disobedience to racist laws. Archbishop Desmond Tutu of the Anglican Church won
in 1984 for his stand against apartheid in his public speeches.

The award, established in the will of Alfred Nobel, the inventor of dynamite,
who died in 1896, includes a gold medal, a diploma and a check now worth about
$810,000, which will be shared.

When the selections were announced in October, some commentators felt that the
lifelong contribution of Mr. Mandela, 75, the patriarch of the anti-apartheid
movement, so outweighed Mr. de Klerk's that a joint award was inappropriate.

Mr. de Klerk, 57, took office as acting President in August 1989, and was
elected President the next month. Some changes in dismantling apartheid were
already under way, like the repeal of the passbook and influx control
regulations, which were intended to keep blacks out of cities.

Accelerating the Changes

But once in office, he sped the changes considerably. Public protest was
legalized, bans were lifted on the African National Congress and the South
African Communist Party, and political prisoners were released. On Feb. 11,
1990, after serving 27 1/2 years in prison, a gray-haired Mr. Mandela finally
stepped out of jail. The congress leader was acknowledged throughout the world
as spokesman for the oppressed black majority.

The Norwegian Nobel Committee has a tradition of recognizing the contributions
of both sides in peace talks, whether in Vietnam or the Middle East. During
three days of meetings, press conferences and banquets here, the theme that it
takes two to end a war was emphasized.

Mr. Mandela was magnanimous in praising Mr. de Klerk as someone who "had the
courage to admit that a terrible wrong had been done to our country and people"
through apartheid and who had "the foresight" to understand that all the people,
as equals, must determine the future.

The two presented different views on how white minority rule had been brought
down. For Mr. Mandela, who cited Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. as an inspiration,
it was because of "the millions of our people who dared to rise up against a
social system whose very essence is war, violence, racism, oppression,
repression and the impoverishment of the entire people." He thanked "the
millions of people across the globe" who helped.

'Change of Heart' Cited

For Mr. de Klerk, it was not international sanctions or armed struggle, but
instead "social changes which economic growth generated," in particular the
movement of millions of people into the cities and "the exposure to realities"
brought by television and radio.

But the single most important factor, he said, was "a fundamental change of
heart," which he said had "occurred on both sides."

Even as Mr. Mandela arrived in Oslo on Tuesday, exclusive white rule was ending
with the installation of the Transitional Executive Council, a multiracial,
multiparty body that will oversee preparations for elections on April 27. But 7
of the 26 parties that originally took part in talks on an interim constitution
were absent from the council. One group that did not attend was the Freedom
Alliance, a collection of white members of the far right and black homeland
leaders.

Mr. de Klerk noted that despite the progress, violence was continuing and some
3,000 people had been killed this year alone. Mr. Mandela warned that there
could still be trouble ahead. But for the most part the two men's speeches were
upbeat.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              225 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: December 12, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1452 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   6   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 2      2  70   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 3      3   9   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                and a poem.

 4      4  16   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 5      7   2   THE TRUCE AT BAKURA, by Kathy Tyers. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.)
                The "Star Wars" Rebel Alliance responds to a call for help from
                a threatened outpost.

 6      6  11   LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues
                the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour."

 7*     5   5   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery
                writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined
                to kill him and take his place.

 8      9  35   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 9     11  39   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 10     8   8   A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A
                young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in
                Victorian England's high society.

 11    14  14   THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                Concluding the "Griffin & Sabine" trilogy, about an artist and
                his secret admirer.

 12    12   3   THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Talese/Doubleday,
                $23.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly
                reappears in their lives.

 13    10   7   DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) An
                architect-engineer gets caught between the warring factions of
                a clan that owns an English racecourse.

 14         1   THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of
                Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.

 15         2   HOTEL PASTIS, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $23.) An Englishman is
                harried by intrigues and machinations after he becomes an
                innkeeper in Provence.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   4   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More
                comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 2      2   8   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 3      4  14   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 4      3  16   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 5      5  31   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 6      6  10   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 7      7   2   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                100, reflect on their lives.

 8      9  10   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by
                Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Thoughts on 43 years of
                marriage.

 9          1   LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The
                country singer's memoirs, with an account of her relations with
                daughters Wynonna and Ashley.

 10     8   5   THE DOWNING STREET YEARS, by Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins,
                $30.) The former British Prime Minister recalls her 11 1/2
                years in power.

 11    10   8   STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski.
                (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played
                Capt. James Tiberius Kirk.

 12    12  70   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 13    11   2   THE BEST CAT EVER, by Cleveland Amory. (Little, Brown, $19.95.)
                A third volume about the trials and tribulations of the feline
                Polar Bear and his owner.

 14    13  10   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 15         6   CASE CLOSED, by Gerald Posner. (Random House, $25.) A
                reassessment of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      4  20   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 2      3   4   AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with
                Bud Shrake. (Simon & Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes
                from the golf instructor.

 3      1  30   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.

 4      2   9   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 27, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
AND BEAR IN MIND

THE BOOK OF NIGHTS, by Sylvie Germain. (Verba Mundi/Godine, $22.95.) In this
work of magic realism by a French philosopher living in Prague, the protean
world of the Brothers Grimm meets Nazi Germany.

THE COMPLETE LYRICS OF IRA GERSHWIN, edited by Robert Kimball. (Knopf, $45.)
More than 700 lyrics displaying the fresh and inventive rhymes, supple phrasing,
intelligence and wit that made Gershwin a lyricist nobody can read for one
minute without humming.

THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER, edited by Mark Tucker. (Oxford University, $30.) A
fascinating anthology of 70 years' worth of writing about (and occasionally by)
Ellington, who clearly inspired powerful emotions in even the most sober minds.

EXIT INTO HISTORY: A Journey Through the New Eastern Europe, by Eva Hoffman.
(Viking, $23.) Seeking out the ordinary, a Polish-born writer with a touch of
American objectivity makes a tour of Mitteleuropa, returning with subtle
insights about a world in transition.

EXTRA INNINGS: A Memoir, by Doris Grumbach. (Norton, $22.) Well into her 70's,
Ms. Grumbach says she is trying to "learn to sit still" and mining what she
calls her "mental compost heap."

GENET: A Biography, by Edmund White. (Knopf, $35.) A monumental biography,
meticulously researched, that places Genet's literary vision squarely in his
homosexuality and confronts the mystery of how a man who left school at 12
became a great master of the French language.

GHOSTS, by John Banville. (Knopf, $21.) Rattling around in this Irish writer's
witty, startling and nearly plotless novel are echoes of "The Tempest,"
entrancing visual elements, an obscure and intricate mystery, violence and a
houseful of threatening oddballs.

A HISTORY OF WARFARE, by John Keegan. (Knopf, $27.50.) Mr. Keegan, the most
readable and original of military historians, argues that war is an omnipresent
cultural ritual of mankind, from which the ruthless modern notion of disciplined
total war was an aberration.

NEVER STOP RUNNING: Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American
Liberalism, by William H. Chafe. (Basic Books, $28.) A historian captures the
rootlessness and personal insecurity of an aggressive reform politician from New
York who could accomplish almost anything except getting himself elected.

RETURN TO PARADISE, by Breyten Breytenbach. (Harcourt Brace, $22.95.) A bleak,
beautiful, subjective collage of reminiscences, political rants and prose poems
about this Afrikaner poet's troubled sojourns in South Africa.

THAT'S THE WAY I SEE IT, by David Hockney. Edited by Nikos Stangos. (Chronicle
Books, $35.) The second volume of the artist's recollections, taken from the
tape recorder of Mr. Stangos, is a long, perky monologue -- autobiography
alternating with ruminations on vision and the reproduction of images.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              226 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ON WASHINGTON;
High Up in the Box

BYLINE: By Maureen Dowd

SECTION: Section 6; Page 42; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1214 words


You get so used to wallowing in bad sports metaphors when you cover politics,
that you know a Hail Mary moment when you see one.

It happened at the mid-September Redskins-Phoenix Cardinals game, when the
Redskins were desperately trying for a touchdown.

"Not gonna look," moaned Jack Kent Cooke, the Redskins' owner, burying his face
in his hands like a small child.

His ostrich instincts were correct. Muffing that moment, the team began a free
fall to last place. And this Redskins-crazy town plunged into a depression so
black it would probably resist even the Woody Allen cure of Prozac and a polo
mallet.

I actually got to see Cooke utter that perfect epitaph for this season of doom
because I was sitting near him in the heady atmosphere of the owner's box,
floating high above the 50-yard line.

As Hemingway wrote in "The Snows of Kilimanjaro," What was this leopard doing at
that altitude?

In Washington an invitation to watch a Redskins game in Cooke's box at R.F.K.
Stadium is a hotter ticket than an invitation to the White House. Evan Thomas
explained in his biography of Edward Bennett Williams, the fabled lawyer who
once owned part of the team, that securing a seat in the box had become "a
ruling-class ritual on an emotional, if not esthetic, par with Wimbledon and
Ascot for the British."

The pecking order in the capital was made clear recently when the vinegary
little Canadian-born Cooke was asked whether President Clinton would be invited
to the box. "No," the 81-year-old replied, before grudgingly adding, "Well, he
is the President, so I suppose I will invite him if he calls and asks me."

I hadn't been invited on my own. My boss, R. W. Apple Jr., The Times Washington
bureau chief, had been asked, and he was taking me so we could do some
diversity-era sports bonding. But it was still sweet revenge on my family.

In 1972, in the golden age of George Allen and Billy Kilmer, my older brothers
and sister banded together in a nefarious scheme to bar me from ever again using
any of the four season tickets our family had had since 1957. I was declared
fana non grata after it became clear, during a Redskins-Packers game, that I
didn't even know we were in the playoffs.

I am not promoting the cliche that women don't understand sports; I started as a
sports reporter. I just never cared about football. And in this town, where an
injured quarterback can knock the President off the evening news, that is a
self-indictment of Dostoyevskyesque proportions.

But two decades after my banishment, I was back, lording it over the hoi polloi
-- and hoi siblings -- from the Olympian heights of the box.

Much has been written about the capital's obsession with the Redskins and the
overbearing fans here. My earliest memories are of Redskin fanaticism. My
brother Kevin named my kittens after linebackers, Pellegrini and Drazenovich,
and then banged their little heads together, re-enacting plays.

The mania comes partly from Washington's fixation on winning and losing. It also
stems from its hybrid nature as both a government and a real city. The stadium
between the monuments and the slums is the only place where those two worlds
unite, where senators sit next to janitors, where HUD lawyers high-five street
vendors. During the searing years of Vietnam and Watergate, rooting for the
Redskins offered "a healing ground," as Richard Helms, the former C.I.A.
director, once said.

Before I went to the game, I tried to brush up a bit on Redskinese. I was warned
not to wear anything too casual because the network cameras always pan the box.
But I felt like Ivana Trump, getting color-coordinated for football; so I
defiantly put on populist jeans and cowboy boots. Huge mistake. When we took the
private elevator up to the pre-game party in the Lombardi Room, the women
gleamed with Chanel, silk, French twists and lorgnettes. (The better to read the
program with.)

Marlene Cooke, the exotic, 37-something Bolivian-American wife of the owner,
looked ready, in chiffon and dangling jewelry, for a state dinner. (The
chatelaine of the box has an air of dangerous glamour, enhanced by her public
struggle not to be deported, after a brief prison stint on a charge of
conspiring to import cocaine.)

Or maybe the fourth Mrs. Cooke just seemed refreshingly noire compared with her
guests. Reflecting Cooke's distaste for the Clinton crowd, the roster consisted
of media heavies and bipartisan blasts from the past: David Brinkley, George
McGovern, Eugene McCarthy, Pat Buchanan, Richard Darman and both Larry Kings,
television host and playwright.

After being introduced to Cooke, I tried to retreat to the trays of elegant
little pizzas. All my rehearsed bon mots about flea-flickers and split uprights
had flown out of my head. But the charming Cooke held my arm and boomed: "Stay
right here by my side. Do you want a mint julep?"

I nodded mutely and tried to look alert as Sir Robin Renwick, the British
Ambassador to the United States, rushed up to tell Cooke that the past week's
win over Dallas had been a heart-stopper.

Turning to me, a beaming Cooke demanded, "And what was your favorite moment of
the Dallas game?"

Offering my own version of Dan Quayle's deer-in-the-headlights look, I was saved
only when Mrs. Cooke tugged her husband away, telling him it was game time.

We went over a catwalk, and we were in the box -- a rather ordinary-looking
place with three tiers of 64 Naugahyde seats, hovering waitresses and a bucket
of expensive wine.

I tried to conceal my jejuneness by agreeing with everything anyone else said.

"'What we could use now is a pass interception," my boss said. I nodded.

"They look like men, and we look like boys," complained CNN's Larry King. I
nodded.

"Why don't they put in goddamn Reggie Brooks?" Cooke barked from behind
binoculars.

"Where's Reggie?" I echoed, in a small belligerent voice.

The box is like the Oval Office East. Cooke, chief executive, sits in front on
the left, surrounded by sycophants and his own "red phone," a black dial-less
phone with a red ribbon on the receiver. When a player is hurt, the phone
magically rings and Cooke rails into it. He also lets off steam at the general
manager, Charlie Casserly, who sits behind, wearing a long-suffering face and
diamond-studded ring. (Later my sister mocked my disdain, explaining it was a
Super Bowl championship ring.)cw-1

When the Redskins scored, Cooke hugged his wife. And he patted her arm
sympathetically when Mark Rypien, the quarterback, got his knee crushed by a
Cardinals tackle. She did not seem upset. Wearing Italian movie star sunglasses,
she ate a mustard-slathered hot dog without ever removing her brown suede
gloves.

Three days later, Mrs. Cooke confirmed her Fellini esque stature when she was
arrested after a wild ride through Georgetown with a young man on the hood of
her Jaguar. Wearing a Chanel bustier and miniskirt, she flung her gold pumps at
an officer who suggested a sobriety test, and explained that the 26-year-old was
her "nephew."

At halftime Cooke, like Achilles, sulked in his box and did not show up for
cocktails and spicy meatballs in the Lombardi Room. (Not gonna look.)

As we left, I stopped to say goodbye to our host.

"It wasn't your fault," he assured me, kindly.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Washington Redskins owner Jack Kent Cooke and wife Marlene.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY DENNIS COOK/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              227 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New York Hotels

SECTION: Section 5; Page 28; Column 6; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 299 words


To the Editor: I read with interest Terry Trucco's article "Checking Out New
York Hotels" (Sept. 19). In it, she gave what seemed like a mediocre review to
the St. Moritz Hotel on Central Park South, and made it sound kind of cute that
there were mint-green curtains and crumbs on the park-view window sill ("The
previous occupants had apparently enjoyed the view, too.")

I had a much less cute experience at the St. Moritz Hotel last winter. When I
arrived, the lobby was jammed. I waited half an hour before I was checked in. A
porter showed me to a room that astonished me: The bed was softer and droopier
than I've seen in a life of traveling ( including third-class accommodations in
Thailand and North Vietnam). There were holes in the wall near the floor; you
could fit a baseball through them. I trudged back down to the jammed lobby and I
waited in line again. I told the clerk it was one of the most depressing rooms
I'd ever seen. He explained that this was one of the "unrefurbished" rooms and
gave me a key to a second room.

The second room was slightly less depressing, but not by much. The room was dank
and dark and you could hear people arguing in the rooms on both sides. I
postponed my dinner date, paid my bill (the phone calls) and went to a different
hotel with no discount, no noise, no crumbs and no mint-green curtains. Comfort
is obviously not the St. Moritz's prime concern.

MITCH MARKOWITZ
Pacific Palisades, Calif.

Cynthia Kingdon, director of marketing and sales for the St. Moritz, responds:
The St. Moritz regrets that Mr. Markowitz was not happy with his experience at
our hotel. Our guests' comfort and enjoyment are our top priorities and since
his visit, we have completed a multimillion-dollar refurbishment of all our
guest rooms.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              228 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SURFACING

SECTION: Section 9; Page 3; Column 5; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 116 words



MOVIES
It's a depressing life: Hollywood is spreading very little cheer this Christmas,
releasing films on such dire subjects as AIDS ("Philadelphia"), the Holocaust
("Schindler's List," above) and the Vietnam war ("Heaven and Earth").


PRETENSION
Ritzy Ritz crackers: These gourmet-style chocolate-dipped wafers are available
as a "limited edition" through the holidays, according to Nabisco. (Suggested
retail price for box of 15: $2.69.)


MUSIC
Solar-powered albums: Greenpeace has produced the first album recorded with
solar power. The proceeds from "Alternative NRG," which features the likes of U2
and R.E.M., will be used to fight the burning of fossil fuels.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              229 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
North Korea's Game Looks a Lot Like Nuclear Blackmail

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 1071 words

DATELINE: TOKYO


WHEN historians and intelligence analysts search for the roots of North Korea's
drive for atomic weapons, they are usually drawn back to a moment 43 years ago,
when the Truman Administration contemplated the quick and decisive way to end
the Korean War: a nuclear attack on Pyongyang.

It never happened, of course, but North Korea's leaders to this day throw Gen.
Douglas MacArthur's plan in the face of visitors as a symbol of American
imperialist savagery.  The power of the bomb, even as a threat, made an
impression that four decades later is coming back to haunt the White House.

The country whose frenzied Stalinist rhetoric became a joke even among its
Communist allies, whose moribund economy made Cuba look like an entrepreneurial
powerhouse, has suddenly found the formula for dealing with America as an equal.
At 81, Kim Il Sung, the world's longest serving national leader, is trying out
his theory that nothing makes Washington take you seriously faster than a pile
of plutonium.

And it's working. In the last few weeks hardly a day has passed without the
President of the United States -- who was 4 years old when the "great leader"
faced off against America the first time -- talking about the importance of a
deal with one of the world's most isolated regimes. After decades of refusing to
speak directly with the North, officials of the State Department and the
National Security Council are dangling the kind of carrots Mr. Kim once
fantasized about: promises of trade, economic aid, an end to the biggest
American-South Korean military exercise, even diplomatic recognition.

Washington will talk about all this as soon as international inspectors are
allowed back into seven buildings at the heart of the North's nuclear complex.
Needless to say, if there ever was much evidence of a bomb project inside, by
now it has been moved someplace else. And Mr. Kim has played his few cards
superbly. "Just think how much Kim has accomplished in the past few months," a
senior Japanese intelligence official mused. "America is paying attention to
him. Everyone else in Asia is afraid of how the North Koreans may overreact to
too much pressure." The North, he suggested, hasn't gotten this much attention
since it crossed the Han River in 1950, wiping out Seoul.

Indeed, even today, 40 years after the signing of the armistice, North Korea's
greatest leverage arises from the fear it engenders -- not so much because of
its million-man army or its artillery within easy reach of Seoul, but rather
because of the regime's reputation for unpredictability. This is, after all, the
country that a few years ago was blowing up commercial airliners and planting
bombs to wipe out the South Korean Cabinet. That weighs heavily on Washington's
strategists. "There is a fine line between persuading North Korea to do what
needs to be done, and provoking a terrible reaction," Gen. John M.
Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said recently in Seoul.

Wavering

Clinton Administration officials bristle, of course, at any suggestion that
their proposed concessions prove that nuclear blackmail works. But that is the
subtext of the whole drama intensifying in Washington, Tokyo, Seoul and
Pyongyang.

It may also explain why Mr. Clinton seems to be wavering so -- brandishing
economic sanctions one day, then wondering aloud if they would work, then trying
to cool down the rhetoric, then insisting again on full inspections. Clearly,
having backed away from stated goals in Bosnia, Somalia and Haiti, he is under
pressure to show that, in at least one area of key American interest, military
power can still be converted into diplomatic influence. But is it really worth
the risk for a bomb that may not exist?

For Mr. Kim, American analysts and military commanders assume that there is only
one agenda item: To save his reeling regime from imminent economic collapse. No
one seems to think he or his mysterious son, Kim Jong Il, can pull it off, but
then again a year ago no one thought they would get this far.

In this strategy, stage one is obvious: Rip down the blockades to doing business
with America and Japan, since Russia and China have lost virtually all interest
in dealing with Mr. Kim's bankrupt Government.

Stage two gets a bit more dicey. North Korean officials described to visitors
last year an image of their country somewhat akin to Vietnam -- a Communist
regime seeking to maintain rigid social controls while marketing a disciplined,
cheap work force and natural resources to moneyed neighbors. Right now, this
hardly seems like Asia's greatest investment opportunity. But last week, along
with the usual threats, the North turned out a remarkably detailed -- and in
some ways quite liberal -- set of regulations for free-trade zones.

Mr. Kim knows two things: As soon as he reveals all his nuclear mysteries they
are worthless as bargaining chips, and he has very little time to make this
high-wire act work. The economic desperation is now so deep that North Korean
propaganda last week finally dropped any pretense of hiding it. Meanwhile the
man presented last year as a champion of reform, Kim Dal Yong, the state
planning chief, was mysteriously deposed last week, presumably because whatever
he was doing didn't work fast enough.

What all this means is that while Mr. Clinton has no good short-term options on
nuclear inspection, the long-term strategy is simply to try to assure the world
of a soft landing as North Korea collapses. That helps explain why Japan and
South Korea are generally advocating timidity on the nuclear issue. The Japanese
are shy of confrontation, and fearful of a flood of refugees or unrest within
their own big North Korean community. The South fears being stuck with the bill
for the North's collapse. But both recognize that the current situation cannot
last; already the International Atomic Energy Agency is saying its cameras have
failed from lack of maintenance, and it can no longer ensure that nuclear
material is not being diverted to bombs. Soon that alone may drive the West to
seek sanctions, and prudence will dictate a military buildup to guard against
retaliation. "The place is going to implode or explode," Gen. Gary E. Luck, the
commander of American forces in South Korea, said recently. "I hope it's an
implosion. Because I don't think the world would like to see what an explosion
looks like."


LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Residents of Pyongyang cheering as United Nations forces take
over the North Korean capital in 1950. (Associated Press); Truman photographed
during the early days of the Korean War.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              230 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In 3 Progressive Cities, Stern Homeless Policies

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1265 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, Dec. 11


Clinging to its cherished reputation for liveability, this city recently made it
a civil offense for a person to sit on the sidewalk in front of a business
during the day.

In Portland, Ore., when a panhandler starts begging for change, two uniformed
men, officially known as "guides," promptly show up and discourage donations.

In San Francisco, police officers are jailing people and issuing citations for
such long-ignored violations as "intent to camp" and public intoxication. Since
August, they have written 3,400 citations.

Frustrated by policies toward the homeless that seem to have had little effect
on reducing the number of people wandering and begging in the streets, three
West Coast cities with a reputation for tolerance and forward-thinking social
programs are trying a new tack.

Political leaders in all three cities say their new posture reflects not just
the attitude of a public fed up with aggressive street people but also the way
new thinking on the homeless problem is finding its way into public policy.

'Public Patience Has Worn Out'

Some advocates for street people say the new practices amount to a harsh attack
on the poor, essentially making it a crime to be homeless. They also wonder if
the policies will do anything more than move the homeless from tourist and
business areas into less visible places where they can be largely forgotten.

"Public patience has worn out," said Noah Griffin, a spokesman for Mayor Frank
Jordan of San Francisco. "We want to take back the parks, automatic teller
machines, alleys, the streets, our plazas, our playgrounds for all citizens."

The city attorney of Seattle, Mark H. Sidran, recently drafted six new
ordinances to make it easier to jail or fine street people for such offenses as
urinating or drinking in public or loitering or aggressive panhandling in front
of a business. All six were approved by Seattle's liberal City Council.

"The press has been talking about a backlash against the homeless," said Mr.
Sidran, a Democrat. "But what we're doing is not a backlash against the
homeless. It's a backlash against failed public policies."

Across the nation, cities are replacing their old practices with newer, usually
tougher policies. A report issued on Thursday in Washington by the National Law
Center on Homelessness and Poverty said cities were increasingly enacting and
enforcing anti-vagrancy laws to jail homeless people or to remove them from busy
areas.

Public Safety Arguments

The White House has also shifted direction. Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros
says he wants to move the Government's emphasis away from emergency shelters
toward treatment of alcoholism and mental illness.

Still, Clinton Administration officials have yet to portray homelessness as a
public safety concern, as some mayors are doing.

The shift from viewing street people as objects of pity to seeing them as a
threat to civic well-being is remarkable in these West Coast cities, liberal
bastions where as recently as five years ago politicians were promising to wipe
out homelessness.

Central to the approach of all three cities is the assertion that adequate
services already insure that most homeless people do not really lack food or
shelter. San Francisco alone spends $46 million a year on housing, food and
social services for its homeless, which works out to more than $7,600 for each
of its estimated 6,000 street people.

The new view holds that most of the homeless are not working people down on
their luck and in need of a meal but rather drug abusers or alcoholics or are
mentally ill.

Portland leaders came to this conclusion after they started issuing vouchers for
food or shelter that passers-by could give to panhandlers. They found that
hardly any vouchers were being redeemed.

A Plan Lauded and Condemned

To back up the new approach, downtown property owners founded the Portland
Guides, private patrollers with uniforms and two-way radios who roam the central
business district looking for panhandlers. While they do not forcibly remove
beggars, the patrols discourage passers-by from giving panhandlers change, and
instead encourage them to buy and give the vouchers. The program has the
blessing of city government.

"We've seen a real change in downtown," said Sara Roberts, a spokeswoman for the
Association of Portland Progress, the business group that started the program.

Others laud the program for sending a message that giving money to people with
their hands out will do them more harm than good. In Washington, D.C., the
International Downtown Association is promoting Portland's approach as a model
for other cities.

Critics say the program is little more than a strong-armed way to keep the
downtown free of undesirables.

Seattle has taken perhaps the strongest stance against panhandlers of any city
in the nation. A few years ago, it outlawed "aggressively begging," defined as
using intimidation or persisting after being told no.

Now it has passed a law prohibiting people from sitting or lying on sidewalks in
business districts. Mr. Sidran said such people deterred shoppers, ultimately
causing businesses to fail and touching off "a vicious cycle that, as many
formerly great American cities have demonstrated, can be very difficult to
reverse."

Ambivalence Among Advocates

Some advocates for the homeless, while disagreeing with the strongest parts of
Seattle's policies, say they welcome new thinking on the issue.

"I'm not thrilled," said Bill Hobson, the director of a Seattle shelter, "to be
advocating the right of people to beg or drink themselves to death." But he also
said that stepping up law enforcement or forcing the homeless to move from one
part of a city to another would not increase public safety unless such measures
were accompanied by adequate drug- and alcohol-abuse programs and centers for
the mentally ill.

The Seattle sidewalk vagrancy ordinance has been challenged in court by civil
liberties groups who argue that it violates the constitutional right of free
assembly. In San Francisco, the American Civil Liberties Union has sued to block
Mayor Jordan's plan, arguing that its aggressive enforcement of laws that have
long been on the books singles out a class of people.

A Veterans Issue

In a press conference on Monday, Ron Kovic, the disabled Vietnam War veteran
whose story was recounted in the movie "Born on the Fourth of July," denounced
the San Francisco program, known as Matrix, as an affront to veterans, who he
said made up a significant portion of the homeless population.

"Thousands of homeless veterans and other Vietnam veterans are being mistreated
every day in this city because of the Matrix program," Mr. Kovic said.

In San Francisco, where tourism is the top industry, officials said tourist
destinations like Union Square were being overrun with beggars and drunkards.

A leading San Francisco pollster, David Binder, said the new policy reflected a
change in attitude among residents of a city considered to be one of the most
tolerant in the nation.

"Initially, homelessness was viewed as a societal problem," he said. "As it has
worsened, a lot of people have moved away from that view and now see it as a
public-safety problem."

In Seattle, Mr. Sidran said his changes had been welcomed by liberals who
realized the old solutions were not working.

"This is a tolerant, liberal city where people still wait for the walk light
before they cross the street," he said. "But people are saying there have got to
be minimum standards of behavior for everyone."


LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              231 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

ECONOMIC PULSE: The Great Plains;
Plains, While Still Bleak, Offer a Chance to the Few

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3231 words

DATELINE: WILD HORSE, Colo.


Survival has always demanded ingenuity in the Great Plains, where 19th-century
settlers, making do without timber and nails, used mud and grass to build their
homes.

Today vast stretches of this region are about as lonesome as they were a century
ago. But some small economic miracles, born of creative ideas and the
willingness to take a chance, are thriving in the scrub and dust of America's
least populated quarter.

Farmers in North Dakota, who produce the bulk of the nation's durum wheat used
for spaghetti, have pooled their resources and built a pasta-making plant, which
opened two weeks ago near Jamestown.

Buying Cattle From Home

A livestock dealership in Brush, Colo., using television satellite dishes, now
broadcasts cattle auctions so ranchers can inspect heifers from the comfort of
their living rooms.

An outdoor-gear catalogue retailer, looking for ways to provide distinctive
service from its headquarters in tiny Sidney, Neb., gives its customers a
toll-free number to call with any question about outdoor sports, and requires
all of its workers to pass a hunting and fishing test.

Meatpacking plants in western Kansas are increasing production by relying
largely on hard-working immigrants from Mexico and Vietnam. And the Sioux in
South Dakota recently broke ground on a big gambling casino that will provide
jobs for hundreds of unemployed Indians.

Towns Falling Away

But for every economic boom on the Great Plains, there are far more little
places, like Wild Horse, that are falling silent. Signs of recovery in the
national economy, while raising some hopes here, generally loom as distant as
the jets that streak the sky over this region on their way to someplace else.

Wild Horse, about 100 miles southeast of Denver, was once a thriving town of
about 200 people. Over the generations, it survived fire, dust storms and
tornadoes. A picture taken in 1917 shows a town radiating with promise, faces
smiling and hands clapping to a brass band blaring on Main Street. But in a
national economy that has outgrown its use for such tiny, far-flung places, Wild
Horse is not likely to survive much longer. Only 13 people live here now, and
all but two of them are over 65 years old.

Abandoned houses creak in the wind and boarded stores sit empty. Only a gas
station with a flea market, the Unicorn, remains open. And the handful of
survivors fear the day when the name of Wild Horse will be erased from the map.

The Great Plains, the flat, shadowless sweep from Canada to Mexico, between the
eastern foothills of the Rockies and the 98th meridian, a line that cuts just
west of Wichita, Kan., covers one-fifth of the United States, but accounts for
just one-fortieth of its population.

And across much of the Plains, the numbers are shrinking. In Nebraska, for
example, 83 of the state's 93 counties lost population in the 1980's, and almost
all the winners were near Omaha, east of the Plains.

A century ago, the Census Bureau marked an area "settled" when it had more than
six people per square mile, and the historian Frederick Jackson Turner declared
the American Frontier to be closed. But today, in about 200 counties on the
Great Plains, the population density has fallen below that frontier threshold.

Rural America Writ Large

"What is happening to rural America generally is writ large in the Great
Plains," said Mark Drabenstott, a vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank in
Kansas City, Mo. But unlike towns in rural regions like the Corn Belt of the
Middle West or the dairy farms of New England, he said, many towns in the Great
Plains sit in such isolation that further decline means they risk disappearing.

Mr. Drabenstott explained that if a school closes in Iowa, where towns are much
closer, there is likely to be another school 10 or 15 miles down the road. But
here in Cheyenne County, with a population of 2,400, the school in Kit Carson is
already serving an area of 1,000 square miles. It is not uncommon for children
in the Great Plains to spend two hours each way on the school bus. And when a
school closes in such a remote place, families must move, rather than opt for an
even more distant school, since a school bus ride can only get so long.

"In many of these little towns on the Plains," Mr. Drabenstott said, "we're
reaching the point where the noose has begun to concentrate the mind."

Over all, population in the Great Plains has been slowly increasing, the result
of the growth of a handful of cities. But in the rural counties, the population
has fallen more than 15 percent since 1930.

That decline poses a stark contrast to the current economic booms farther West.
In the mountainous regions of western Montana, for example, movie stars and rich
Californians are buying ranches and donning leather chaps and cowboy hats. But
on the Plains in the eastern part of Montana, where real cowboys wear soiled and
wrinkled hats, plenty of old ranch houses are sitting empty.

"The celebrities only want country that's drop-dead pretty," said Diane
Kuhlbacher, a rancher in flat-as-the-floor northeastern Wyoming, which has been
untouched by the rapid growth of Jackson and other places across the state near
the Tetons. "We think our Plains are pretty, too, but it's the kind of pretty
that has to grow on you."

Images of the Steppes

The Great Plains includes parts of 10 states: Colorado, Kansas, Montana,
Nebraska, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas and Wyoming.
But no one state lies entirely within the Plains. Two major cities sit at its
edges, Denver and San Antonio. The biggest city that sits on the Plains is
Lubbock, Tex., with a population of 186,000.

The region starts where the rainfall begins to stop -- the average precipitation
is less than 25 inches per year -- and where the tall grass of the prairies
gives way to short grass. For its scarcity of trees and vegetation, Zebulon Pike
and other 19th-century explorers dubbed the Plains the Great American Desert. It
has also been called America's Empty Quarter and America's steppes. It has the
hottest summers, the coldest winters and the shortest growing season of any
section of the country. And its ceaseless winds have literally driven some
people mad.

Home for centuries to the Sioux, the Great Plains was settled by whites largely
through the Homestead Act of 1862, which President Abraham Lincoln signed "so
that every poor man may have a home." And the settlers came in covered wagons by
the millions, only to learn that the 160-acre plots offered by the Government,
enough land to support a farm family in the fertile soil of Iowa, were
insufficient in arid western Nebraska.

Citing the long decline of population on the Plains, two geographers at Rutgers
University, Frank and Deborah Popper, caused a furor a few years ago when they
called for the Government to sweep parts of the region clean of its last
inhabitants and turn it into a wildlife park to be called Buffalo Commons.

But Easterners have been making dire warnings about the Great Plains for more
than a century. "What do we want to do with this vast, worthless area?" Daniel
Webster asked in 1836.

In the face of enduring pessimism about their region, the Plains men and women
still struggle to carve prosperity out of their rocky soil and wind-whipped
small towns, and in some cases they are achieving remarkable success.

The Farmers
A Bumper Crop Of Linguini

Given a choice, most American farmers will plant corn or soybeans, crops that
generally bring the most cash per acre. And most farmers in eastern North
Dakota, stewards of the rich, black soil that characterizes the Midwest
prairies, cultivate vast sections of those crops, along with wheat and sugar
beets.

But on the Plains of the rest of North Dakota, where the rain is stinting, most
farmers do not have that choice. They generally stick with wheat, which fares
better in the drier climate. The difference between the Plains and the prairies
can be measured in crop yields. The average yield of wheat per acre in the far
eastern counties of North Dakota is 40.4 bushels; in the central counties, it is
23.5 bushels; in the far western counties, it is 12.2 bushels.

Like all farmers, the Plains farmers' income can soar or swoop, depending on
market prices. In the 1980's, a time when farmers were being clobbered by high
interest rates, prices for wheat fell to less than $2 a bushel. The double
whammy drove many off the land. The farmers who survived are doing much better
today, with rock-bottom interest rates and wheat prices that have fluctuated
around $4 a bushel.

But since the specter of another plunge in prices always haunts them, a group of
1,040 North Dakota wheat farmers got together two years ago to devise a way to
cushion their risks. Until lately, the durum wheat produced here was shipped to
big mills in Ohio and Pennsylvania and used for pasta. Some farmers had an idea:
Since North Dakota has the wheat, why not make the pasta right here?

They formed a cooperative and each invested $12,000 to build a plant. The Dakota
Pasta Growers, based in Carrington, N.D., started production in early November.
It has hired 100 workers from the region and plans to produce 120 million pounds
of pasta in the first year.

"It all got started with some farmers just kicking around some ideas," said Gary
McIntosh, the head of sales.

With the creation of jobs, real estate values have jumped in the Carrington area
for the first time in years. New houses are being built. And an old furniture
store, which had been empty for years, has a sign in its window: "Grand
Opening."

"Who says resurrection can't happen?" asked Larry Leistritz, an economics
professor at the University of North Dakota, who said the Plains needed to
create just such businesses to capitalize on farm production.

"It's a bright spot," he added. "But there haven't been too many pasta plants."

The Winners
Mail Order From Heaven

It's an old adage: Do what you want. The money will follow.

Dick and Jim Cabela of Sidney, Neb., wanted to hunt and fish, or at least to be
around the sporting life. So more than 30 years ago they started a small
business selling gear to hunters and fishermen. Their catalogue sales have seen
double-digit growth in every year since.

A few years ago, the business grew beyond the capacity of the local telephone
company to supply it with lines. But the Cabela brothers, like many other
entrepreneurs in the Great Plains, rejected the idea of moving for one reason:
this was home.

They opened a second business site in another little town on the Nebraska
plains, Kearney, a place that during the homesteader rush of the late 19th
century waged a brief campaign to make itself the nation's new capital, but has
been struggling since then to keep its population above 6,000.

Combining its sites in Kearney and Sidney, Cabela's Inc. employs 1,900 people,
making it one of Nebraska's largest businesses.

"This is heaven," said Jim Beardsley, who left an advertising job in Illinois to
move to Sidney, population 6,500, and become the director of the company's
catalogue sales. "I can hunt and fish every weekend. I've got a
4,000-square-foot house with a hot tub on 18 acres of land that I paid $72,000
for. I can look out my window and see a herd of antelope trotting past. It's so
free of crime here that I leave the keys in the ignition of my car. And my kids
go to a school with a student-teacher ratio of 12 to 1.

"Friends back East ask me how I can live in this little town. And I say, 'Yeah,
right.' "

Some scholars of the West say the usual barometers of a region's economic
health, like per-capita income, paint a false picture of little towns on the
Great Plains.

"The standard economic assessments are not only inadequate in measuring the
quality of life in these little towns, they're pretty much irrelevant," said
Phil Burgess, president of the Center for the New West, a research group in
Denver. "People say the average income in South Dakota is one of the lowest in
the country. But do you know what it costs to buy a nice big house in South
Dakota? I was talking to a guy in Southern California recently. He said he pays
$1,900 for a alarm safety system. And I told him, 'The people in South Dakota
don't have that expense. They don't need safety systems.'

"The No. 1 issue that everybody in this country is so concerned about is crime.
Well, they don't have to worry about crime in little towns on the Plains. If
your kid is running around doing something wrong, some neighbor is going to call
and tell you about it. So some of these places aren't growing. So what? They've
got nice houses, good schools and no crime. Isn't that the kind of quality of
life we all say we're looking for?"

Paul Hoefs, a 44-year-old stockbroker who has lived in New York, Chicago and
Miami, was told by his company that he could open a new office in the location
of his choice, so long as it had a telephone, a modem and a fax machine.

Intrigued with the idea of living in a small town on the Plains, Mr. Hoefs and
his wife and children took a drive through Superior, Neb. They saw the charming
Main Street and quiet neighborhoods of elegant Victorian houses with wraparound
porches and leaded glass windows selling for $50,000.

"As we drove through town, people waved hello to us," he said. "And the whole
family said, 'That's it. This is the place for us.' "

Mr. Hoefs and his family now live in one of those Victorians, and he walks a
block and a half to work every morning. The Ranchers A Big Spread Far From
School



Along with her husband, Diane Kuhlbacher owns a 10,000-acre ranch on the rugged,
open countryside of Rocky Point, Wyo., but spends most days in a cramped
two-bedroom apartment in the town of Gillette, 60 miles away. Two of her sons
are in high school, and she did not want them to spend four hours a day on the
school bus.

"Years ago, ranchers would just rent a place in town for their kids to stay by
themselves," Mrs. Kuhlbacher said. "But there wasn't as much mischief to get
into back then."

Even in little towns in Wyoming, she said, there are problems with drugs,
drinking and teen-age pregnancies.

Two of her sons and another boy from Rocky Point sleep in bunk beds in one room,
while she and her 4-year-old son stay in the other room. "It isn't big enough,"
said Mrs. Kuhlbacher, who works in a bookstore. "But it's all we can afford."

Wyoming makes what it calls "isolation payments" to people like the Kuhlbachers
to help pay for a second home. The payment of $250 a month covers the rent on
the apartment, she said, but not the utilities. Living in the little apartment
and spending so much time away from her husband, Jack, is one of the sacrifices
required of ranch life in the remote parts of the state.

The Kuhlbachers could sell the ranch and probably live comfortably on the
profits. But the property has been in the family since the turn of the century,
when her husband's grandfather settled it under the Homestead Act.

"Since it belongs to the family, we don't really feel like it's ours to sell,"
Mrs. Kuhlbacher said. "Besides, we're ranchers. It's our life. And we just
wouldn't want to trade it."

The time spent apart from her husband poses a hardship on the family, she said,
but it has also had its bright spots.

Before Mrs. Kuhlbacher moved out, she said, her husband was "like a lot of other
men" when it came to doing chores in the house. "We women have a saying up
here," she said. "Wyoming: where the men are men and the women work."

But since Mr. Kuhlbacher has had to fend for himself, he has mastered the
washing machine and doing the dishes. Now sometimes, even when the family is
together on weekends, he does the cooking. "He's gotten so he actually likes
it," his wife said. "And he makes a mean pot roast."

The Survivors
The Sadness Of Empty Houses

Behind a faded white-picket fence in one of the few lighted houses in Wild
Horse, 75-year-old Leona Schrimp sits back in her living-room chair, beside a
cast-iron stove burning with the sweet smell of cottonwood, recalling the past.

"Oh, we had fun in this town once," said Mrs. Schrimp, her white hair pulled
back and her eyes flashing like stars.

"But now, almost everybody has gone away. The Blekebergs, the Kinnebergs, the
Kopstads, the Johnsons, the Olsons. It gets so I don't even want to take a drive
in the country anymore. Makes me too sad, looking at all those empty houses."

The town sits on the bank of the Big Sandy River, which has been dry for years.
The next town to the west, Hugo, is 34 miles away, a stretch that passes only
two houses, one of them empty. Coyotes howl in the darkness, and the fields
crawl with rattlesnakes.

Mrs. Schrimp's mother, Marie, was a homesteader, an immigrant from Norway who
came to the Plains in 1908. She took a job cooking for cowboys on a ranch, and
the wranglers helped her learn to speak English. She fell in love with one of
them, a young cowboy named Otto Goldberg, and they married.

"There's my dad," said Mrs. Schrimp, pointing to a photograph that showed him
and the other townspeople in a joyous spring celebration of 1917.

"And there's my friend Judith," she said, pointing to a small girl in the
photograph. "She was born in '09. Held out here as long as she could. She's in a
retirement home now."

Until 1979, Mrs. Schrimp ran Lee's Cafe in town, which is now empty. Her
husband, Curtis, is a retired cattle truck driver. In his spare time, he ran the
gas station next to his wife's cafe.

The schoolhouse down the road closed nearly 30 years ago, and church services
are now held in the building, "when we can find a preacher to come out here,"
Mrs. Schrimp said.

Until a few years ago, the claim to fame in Wild Horse was the headquarters of
the Loretta Lynn Fan Club, run by Loudilla, Loretta and Kay Johnson, who lived
on a ranch at the end of a dirt road. But the Johnson sisters moved to Nashville
a few years ago, taking most of the post office's business with them.

The postmistress, Evonne Schallenberger, who plans to retire in June, said she
had been assured that the office would be kept open. But the Schrimps have their
doubts.

On the wall hangs a painting of Mrs. Schrimp's mother's home, a little white
farmhouse in a meadow by a fjord. The Schrimps have three children, and when
they were young, they would gaze at the painting and wonder about their
grandmother's life back in the old country.

The Schrimps' son, Steve, now lives in Denver, where he works as a computer
consultant. One daughter, Martha, runs cattle on a spread outside of town. The
other daughter, Lee Ann, who went to college to become a teacher, took a trip 10
years ago to Norway to find her grandmother's house, the one in the painting.

She found the place, and introduced herself to the young dairy farmer who lived
there. And they fell in love. Now Lee Ann and the dairy farmer and their
children live in her grandmother's old home in Norway.

A Norwegian newspaper wrote an article about it. The reporter said Lee Ann must
love Norway's deep green meadows, rolling hillsides and bubbling brooks,
especially after a childhood on the bleakness of the American Plains.

"Oh, where I come from," she told him, "you can see forever."


LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 12, 1993, Sunday

 CORRECTION:
An article on Dec. 12 about the economy of the Great Plains misstated the
population of Kearney, Neb. The 1990 census put it at 24,396.



GRAPHIC: Graph: "Where All Is Flat" shows statistics on population and
employment growth and per capita income for the Great Plains and the entire U.S.
(Source: Economic Research Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture) (pg.
28)
Photo: In far-flung places like Wild Horse, Colo., a handful of residents fear
the day the town's name will be erased from the map. (Brian Brainerd for The New
York Times); "This is heaven," says Jim Beardsley, the director of catalogue
sales at Cabella's, a outdoor-gear retailer in Sidney, Neb. (George Hipple for
The New York Times) (pg. 28)

Map shows the area of the Great Plains. (pg. 28)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              232 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Patents

BYLINE: By Teresa Riordan

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 851 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


SINCE the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the patent systems of many of
the former Soviet states have been in chaos. Russia essentially took over the
old Soviet patent office while the other 14 states fashioned their own
idiosyncratic patent offices.

Consequently, patent applicants, who under the old system would have sent one
form to Moscow, now must file in 15 countries and pay 15 filing fees.

But a new treaty, known as the Eurasian Patent Convention, will restore order
soon, according to a delegation from the Russian patent office. The delegation,
headed by the Commissioner of the Russian office, Vitaly P. Rassokhin, is
visiting the United States.

Under the agreement, a patent applicant would send one form, in Russian, to
Moscow to get a patent that would cover all 15 countries. The agreement is
modeled after the treaty that established the European patent office in Munich,
Germany.

"This will of course speed up the process of filing for a patent," said Viktor
I. Blinnikov, the deputy commissioner of the Russian patent office, speaking
through a translator at the annual conference here of the Intellectual Property
Owners Association.

Formal Signing Seen

The treaty has at least 11 signatories, including Ukraine, according to Mr.
Blinnikov, who said he was confident it would be formally signed by those
countries and perhaps others at a meeting in January at the World Intellectual
Property Organization's headquarters in Geneva.

During its stop in Washington, the Russian delegation visited the United States
Patent and Trademark Office. Mr. Rassokhin said the purpose of the visit was
less to lobby Commissioner Bruce A. Lehman on "harmonizing" United States patent
law with that of the rest of the world than to take notes on the agency's
computer system, which is still not fully operational. "We understand it is very
advanced," Mr. Rassokhin said in an interview before the tour.

The computer system, which has cost nearly $500 million so far and has been in
the works for a decade, has been viewed less enthusiastically in this country.
"The actual accrual of benefits from this investment has not been demonstrated,"
the General Accounting Office of Congress said in a report this fall.

Mr. Blinnikov and Mr. Rassokhin were said to have been pleased when employees at
the patent office searched the computer files for "Stolichnaya." In short order,
a trademark document for the Russian vodka appeared on the computer screen. The
officials were given a printout.

Aircraft Coating To Improve Safety

A former fighter pilot in the Korean and Vietnam wars says he has invented a
polymer coating process that could triple the service life of commercial
airplanes and save lives during crashes.

Usually, fiberglass insulation blankets are sandwiched between an airplane's
body and its outside metal skin. Milton J. Torres, 62, an industrial engineering
researcher at Florida International University in Miami, proposes jettisoning
the blankets and instead coating the interior of the metal skin with a commonly
used polymer, or plastic substance.

The coating, which is about two inches thick, has been named "pantherskin," in
honor of the university's mascot.

Mr. Torres said the coating reduces the amount of expanding and contracting of
the metal skin from variations in air pressure as a plane changess altitude.
According to laboratory tests, the polymer reduces strain by 90 percent at the
rivets attaching a plane's skin to its frame.

The coating would also make aircraft skins more resistant to fire, Mr. Torres
said. During testing, a section of coated metal skin withstood more than 25
minutes of torching with a flame of 3,000 degrees Fahrenheit. An untreated skin
similarly torched burned up in less than a minute.

Mr. Torres said he had begun to think about the danger of fatigued aircraft in
April 1988, when the hull of an Aloha Airlines jetliner ripped open, killing a
flight attendant and injuring scores of passengers.

"It's such a simple solution, I can't believe someone didn't do it before," Mr.
Torres said. "I guess it's not too many people who are trained in airplanes and
polymers at the same time."

Mr. Torres received patent 5,251,849, which was assigned to Florida
International University.

New Holiday Pasta Shaped Like Santa <EH>

 Over the years patents have been issued for a variety of anthropomorphic and
other pasta shapes. The most recent pasta to be issued a patent is designed to
look like Santa Claus.

The patent was assigned to Kraft General Foods Inc. of Northfield, Ill., which
also sells pasta shaped like dinosaurs and computer-game characters.

A spokeswoman for Kraft, Linda W. Eatherton, said that in anticipation of the
holidays the company recently shipped to stores a macaroni and cheese product
called Santa Mac, which features pasta in six different shapes: a candy cane,
bell, Christmas tree, stocking, bugle and Santa Claus.

Kraft said patent applications were pending for most of the holiday shapes. The
company was assigned design patent 333,546 for the Santa pasta.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              233 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Gives More Data on Missing to U.S.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 207 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Dec. 14


Vietnam has handed over more documents on Americans missing in action to the
United States, Assistant Secretary of State Winston Lord said today. He declined
to say what was in the documents or whether they shed any new light on missing
Americans.

Mr. Lord met separately with Premier Vo Van Kiet, Foreign Minister Nguyen Manh
Cam and Vice Foreign Minister Nguyen Dy Nien. He said they had discussed ways to
bring about the fullest possible accounting of the missing. "Vietnam sees this
in humanitarian terms, as do we," he added, but he gave no details.

Vietnam turned over eight sets of remains of missing Americans on Monday; it has
turned over 67 sets of remains this year.

The United States lists 2,248 Americans still unaccounted for in Southeast Asia
after the Vietnam War, including 1,648 in Vietnam, 514 in Laos, 78 in Cambodia
and 8 in China.

United States officials have said it is unlikely there will ever be a full
accounting because of the passage of time and the fact that many airmen went
down over water or mountains.

President Clinton has made a full lifting of the United States trade embargo
against Vietnam and the establishment of diplomatic relations contingent on the
fullest possible accounting.


LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              234 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE WORLD TRADE AGREEMENT: U.S. AND EUROPE CLEAR THE WAY FOR A WORLD ACCORD ON
TRADE, SETTING ASIDE MAJOR DISPUTES;
How Free Trade Prompts Growth: A Primer

BYLINE: By PETER PASSELL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1182 words


Free trade means growth. Free trade means growth. Free trade means growth. Just
say it 50 more times and all doubts will melt away.

Those who dutifully followed the debate over the North American Free Trade
Agreement and are now struggling to figure out what the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade has to do with the price of peas in Peoria may be excused for
a dash of skepticism about a link that is more often asserted than explained. It
is, in fact, one of the most widely held yet most difficult to prove ideas in
economics.

In the end, the nearly universal conviction that open trade drives global
prosperity rests more on observation than on well-developed theory: "We all
noticed that the countries doing well were exporting like crazy," said Stanley
Fischer, the World Bank's former chief economist.

College instructors love to illustrate the British economist David Ricardo's
insight about the gains from free trade with a story about Woodrow Wilson.
President Wilson, they say, could type faster than his secretary. But it made
sense to leave the White House correspondence to others so he could concentrate
on making the world safe for democracy and other higher-productivity endeavors.

A Victorian Example

By this same rule of "comparative advantage," it made economic sense for
Victorian England to break the political influence of its cosseted farmers by
opening its borders to wheat from central Europe and North America. That allowed
entrepreneurs to focus more capital and labor on manufacturing, where it could
(and did) make Britain the richest country on earth.

These gains from economic specialization are still nothing to sneeze at. The
World Bank estimates that in 1985 free trade in dairy foods would have lowered
average prices by two-thirds and doubled global output. All told, free trade in
grain, meat, milk and sugar would have added $40 billion to world income --
mostly by shifting production away from Western Europe and toward lower cost
producers.

And the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development calculates that
the combination of reduced tariffs and more generous import quotas penciled into
the new GATT accord would increase world income by $270 billion annually by the
turn of the century.

Big as these numbers are, though, they are modest compared with the total world
output, which will probably exceed $30 trillion a decade hence. And even if one
imagined free trade nirvana in which shirts sewn in Jakarta could be sold as
freely in Seattle as shirts made on Seventh Avenue, the direct impact of the
resulting global specialization of production would not be overwhelming.

Gary Hufbauer and Tim Elliott of the Institute for International Economics in
Washington estimate that free trade would add about 1 percent to the average
American's income.

Why, then, is Sebastian Edwards, a development specialist at the University of
California at Los Angeles, convinced that "free trade is the cornerstone to
modern economic systems?" Because it does not take an econometrician to tell
which way the winds of prosperity have been blowing.

In the 1890's, Argentina had roughly the same income per person as the United
States and seemed as well endowed with resources, both human and physical. A
century of protectionism, though, left Argentina with hundreds of inefficient
industries serving only local markets and a living standard roughly a third as
high as that of the colossus to the north.

Asian Comparisons

Or compare the economies of Asia that stumbled into the 1960's in more or less
wretched condition. Those that focused on the expansion of trade (Hong Kong,
Taiwan, Singapore, South Korea, Thailand, Malaysia) have done very well. Those
that tried to develop by pushing for self-sufficiency (India, Vietnam, Myanmar,
North Korea) have done very badly. And those that came late to the open trade
game but are now big players (Indonesia, China) seem to be on their way to a
chicken in every wok.

In the end such comparisons may be the only hard evidence that economists have.
But it has not stopped them from speculation about the inner workings of the
machinery translating trade into growth.

The puckish explanation, suggests Paul Krugman of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, is that the relationship is, in fact, specious, that cause has been
confused with effect.

Countries ready to grow may be more inclined to gravitate toward open trade.
More specifically, the cultural values that seem to underpin growth -- thrift,
rule of law, respect for property rights, fiscal discipline -- may also create
political systems that are better at defending the interests of efficient,
export-minded producers against those of groups demanding a free economic ride.

Certainly the view of the overwhelming majority of economists, though, is that
trade kindles growth. "Trade is a vehicle for technology transfer," Mr. Fischer
points out, flashing what many see as the free traders' trump card. The
successful Asian economies that protect local producers of consumer goods, he
notes, have been careful to permit easy access to modern foreign equipment and
materials.

What's more, openness to imports generally pays greater dividends than access to
faster computers and tougher plastics. It also offers the chance to "learn by
looking," suggests Mr. Edwards -- "to be exposed to foreign ideas on a massive
basis."

Trade is also a source of competition for would-be local monopolists, keeping
prices down and disciplining the locals to reduce waste. And it can have a
critical impact on competition out in less obvious ways. "Without the Japanese
to lead the way on quality control and fit and finish," argues Robert Crandall
of the Brookings Institution, it is hard to imagine Detroit would have pulled up
its socks.

The 'British Disease'

Mancur Olson, the director of the Center on Institutional Reform and the
Informal Sector at the University of Maryland, offers another connection between
trade and competition-spurred growth. In every economy special interests are
organizing to slow change, he suggests, creating sinecures for themselves and
generally preventing boat-rocking innovation. This, he believes, goes a long way
toward explaining the failure of many poor countries to grow and the tendency of
industrialized countries to catch what has come to be known as "the British
disease."

But economic systems can be made more resistant to the infection by increasing
the number of actors -- companies, unions, property owners -- who must be
organized and kept in line in order to stifle competition. "The smaller the
economy," Mr. Mancur reasons, "the greater the likelihood of successful
collusion."

Thus, he explains, expanding the economic borders of economies helps, as in the
case of the European Community or the North American Free Trade Agreement, "But
global free trade helps even more."

A news analysis article in Business Day yesterday about the agreement referred
incorrectly in some copies to the number of participating nations. There are
117, not 116.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 16, 1993, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A front-page chart yesterday about the highlights of the world trade agreement
referred incorrectly in some editions to the timetable for its approval by
Congress. The agreement requires the President's signature by April 15; he may
submit it to Congress at any time after signing it. The pact is scheduled to go
into effect July 1, 1995. If Congress has not approved it by then, the United
States will be vulnerable to trade sanctions.

A related front-page article yesterday about how free trade promotes growth
misstated the first name of an economist at the Institute for International
Economics in Washington. She is Kim Elliott, not Tim.

GRAPHIC: Chart: "Highlights"

The United States and 116 other nations agreed to substantially reduce tariffs
and rewrite the free trade rules that have governed most international commerce
for 45 years.

Changes: The United States and the European Community will cut their tariffs on
each other's good in half. Tariffs on good from the rest of the world will be
cut less. Agricultural tariffs will be reduced by 36 percent in industrial
nations and 24 percent in developing nations.

Effects: The agreement is expected to boost business and investment activity by
opening markets and encouraging countries to specialize in producing whatever
goods they can make most efficiently.

Unresolved Issues: Negotiators could not reach agreement on free trade involving
movies, television programs and music; civil aircraft; shipping and financial
services like banking and stock brokerage. Rather than jeopardize reaching an
agreement, the issues were put aside for the time being. They have the potential
to fuel future trade disagreements.

Approval: Under a Federal law, Congress must approve or disapprove the agreement
by an April 15 deadlin. The other countries have until mid-1995 to ratify it.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              235 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
The Unworthy

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 29; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 705 words


He wears camouflage clothes, the man who works the cars waiting to pass through
the Holland Tunnel, and a sign that says "Homeless Vet." Tucked beneath his arm,
or what's left of it since he lost the part below the elbow, is a military
helmet, inverted now, turned into a beggar's bowl. But he never asks for money,
and his black eyes bespeak not entreaty but anger.

The children clamor to put a bill in the helmet, and they speculate about the
lost arm, about whether it was a grenade or a bullet that did it. Never do they
wonder, as I do, whether the arm was lost in a car accident, whether the
camouflage clothes and helmet came from the army-navy store, whether the dollar
goes for drink and drugs, whether the homeless vet is nothing of the sort.

Mary Brosnahan, the executive director of the Coalition for the Homeless, has a
term for this phenomenon: "separating the worthy from the unworthy." More than a
decade after our fellow citizens began bedding down on the sidewalks, their
problems continue to seem so intractable that we have begun to do
psychologically what government has been incapable of doing programmatically. We
bring the numbers down -- not by solving the problem, but by deciding it's their
own damn fault.

The passive homeless are worthy, the aggressive unworthy. This is the opposite
of the ethos on the streets, where only the strong survive. The crazy homeless
should go to institutions. There is little thought given to the possibility that
having no place to go made them crazy in the first place. The unworthy homeless
urinate on the streets. What are their options?

Politicians, sensing the public mood, have become more punitive. During the
mayoral campaign Rudolph Giuliani made himself look both ridiculous and callous
by proposing a 90-day limit on shelter stays, this in New York, where the
average homeless family is in the system for more than twice that. Some cities
are now making panhandling an offense and aggressively enforcing loitering laws.

A woman loitered long on a bench across the street from the Department of
Housing and Urban Development in the nation's capital. She froze to death there,
and the HUD Secretary, Henry Cisneros, delivered her eulogy. But perhaps the
truest words spoken on her behalf were those of a HUD employee who looked out on
the ambulances and police cars and said, "It's just strange to see how many
resources a person gets after they die."

Some officials think the way to proceed is to demonize, prosecute, persecute. It
is an illusory remedy.  Others see the reality. Aides to Gov. Mario Cuomo are
considering the first increase in the shelter allowance for welfare families
since 1988. Mr. Cisneros has proposed a plan for the District of Columbia that
has as its centerpiece the creation of 1,000 new units of permanent housing.

The vacancy rate for public housing in New York City is close to zero.  The
vacancy rate for apartments with rents within the current welfare shelter
allowance is 1 percent.

There are many different kinds of people lumped under the rubric "homeless."
There are the women with children, no longer able to share apartments with
relatives. There are the Vietnam veterans who bed down at the shelter on Borden
Avenue in Queens and go out looking for day work each morning, the working
homeless most New Yorkers never know about.

There are panhandlers and sidewalk sleepers, crack addicts and violent criminals
and people who talk to the man in the moon. Some need hospitalization, some need
rehab and some will wind up back in jail.

But they all have one thing in common. After the rehab, and the hospitals, and
the shelters, they will all still need a place to live. The most successful
programs for the homeless over the last decade have certainly not been shelters,
or even treatment programs. They've been programs that develop affordable
housing.

People don't stop being homeless when they get clean and sober, or when they
take their medication.  They don't even stop being homeless when they find work.
And they certainly don't stop being homeless when the cops move them from place
to place or we decide they're bad people anyhow. They stop being homeless when
they find homes.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              236 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CHANGE AT THE PENTAGON;
Wounded in Policy Wars

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1158 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 15


Les Aspin had studied all his life for the job. But he failed to master some key
lessons, and instead of providing the capstone for his career, his service as
Secretary of Defense lasted only a year and ended in ambiguity, with a decidedly
equivocal record.

To move across the Potomac to the Pentagon, Mr. Aspin had to abandon a safe
Congressional seat and his post as chairman of the House Armed Services
Committee. He did not do so lightly, because he knew it would be difficult if
not impossible to restart an elective career in his late 50's. But after some
hesitation, he decided this would probably be his only chance at the secretary's
job, and he took it.

That is one of the main reasons that the national-security insiders in
Washington, who have known him well for decades, put little credence in his
explanation that he wanted a break from government service. One of them
commented tonight: "He thrived on this stuff; to tell the truth, he didn't have
much of a life outside his work, and he'll be lost without it."

'Time to Pass the Baton<HHE>

Asked whether he had been forced out, one of the Secretary's closest co-workers
answered: "You know how this town operates as well as I do. I can only say I
think my friend read the evidence and made the right decision. It's a relay
race, not a marathon, and he decided that one lap was enough: it was time to
pass the baton."

Mr. Aspin worked hard to develop new policies on difficult issues that grew out
of the end of the cold war, like the reduction in the size of American armed
forces, the intensified problem of proliferation of nuclear weapons and
heightened regional dangers. He also wrestled with tough questions that he told
friends he would not have chosen and that others might have shirked: homosexuals
in the armed forces, women in combat roles and the Tailhook convention, at which
naval aviators made sexual assaults on women.

But his policies and his actions cut across entrenched interests, and that hurt
him. So, several senior officials said, did his decision not to reinforce
American troops in Somalia, when officers on the scene had urged quick action.
When American Rangers were pinned down, suffering 18 deaths and 75 injuries, a
cry went up for his scalp.

"We have a dilemma, which Somalia exemplified," an ally of Mr. Aspin said. "We
haven't worked out when, where and how we are going to commit our forces in this
new age. Les hasn't worked it out, nobody's worked it out. He opposed the use of
force in Haiti and Bosnia and won, but he lost in Somalia -- and in that sense
he is a victim of our failure to make a national decision.

"Mr. and Mrs. Couch Potato want us to stop civil wars and save the hungry. They
see the military as the best way to do that, but when people get killed, they
won't stand for it. The President will have to resolve that issue."

Hailed at Beginning

It is President Clinton's responsibility, of course, to make the final decisions
on all the big issues. But Mr. Aspin got tangled in one controversy after
another, and he was an obvious target when leading Democrats began pressing for
change in the foreign policy team. A change was more urgent than it might
otherwise have been, many of them said, because of Mr. Clinton's own unusually
weak background in and feeling for foreign policy and military affairs.

Mr. Aspin has always been better at the substance of things than at the
political penumbra that surrounds them. At one point, he was briefly forced out
of his chairmanship because of his failure to perform even the most rudimentary
acts of constituency-building within the Democratic membership.

He promised to reform, but he was not very apt at covering his political flanks
at the Pentagon, either.

When the President announced that he had chosen Mr. Aspin, the Wisconsin
legislator was widely hailed in Washington as the most thoroughly qualified
nominee for the position since Harold Brown, who was Secretary under President
Jimmy Carter.

Both men could be described as military intellectuals, but Mr. Brown had an
important advantage. He had run things before taking charge at the Defense
Department. So had Dick Cheney, George Bush's Secretary, who had served as White
House chief of staff in the Ford Administration before entering Congress.

Mr. Aspin, on the other hand, was almost entirely a creature of the House of
Representatives. After studying at Yale, Oxford and the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, where he earned his Ph.D. in 1965, and after teaching economics
for a while, he had worked in the Pentagon and in Vietnam as one of Robert S.
McNamara's "Whiz Kids." But he was elected to Congress in 1970, when he was only
32, and had served there for 22 uninterrupted years.

"He was an idea man when he was up here, a guy who liked to sit around and talk
theory more than he liked to make decisions and issue orders," said Senator John
McCain, the Arizona Republican who flew Navy attack planes over Vietnam at the
same time as Mr. Aspin was analyzing the war in Saigon and Washington. "I admire
him tremendously, but it's very hard to make the transition from thinking and
talking to administering and commanding.

"Cheney did it, but his background was a lot more varied than Les's."

A burly and engaging man, Mr. Aspin was something of an absent-minded professor,
whose friends teased him when he would ask them to his house and forget to offer
them drinks because he was so deeply enmeshed in explaining the arcana of
defense policy. And he was never strong on organization.

Worked as 'Chairman'

Once he arrived at the Pentagon, his rumpled, discursive, informal style, which
almost everyone found charming outside the office, drew criticism from top
uniformed officers, from counterparts at the Central Intelligence Agency and,
ultimately, from his former colleagues on Capitol Hill. His testimony before
Congressional committees was attacked as woolly and nonresponsive.

In his defense, his friends said tonight that he had functioned as a "chairman
of the board," leaving management of the Pentagon to aides like John Deutch, an
undersecretary whom Mr. Aspin had known for many years. The system worked
efficiently, they said, but that was not the majority view.

Whatever the details of his thinking, which he has apparently disclosed to very
few people, Mr. Aspin is clearly worn out. His doctor gave him a clean bill of
health, but he looked wan and gray when he appeared in the Oval Office this
afternoon, and he seemed to have concluded that the White House viewed him as a
political liability.

"He didn't say so in so many words," one associate commented, "but he gave me
the strong impression that if the President had given him a resounding vote of
confidence, he would have found the energy to carry on. I talked with him every
day, more or less, and he didn't strike me as a man who was leaving of his own
volition."

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography; News Analysis

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              237 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CHANGE AT THE PENTAGON;
Inman, Ex-Admiral, Is Defense Nominee

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1452 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 16


Trying to strengthen his national security team and to blunt criticism of his
military policies, President Clinton announced today that he was replacing
Defense Secretary Les Aspin with Bobby Ray Inman, a retired four-star admiral
who has held top intelligence posts in Republican and Democratic Administrations
alike.

Mr. Clinton announced the selection of Mr. Inman less than 24 hours after the
Defense Secretary tendered his resignation. The White House presented Mr. Inman
as the answer to Mr. Aspin, a former member of Congress whose 11 months in
office ended amid widespread criticism of his ability to run the Pentagon and
manage its increasingly fractious services.

Reluctant Appointee

The swiftness of the announcement was an indication that the White House had
been planning the move for weeks, most likely before Mr. Aspin was even aware of
how far out of favor he had fallen. White House officials said Mr. Clinton and
his aides began meeting with Mr. Inman three weeks ago.

In an unusual display of independence and self-protective political instincts,
Mr. Inman, appearing at a Rose Garden news conference with Mr. Clinton and Mr.
Aspin, said he had voted for President Bush and initially did not want the
Pentagon job. But he finally accepted, he said, out of a devotion to "duty and
country."

"I had to reach a level of comfort that we could work together, that I would be
very comfortable in your role as Commander in Chief while I was Secretary of
Defense," Mr. Inman said to Mr. Clinton, whose relationship with the uniformed
military was strained even before he took office. "And I have found that level."


At Center of Events

By selecting Mr. Inman, Mr. Clinton sought to shore up his credentials with the
military, which began grumbling during the 1992 Presidential campaign when it
was disclosed that he had avoided the draft in the Vietnam War. The President
also sought to insulate his Administration from attacks by conservatives who
have criticized his handling of events in Somalia, Haiti, Bosnia and North
Korea.

Indeed, in his remarks today Mr. Clinton underscored how Mr. Inman had served on
an aircraft carrier, two cruisers and a destroyer before becoming the youngest
vice admiral in the peacetime history of the Navy. A longtime Naval intelligence
officer, Mr. Inman went on to head the National Security Agency under President
Jimmy Carter in the late 1970's. He then became Deputy Director of the Central
Intelligence Agency in 1981 and 1982 under President Ronald Reagan, placing him
at the center of major military and foreign policy debates.

Despite the White House's emphasis on Mr. Inman's service record, the
Secretary-designate has been as much a political figure as a military one. A
well-connected Washington insider with supporters from both parties in Congress,
Mr. Inman has served on Pentagon task forces and on corporate boards. He has
also ventured into business in the decade since he resigned from the C.I.A. He
left the post of Deputy Director after a series of disputes with his boss,
William J. Casey.

Tending His Alliances

Throughout his career, Mr. Inman has nurtured his ties to lawmakers and
cultivated the press. His friends include Secretary of State Warren Christopher,
who had his differences with Mr. Aspin.

If confirmed, Mr. Inman would be the first former military man to run the
Pentagon since George C. Marshall did in the Truman Administration. Under
Federal law, an officer must be retired for 10 years before he can serve as
Secretary of Defense, and Mr. Inman retired from active military duty at the
time he left the C.I.A., in 1982.

Although Mr. Clinton took pains to let Mr. Aspin leave with dignity, White House
officials made no secret of the fact that they were pinning much of the blame
for military policy troubles on him. Mr. Aspin, a former Democratic
Representative from Wisconsin, had been criticized since he took office 11
months ago as lacking in leadership and organizational skills.

But the appointment of Mr. Inman still left the Pentagon grappling with a
multitude of challenges, including a $50 billion gap between its strategy and
financing; a recalcitrant North Korea, which has refused to submit its nuclear
program to wide-ranging international inspections, and preparations for possible
peacekeeping duty in Bosnia.

Nor is it clear that Mr. Inman will turn out to be the manager the Pentagon has
been hungering for.

In his remarks today, Mr. Inman highlighted his business experience. "In these
last 10 years I've learned a lot about how business works," he said, "and I
would hope to spend a lot of my time on bringing best business practices to the
Department of Defense."

Mixed Record in Business

His record as a businessman is mixed. Shortly after leaving the Reagan
Administration, Mr. Inman founded the Microelectronics and Computer Technology
Corporation, a consortium of computer companies, to compete with Japan's
electronics giants. But he left three years later.

In 1987, Mr. Inman was made chairman and chief executive of Tracor Holdings, a
Texas military contractor, a post he held for two years.

But Mr. Inman was described by some current and former Pentagon officials as a
forceful executive who can hold resolutely to his position and who would not
hesitate to provide unpopular advice to the White House.

Early in the Reagan Administration, Mr. Inman initially resisted suggestions
from a senior White House aide that he leave his post as Director of the
National Security Agency and become the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
under Mr. Casey.

Mr. Inman insisted that he would take the post only if President Reagan
personally directed him to do so. Mr. Reagan did so, according to a confidant of
Mr. Inman, and he took the post and received his fourth star.

Given his independent streak, it is unclear to what extent Mr. Inman plans to
carry out the Pentagon agenda he has inherited from Mr. Aspin.

New Pentagon Structure

During his brief tour at the Pentagon, Mr. Aspin restructured the Defense
Department, creating new posts on "counter-proliferation," to fight the spread
of weapons of mass destruction, and "democracy and human rights," to deal with
peacekeeping issues and encourage the growth of democracy.

Mr. Aspin also brought in his version of the "best and the brightest," including
professors from the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.

Some Pentagon officials, like Deputy Defense Secretary William Perry and John M.
Deutch, a top official on the development and acquisition of new weapons, have
worked with Mr. Inman. Others, who hitched their fortunes to Mr. Aspin, are
likely to depart.

Mr. Clinton said that in choosing Mr. Inman the Administration intended to
"build on" Mr. Aspin's work on a military structure and strategy for the
post-cold-war world, leaving open the possibility for important changes.

In an interview today with ABC News, Mr. Inman said that NATO needed to reach
out to Eastern European nations and change if it wanted to remain viable. But he
stopped short of saying that Eastern European nations should be granted
membership in the alliance in the near future. The Clinton Administration's
position is that the issue of expanded NATO membership should be deferred.

Dutiful to the End

The intensity of the search for a replacement for Mr. Aspin caught many Pentagon
officials by surprise.  Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who is chairman
of the Armed Services Committee, told reporters today that he had been consulted
by the President on possible successors.

"I think it's a good selection," Senator Nunn said. "I think he is a real
professional, and I do not anticipate any difficulties in the confirmation."

Despite the civility of the past two days, the resignation of Mr. Aspin, which
is to take effect on Jan. 20, hasled to recriminations.

Some officials conceded that Mr. Aspin had not been an effective manager and was
slow to make decisions. But some aides to Mr. Aspin contended that Frank G.
Wisner, the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, presided over a poorly
organized policy apparatus fraught with turf battles.

Some current and former officials also said that the civilian leadership of the
Pentagon had become something of a scapegoat for the Clinton Administration's
setbacks on military policy.

"He was saddled with the gay issue that he did not invent," William G. Hyland,
the former deputy national security adviser in the Ford Administration, said of
Mr. Aspin. "I do not see why he should be taking much of the rap for Somalia. I
place the rap for Somalia on the State Department and the White House."


LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Bobby Ray Inman speaking in the Rose Garden after being named
Secretary of Defense. Listening were Les Aspin, the outgoing secretary, left;
Anthony Lake, national security adviser, and President Clinton. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg. A1); Senator Sam Nunn at a news conference
yesterday as he endorsed the selection of Bobby Ray Inman as Defense Secretary.
Mr. Inman was shown in an inset on the television behind Mr. Nunn. (Stephen
Crowley/The New York Times) (pg. B12)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              238 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

It's a Tough Time to Take The Helm at the Pentagon

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1040 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 17


When Bill Clinton was cheered by the hundreds of fatigue-clad soldiers at the
Camp Casey marine base in South Korea in the summer, he was so thrilled by the
warm reception that aides rushed home to the White House, enlarged the color
photographs of the President being embraced by the troops to poster size and
nailed them to the walls.

The pictures captured a rare moment of happy coexistence between the Commander
in Chief and his military. Mr. Clinton, who never served in uniform and
protested American involvement in Vietnam, has never been able to overcome the
awkwardness of his relationship with the troops.

Mr. Clinton's troubles with the military compel whoever serves as his Defense
Secretary to take on a role not demanded of those who served other Presidents in
the job. The newly nominated Pentagon chief, Bobby Ray Inman, is being asked to
step in as a powerful go-between to work with troops who continue to view their
leader with unease and who, unchecked, can easily undercut the President.

This altered power relationship evolved as Mr. Clinton was forced to deal with
one military drama after another and encountered the resistance and sometimes
hostility of the armed services over such decisions as whether to allow
homosexuals to serve openly, to send troops to Haiti or to make deeper cuts in
the Pentagon budget. Some officers mocked the President and others spoke out of
turn, offering opinions that ran counter to Administration policy.

Distrust Deepens

Each time a new pothole developed, Mr. Clinton had to prove himself all over
again, demonstrating his mettle as much to his soldiers as to his civilian
public. The mutual distrust deepened as Mr. Clinton embarked on a plan to scale
down American forces.

And even though Les Aspin resisted this plan as Defense Secretary, it turned out
that he could be of little help because he looked and behaved even less the part
of a military leader than did his boss.

The question now is whether Mr. Inman can play a role that few previous Pentagon
chiefs have had. He is assuming the task without the benefit of having had the
sort of combat command that bonded leaders like Gen. Colin L. Powell to the
troops. Dick Cheney, who was President George Bush's Defense Secretary, never
served in the military, but his President was a certified war hero.

Still, Administration aides were cheered by the prospect of the new nominee's
military credentials and said they hoped Mr. Inman's presence would solve the
problem for Mr. Clinton.

Unusual Remarks

They are so confident of his ability to be the President's military fixer that
some advisers agreed in advance to Mr. Inman's unusual Rose Garden acceptance
speech on Thursday, in which he called attention to the President's weakness as
a way of signaling further reassurance to the rattled troops.

"Mr. President, as you know, I had to reach a level of comfort that we could
work together, that I would be very comfortable in your role as the Commander in
Chief while I was Secretary of Defense," he said as he took a job he said he did
not particularly want. "And I have found that level of comfort."

To some Democrats, including several within the Administration, Mr. Inman's
remarks seemed arrogant. Yet, White House officials signed off on the remarks in
advance, and several said later that Mr. Inman's intent had been only to refer
to the relationship the two would try to establish.

But the statement served to make the President seem the beggar and Mr. Inman the
gracious donor of expertise and military cachet.

White House officials insist that Mr. Clinton's relationship with military
leaders is improving every day. They say, in particular, that a mutual trust has
sprung up quickly between Mr. Clinton and Gen. John M. Shalikashvili, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff he appointed in September.

"This is a steadily evolving relationship," one Presidential adviser said. "Over
time, you will see a steady strengthening of the ties. What the military people
like is consistency."

But for many in the military, Mr. Clinton's efforts to avoid serving in Vietnam
is considered his original sin, the stain that will not go away.

"Vietnam is still the lodestone," said Charles Moskos, a military sociologist at
Northwestern University. The President, he said, kicked away several
opportunities to confront the consequences of his actions then and remains
uncomfortable around ranking officers whose careers were rooted in the Southeast
Asian conflict. And Mr. Clinton's political advisers, he added, have not yet
grasped this fact.

"He's never going to be the military's favorite President," Mr. Moskos said of
Mr. Clinton. "But they are tone deaf about the military."

Mr. Inman's appointment may satisfy those who remain uneasy with Mr. Clinton's
grasp of military affairs, but it also troubles some of those who saw an
advantage to the President's post-cold-war approach to international conflict
and shrinking the military.

Representative Patricia Schroeder, a Colorado Democrat who serves on the House
Armed Services Committee, said that watching Mr. Inman's performance in the Rose
Garden "scared the bejesus out of me."

"I don't know who he is," she said. "He hasn't been around and in the milieu.
His whole life has been focused on, in and out of the military-industrial
complex during the cold war. Is this back to business as usual?"

Whatever the reason, Mr. Clinton is working hard to calm the roiled waters. At
the Pentagon today, White House officials joined Pentagon officials in trying to
defuse a dispute that had sprung up over the Pentagon budget, announcing happily
that they would be able to work out their differences over a shortfall that
would come to $31 billion over five years, not the $50 billion previously
estimated.

Representative Schroeder said she feared that Mr. Clinton's whole relationship
with the military had been so painful since he became President that he was
willing to trade new approaches for a bit of calm. Mr. Clinton, she said, may
have lost his stomach for telling the Pentagon no.

"The last Commander in Chief we had who really had a grip on this was
Eisenhower," she said. "That's pretty depressing, isn't it?"

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              239 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT NEW YORK;
An Anti-Fascist's Feet Still Follow His Mouth

BYLINE: By David Gonzalez

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 814 words


MOISHE BRIER wondered if his body could take him to where his mouth said he
should go, which at 82 years of age might be a reasonable concern.

But it was also a fitting question 56 years ago in Brownsville, where the
"progressive Communist and trade unionist" inveighed against the dangers of
creeping Fascism in Europe. So when the Spanish Republic faced the attacks of
Gen. Francisco Franco and his Nazi and Fascist supporters, Mr. Brier knew he
could talk or he could act.

He crossed the Atlantic and took up a machine gun against the Fascists in the
Spanish Civil War.

"It was necessary for Moishe Brier to go to Spain," he said of his decision to
join the American volunteer force that became known as the Abraham Lincoln
Brigade. "I used to speak on street corners all the time. But would my feet
follow my mouth? They did."

Yesterday, the feet that eventually were wounded in battle took him to Riverside
Memorial Chapel, where fellow fighters and friends paid a final tribute to Steve
Nelson, a Brigade veteran and leader. In a city where the word "fascist" was
reduced to just another handful of mud slung during the mayoral campaign, they
are part of a dwindling group of people who still remember when it was a
chilling call to arms that shaped their lives and ended those of their friends.
Of some 3,000 Americans who fought alongside Spaniards and volunteers from other
countries, half of them died.

Time slowly claims the survivors.

They went to Spain fueled by Communism, Socialism and perhaps the most fervent
-ism of all, idealism. They arrived with plenty of that, but precious little
else, thanks to the refusal of the United States and other Governments to sell
arms to the Spanish Loyalists.

Franco's forces had tanks, planes and bombs, and German and Italian troops, all
of which were deployed with deadly effectiveness. Yet the brigade entered the
fray, spurred on by men like Mr. Nelson, a ranking member of the Communist Party
at the time who soon became the brigade's political commissar, gaining a
reputation among his men as the kind of leader whose combination of charisma and
resolve eliminated the need to pull rank.

"He took care of the politics and guaranteed that anything we needed he tried to
get, which was impossible," Mr. Brier said. "There was one other thing he had:
when we would go out into combat, he was there with the men. He didn't stick
behind."

But several months after arriving in Spain, Mr. Nelson was wounded -- a bullet
tore through his cheek and groin while he was scanning a map, and he eventually
returned home. Others fought on for a little over a year, until the Government
they were defending sent them and the other foreign volunteers home in an
ill-fated bid to pacify the situation.

By the spring of 1939, Franco's forces, still fortified by the help of the
Germans and Italians, captured the country. For the Nazis and Fascists, the
Spanish Civil War was a prelude for the terror that would soon sweep Europe and
beyond.

So, too, was it a prelude for the lives of those who fought in the Abraham
Lincoln Brigade. Dubbed "premature anti-Fascists," they were looked upon with
suspicion when they volunteered for service in World War II.

Yet the principles they clung to in war were even more sorely tested in peace.

Mr. Nelson would be tried in Pennsylvania during the 1950's for advocating the
overthrow of the Government. The case went to the United States Supreme Court,
which ruled in his favor, striking down the sedition laws that states had used
to muzzle radicals and advocates.

"He never backed down an inch," Mr. Brier said. "I was proud of the guy."

In later years, Mr. Nelson's children noted how their father and other Brigade
veterans were active in the civil rights movement and protests against the
Vietnam War and United States intervention in Central America. And just as they
had sent ambulances to Spain during the civil war, they raised several hundred
thousand dollars to send ambulances to Nicaragua in the 1980's.

The veterans are now trying to raise $100,000 to obtain from the Russian
Government the archives of the other International Brigades that fought in
Spain. And even though Mr. Nelson's health was failing, he managed to raise
$12,000 in donations that he continued to forward up until the day he entered
the hospital.

"I am as proud of what the vets did in the half-century since Spain as of what
we did in Spain," said Abe Smorodin, who served as a messenger in the Brigade.
"There has been a continuity in our lives."

For Moishe Brier, the basic lesson is always fight back, lest someone else take
what's yours -- your job, your property, your rights or even your life. And
though they lost the war in Spain, he and his comrades were victorious in
avoiding a lifetime of what-ifs on the most personal front.

"What did we win?" he asked. "We won our selves."

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              240 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Cranky Spirit Of Archie Bunker Haunts This House

BYLINE: By SAM ROBERTS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 33; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1405 words


IN THE MYTHICAL WORLD OF LIFE after television, Archie Bunker, the
quintessential white Protestant bigot, might be peppering neighbors in some
Florida retirement community today with wistful memories of the good old days
and lamentations about a hometown gone to hell.

Imagine if he returned to Queens and discovered who was living in his old house.

If it wasn't jarring enough to him when the Jeffersons moved next door, Bunker
-- a particularly apt surname for a holdout in a changing neighborhood -- would
be greeted by something that would defy all his expectations: a black family in
which the blue-collar father engages in outbursts of Bunkeresque intensity,
often directed at his son -- who is no liberal Meathead but rather a deep-dyed
conservative. Meet Norman Lear's newest television family, the Cumberbatches,
due early next year in a midseason replacement show for CBS called "704 Hauser
Street."

Ernie (John Amos), a Vietnam veteran, is a unionized master mechanic at an auto
repair shop. Rose (Lynnie Godfrey), his churchgoing wife, is a caterer. Their
son Goodie (T. E. Russell), named for Thurgood Marshall, heads a group of Young
Republicans. Goodie's girlfriend, Cherlyn Markowitz (Maura Tierney) is white and
Jewish.

After television series that have distorted blacks into cartoon characters and
offered caricatures of New York City, is America ready for this socially
provocative comedy? Is Queens?

And are the Cumberbatches as true to life, demographically speaking, as the
Bunkers were when they arrived in the nation's living rooms in 1971?


"It's a thousand percent plausible," says Mr. Lear, the new show's executive
producer.

With about 2 million people, Queens is New York City's second most populous
borough, and is bigger by itself than any American city except Los Angeles,
Chicago and, of course, New York. It's touted by the Census Bureau as America's
most diverse county, with nearly equal proportions of non-Hispanic whites,
blacks, Hispanic people and others, including Asians. But seldom, in the
borough's 112 square miles, do they live together. An analysis of 1990 census
figures by Dr. Andrew Beveridge, a sociologist at Queens College of the City
University of New York, found that more than half the city's blacks live in
areas where they are 75 percent or more of the population.

By 1990, Queens had passed another statistical milestone: blacks and whites
there had about the same household income. Still, for blacks, in particular,
race was a greater gauge of segregation than class. For Queens to be fully
integrated, four out of five blacks with incomes above the poverty level would
have to move.

What was first broadcast as "All in the Family" and later evolved into the
hybrid, bar-based "Archie Bunker's Place" was originally to have been called
"Those Were the Days" -- suggesting, perhaps, as idealized a perspective on the
past as "704 Hauser Street," is on the present.

But the chief challenge in determining how much the Bunkers' neighborhood has
changed is figuring out just where they really lived. Queens has no Hauser
Street. Los Angeles does, near Mr. Lear's production studio, and that's how the
name originated. The exterior vista shown during the opening credits of "All in
the Family" and "704 Hauser Street" was no facade. It was taped on Cooper Avenue
in Glendale, Queens, in front of a gabled house owned then and now by Dorothy G.
Brandow, an 81-year-old widow who has lived there since 1924, when her parents
bought the house new.

No blacks live on the block, she said. "I think over on Woodhaven Boulevard
there are some," she added, referring to the thoroughfare a block away that
slices the borough.

In 1980, census takers found no blacks among the 3,000 or so New Yorkers in the
census tract that more or less comprises Glendale. In 1990, there were two. The
number of Hispanic people nearly tripled since 1980, to 171. And the number of
Asians living there rose sharply, too, to 67. None of the black or Hispanic
people were reported to be living below the poverty level; 15 of the Asians
were.

In any case, it seems Archie wasn't really


meant to live on Cooper Avenue. Mr. Lear, who only occasionally passes through
Queens on his way to or from the city's airports, wasn't much help in
identifying Archie's old neighborhood, but Sean Dwyer, director of development
at Mr. Lear's production company, Act III Communications, unequivocally ruled
out Glendale, Ridgewood, Woodside, Maspeth, Astoria and several other candidates
and pinpointed the likely locale as Corona. "I talked to a schoolteacher and one
of the writers, whose mother lives in Corona," Mr. Dwyer said. "It used to be
white middle class. Now it's racially mixed: white, Jewish, black, Indian,
Latinos. Number 704 Hauser Street is in Corona."

"Corona? Oh, sure," said City Councilman Walter L. McCaffrey, whose district
includes a shifting configuration of ethnic enclaves in eastern Queens.
"Woodside, Ridgewood, Glendale, probably not. In 1970, it was a white,
conservative bastion. Now it's a community that has everyone under the sun. And,
with the exception of southeast Queens, relatively few neighborhoods have gone
exclusively from white to black."

In 1990, about a third of the people in Corona identified themselves as black --
about double the percentage who did so in 1970.

Corona may lack some of the local landmarks that punctuated the script of "All
in the Family." But the demographics fit. The Jeffersons really could have been
neighbors of the Bunkers, at least until blacks became a majority on the block
and more whites fled. And, after several families succeeded the Bunkers, the
Cumberbatches might be the logical new owners.

Mr. Lear said that about a year ago he was reading Shelby Steele, the black
professor whose book, "The Content of Our Character," is an iconoclastic look at
racial issues in America, casting doubt on the value of affirmative-action
programs, for example. Meanwhile, Mr. Lear's accountant was questioning why rent
was still being paid to store the original "All in the Family" set in a Los
Angeles warehouse.

"I woke up the next morning and said, 'I wonder who's living there now?' " Mr.
Lear recalled. "I figured the father would be the product of the civil rights of
the 60's and the son is growing up to be Shelby Steele or Clarence Thomas.

"We took the set out and set it up, but it Continued on Page 40



couldn't stand the wear and tear. So we put it back in storage and built a new
one to the old specifications, but had it modified as if two families had lived
in the house since. It's the same front door, with a decal of an American flag
on it."

Behind that door, Mr. Lear and his writers are again challenging societal taboos
as they did from the first episode of "All in the Family."

Archie: "If your spics and your spades want their rightful share of the American
dream, let them get out there and hustle for it like I done. I didn't have no
people marchin' and protestin' to get me my job."

Edith: "No, his uncle got it for him."

What would Archie say about a black family living in his modestly renovated
home? "I have no guess," Mr. Lear said. "I don't think a lot about Archie."

Demographic changes, in part, have given a new dimension to the ideological
debates that rage inside 704 Hauser. "Twenty years ago, I don't ever remember a
black conservative-vs.-liberal argument," Mr. Lear said. "When you mix the
conservative viewpoint and race, it is not Republican vs. Democrat and it is far
more than ultra-conservative versus radical liberal."

Just how far the argument has come since Archie bellowed his brand of bigotry is
evident in the first episode of "704 Hauser Street." While Ernie and his son
Goodie are arguing in the familiar living room, who should show up to see the
home in which his mother grew up but Joey Stivic, Gloria and Mike's son.

Joey: "Hi. The outside looks so much different, I wasn't sure if this was the
house."

Ernie (ignoring Joey and continuing to berate his son): "Look at him. Cool as
rain. Drives his daddy up the wall and the Oreo don't even break a sweat."

Goodie: "I am not an Oreo! And you are a bigot!"

Ernie: "Black man can't be a bigot, son. Ha!"

Goodie: "Tell that to a Korean, Dad. Ha, ha!"

Joey: "This is the place, all right."

Somewhere in Queens, and across America, a new generation of argument has begun.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The house so familiar from "All in the Family," top, will soon
have a new family in it: from left, John Amos, Lynnie Godfrey, T. E. Russell and
Maura Tierney--But where exactly is 704 Hauser Street, which gives the show its
name? (Rory Flynn/CBS; Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              241 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY;
Steady Price Rises For Trips to China

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3; Column 3; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 404 words


China may still officially be a Communist country, but the law of supply and
demand is being felt in its travel industry. With the number of visitors
steadily rising in the last few years, the cost of visiting China has increased,
in some cases by as much as 20 percent.

This year a two-week tour offered by Chinasmith, a New York-based tour operator,
cost about $3,840 a person, double occupancy.

The price included air fare from the East Coast and hotel stays in Beijing,
Xian, Shanghai, Guangzhou, Guilin and Hong Kong. Howard Smith, a partner in the
company, said the price would go up next year but he could not be sure how much.

He said he hoped to keep the average increase to 10 percent, but will have to
take a cut in profits to do so.

"We have already been advised by tourist officials in China that internal air
fares are expected to go up by 10 to 20 percent and that hotel rates will
increase between 15 and 20 percent," he said.

Hotel increases will be higher in the larger cities, he said, noting that some
Beijing establishments with which his company has contracts have raised their
low season rates by as much as 50 percent.

Clarence Lu, president of Journey to the East in Flushing, Queens, also said he
expected a 15 to 20 percent increase in hotel rates. A two-week bike tour in
rural northern China this year cost about $3,400, including air fare from the
East Coast; A similar tour next year will be at least $3,845 a person in double
occupancy, Mr. Lu said. He said he was trying to keep the cost down by offering
itineraries that included smaller, less expensive cities.

Prices of some tours that were increased this year will be even higher next
year. For example, a 15-day tour to southern China and Vietnam, offered by
Discovery Tours of the American Museum of Natural History, will, in 1994, cost
$6,980 a person in double occupancy, excluding international air fare.

While that is only a $100 increase over this year's $6,890 tour, a similar trip
in 1992 cost $5,990, also excluding air fare, said Susan Givens, director of the
museum's tour division.

American visitors to China numbered 300,862 in 1988, then fell to 214,956 after
the Tiananmen Square massacre. In 1992 the number of American visitors was
346,300. In general, tourism is increasing at about 10 percent a year, but only
a 5 percent yearly increase in hotel capacity is planned in the next five years.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              242 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Pol Pot & Co.: The Thai Connection - A Special Report;
In Big Threat to Cambodia, Thais Still Aid Khmer Rouge

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2770 words

DATELINE: TA PHRAYA, Thailand, Dec. 16


Not far from here, less than a mile east across the border into Cambodia along a
well-maintained dirt road, is a compound of spacious wooden homes and
storehouses built by Thai contractors for a demanding client.

Foreign diplomats and United Nations peacekeepers say the client was Pol Pot,
the leader of the Khmer Rouge, the Maoist-inspired guerrillas responsible for
the deaths of more than one million Cambodians in the 1970's.

Khmer Rouge defectors say that one of the largest houses -- one set on a
scrub-covered hillside, with a small garden and a panoramic view back across the
border into Thailand -- served as Pol Pot's own home during visits to the
compound earlier this year. His wife and 5-year-old daughter were reported to be
occasional guests.

Nearby is another large, airy wooden house. The defectors say that house served
as the offices of several members of the Royal Thai Army's Task Force 838, a
squadron that worked secretly among the Khmer Rouge and served as the rebels'
liaison to the Thai military.

Evidence of Ties

The discovery of the Thai-built rebel compound in the village of Phnom Prak,
which was still under construction when it was overrun by the Cambodian Army
late this summer, is only part of the evidence of continued close ties between
Thailand -- through elements of its military, its police and its business
community -- and the guerrillas of the Khmer Rouge.

The relationship between the Thais and the Khmer Rouge dates from Vietnam's
invasion of Cambodia in 1978 and is built upon a mutually lucrative cross-border
trade in lumber and gems and a mutual fear of neighboring Vietnam. It is of
grave concern to diplomats in Cambodia and to Cambodia's new Government.

Interviews with dozens of diplomats, United Nations peacekeepers and Cambodian
and Thai officials, as well as a review of classified reports from the United
Nations and foreign embassies, show that the relationship can now be documented
to a degree not possible before and that it continues to threaten Cambodia's
future.

The fears about the extent of the relationship grew this month with the
discovery of a huge cache of Chinese-made weapons stored in Thai Army warehouses
near the Cambodian border close to a Khmer Rouge stronghold. The discovery has
revived suspicions that the Thai military may still be supplying arms to the
rebels.

"We're very worried about the Thais," said Prince Norodom Sirivudh, Cambodia's
new Foreign Minister, who in recent weeks has accused Thailand of "scandalous"
behavior.

War Continues

Despite a $2 billion United Nations peacekeeping operation that resulted last
May in the most free and fair elections ever held in Cambodia, the civil war in
that shattered nation is still not over. The threat from the Khmer Rouge has not
disappeared.

And diplomats and United Nations peacekeepers warn that Thailand could again
serve as a staging area and weapons supply route for the Khmer Rouge if the
rebels decide to step up the war. Sporadic fighting has been reported in the
last week.

"The Thais would have you believe that their relationship with the D.K. is over,
but obviously it's not," said a Western diplomat stationed in Cambodia, using
the initials for Democratic Kampuchea, the formal name of the Khmer Rouge. "The
Thais remain the lifeline for the Khmer Rouge. And the victims are the Cambodian
people. Unless the Thais shut them off, the Khmer Rouge could be around
forever."

The History
For the Thais, A Handy Buffer

Diplomats and United Nations officials credit the year-old Government of Prime
Minister Chuan Leekpai of Thailand and his army commander, Gen. Wimol
Wongwanich, with an effort at least to distance Thailand from the Khmer Rouge.

"The Prime Minister states clearly what the policy is -- no interference in the
internal affairs of Cambodia -- and he expects the military and other Government
agencies to carry out that order," said Aphisit Vejjajiva, the Thai Government
spokesman. General Wimol said flatly this month: "We do not support the Khmer
Rouge. It is not the policy of the Government and the army."

But Thailand's armed forces, which have a long history of independence from
civilian control, are factionalized, and a number of Thai military and police
commanders along the border are known to ignore orders from Bangkok when they
see the chance to cash in on a cross-border trade worth tens of millions of
dollars a year.

For years, the relationship between the Thais and the guerrillas along the
border was the stuff of rumor and sometimes wild speculation. Many people
suspected what was going on, but few had the evidence to prove it, since border
areas were routinely closed to foreigners by the Thai armed forces.

But that changed in 1991 when a United Nations peacekeeping force arrived in
Cambodia and sent soldiers and civilian workers to the border.

Reports from the Border

They gathered what they say are the first reliable reports of what had been
suspected for so long -- of Thai soldiers providing transportation, medical care
and other support for the rebels, sometimes during battle; of Thai loggers and
gem merchants at work in Khmer Rouge-held territory in multimillion-dollar
business ventures in violation of international sanctions against the
guerrillas.

The Thais maintained their contacts with the Khmer Rouge even as the rebels'
principal patron, China, was cutting them off in support of the United Nations
peacekeeping process. The United Nations frequently praised China for its
cooperation in isolating the guerrillas.

Although the Khmer Rouge have been weakened by recent defections, the rebels
continue to control nearly one-fifth of the Cambodian countryside, a vast stock
of weapons and an army of an estimated 8,000 to 10,000 troops.

In Asian financial circles, it is widely reported that the Khmer Rouge have
deposited millions of dollars in Thai banks -- more than enough, it is thought,
for the rebels to continue the fight indefinitely.

Few Believe Promises

While the Khmer Rouge have suggested that they are willing to hand over their
weapons and territory in exchange for a place in Cambodia's new Government, few
diplomats believe that they would live up to such an agreement. Prince Norodom
Ranariddh, Cambodia's First Prime Minister, scheduled, and then canceled, peace
talks with the rebels this month.

"You may see peace talks and some sort of temporary cease-fire, but it won't
last," a senior United Nations official said. "The guessing is that the Khmer
Rouge want to hold on to most of their weapons and territory and wait out the
new Government, hoping that it will collapse from corruption or squabbling."

The involvement of the Khmer Rouge in mass killings in the 1970's, when they
massacred intellectuals, Buddhist monks and anyone else who dared question the
authority of Pol Pot's black-uniformed henchmen, has always been a secondary
concern to Thai military leaders. The rebels were instead seen by the Thais as a
useful buffer between their nation and Vietnam, Thailand's traditional
adversary.

Thai military commanders say their close, indeed friendly, ties to the Khmer
Rouge had at least the tacit approval of the United States and other outside
nations that sought the ouster of the Cambodian Government installed by Vietnam.


Military Supplies

In the 1980's, the United States used the Thai Army to funnel military
assistance to two non-Communist rebel groups that were allied with the Khmer
Rouge. Washington also helped support more than 350,000 Cambodian refugees, some
of them Khmer Rouge soldiers and their families, who crowded into Thai refugee
camps.

"You encouraged us to establish these close contacts with the rebels, and we
cannot end these relationships just overnight," a senior Thai official said. "We
need time."

The civil war came to an end, if only on paper, in the 1991 peace treaty,
brokered by the United Nations, that was signed by the Khmer Rouge, the other
rebel factions, and the Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government. The United
Nations sent a 22,000-member peacekeeping force, the largest in its history.

The peacekeeping operation is now shutting down, having succeeded in its most
important goal, the elections last May. The voting produced a coalition
Government made up of all of the factions except the Khmer Rouge, which
boycotted the election after dropping out of the peace process.

Only about 500 United Nations peacekeepers now remain in Cambodia, and the
departure of the last members of the peacekeeping force means that almost no one
is left to monitor what goes on along the border.

The Recent Past
Solid Evidence Of Thai Support

Spokesmen for the Royal Thai Army readily acknowledge that they remain in
contact with the Khmer Rouge -- a prudent move, they say, given the territory
that the rebels control close to Thailand.

But the Thais insist that the assistance that they provide to the Khmer Rouge
today is strictly humanitarian, no different from the help they provided to all
of the other Cambodian factions during the United Nations peacekeeping
operation.

"There is no use for the Royal Thai Army to have a special relationship with the
Khmer Rouge, because this is not only against the direction from our political
masters, not only against the will of the Thai people, but also against the will
of the international community," said Gen. Tawal Sawaengphan, Deputy Chief of
Staff of the Thai Army. "We would like to see peace taking place in Cambodia."

"There are incidents, there are situations, that may create some kind of
misleading conclusions or confusion that tend to point at the Royal Thai Army as
supporting the Khmer Rouge," he said in an interview in the army's headquarters
in Bangkok. "But actually we are not doing that."

Reports from Witnesses

Diplomats and United Nations officials are not so sure. They say they have
highly reliable reports from witnesses along the Thai-Cambodian border that the
Thai military arranged for army trucks to transport Khmer Rouge soldiers, some
of them armed, along the border during fighting in late August. The Thai
military has denied the accusations.

Diplomats in Bangkok and Phnom Penh say there is also solid evidence to show
that Thai troops provided support, including food, medical supplies and fuel, to
Khmer Rouge soldiers last June after the guerrillas captured a historic
12th-century temple close to the border in the Cambodian province of Preah
Vihear. (The Thai military has denied that it offered military support to the
rebels at the temple.)

In the best-documented and most telling example of cooperation between the Thais
and the Khmer Rouge, the United Nations charged that Thai soldiers simply looked
on as 21 peacekeepers were held hostage by a Khmer Rouge squadron last August on
Thai soil near the Cambodian border.

Photographs taken by an Australian soldier who was among the captured
peacekeepers show the Thai and Khmer Rouge commanders standing on Thai territory
just beyond a Thai border checkpoint -- the writing on the wooden checkpoint is
in Thai -- and chatting amiably.

A Thai Presence

The peacekeepers were freed after the Thai commander played host at a banquet
for his Khmer Rouge counterparts. Khmer Rouge soldiers who were wounded during
the struggle with the United Nations peacekeepers were taken to a Thai hospital
by a Thai ambulance.

"It was clear that the Thais and the Khmer Rouge were simply the best of
friends," a senior United Nations official said. "We were shocked by how cordial
the relationship is."

The Thai Foreign Ministry said in a statement at the time that the United
Nations had misrepresented the episode at the checkpoint and that the attack on
the peacekeepers and their capture took place just inside Cambodia -- not in
Thailand. "This is not the first time that such irresponsible press statements
have been issued" by the United Nations, the Foreign Ministry said.

In its public statements, Cambodia's new Government has become remarkably blunt
in attacking Thailand's dealings with the Khmer Rouge.

Prince Sirivudh, the new Foreign Minister, said in an interview this fall:
"Thailand continues to support the Khmer Rouge. The Thais have not changed their
attitudes at all. Thailand's activities are not just an insult to Cambodia, they
are a scandal."

The Problem Remains

Asked more recently whether moves by the Thai Government to distance itself from
the Khmer Rouge had ended his fears, Prince Sirivudh replied, "Some of the words
are better, but the Thais must fix this problem."

Cambodia's military leaders have made more detailed allegations against the
Thais, charging that the Thai Army supplied the Khmer Rouge with tanks and heavy
artillery for battles in October near the town of Anlong Veng, a Khmer Rouge
stronghold in northern Cambodia.

While Western diplomats doubt the allegations involving Anlong Veng, many were
astounded by the discovery this month of the vast arms cache in 12 warehouses
along the Thai-Cambodian border. The arsenal, uncovered in a raid by the Thai
national police, included several large artillery pieces, dozens of antitank
rockets and millions of rounds of ammunition. The Thai police estimated the
cache at 1,500 tons.

After the raid, police commanders initially suggested that the stockpile
belonged to the Khmer Rouge, But Thai military commanders, who are often at odds
with their police counterparts, later announced that the army owned the
warehouses. The military's statement raised as many questions as it answered
since the warehouses were being guarded by several Cambodians.

The Present
Complex Ties Are Hard to Cut

Even after they try to sabotage the United Nations peacekeeping efforts, the
leaders of the Khmer Rouge continue to be treated as dignitaries by the Thais.

The rebels' titular leader and public spokesman, Khieu Samphan, travels freely
across the border from Cambodia, usually with Thai military escorts, and
frequently makes use of the international airport in Bangkok, the Thai capital.

Although Pol Pot is now reported by intelligence officials to divide his time
among camps in western Cambodia, the 65-year-old rebel leader is believed to
enjoy an open invitation to visit Thailand, where he lived for several years
after he fled from the invading Vietnamese Army in 1979.

The Thais provided him with a compound, known by the Khmer Rouge as Camp 87,
near the eastern Thai border town of Trat.

United Nations peacekeepers and diplomats say that the Khmer Rouge and the Thais
have built up such a close and mutually beneficial relationship over the years
-- the Khmer Rouge gets logistical support from Thailand, and the Thais get
lumber, gems and money from the Khmer Rouge -- that it may be impossible to
sever the ties completely.

Sold Lumber and Gems

Money appears to be no problem for the Khmer Rouge. Diplomats stationed in
Bangkok and Phnom Penh say it is widely believed that Thai banks hold tens of
millions of dollars for the Khmer Rouge, most of it obtained from selling
concessions to Thai lumber barons and gem traders, and that Thai bankers act as
a go-between for the rebels' accounts in Switzerland and the Caribbean.

A classified 1992 report prepared by Thai intelligence estimated that the Khmer
Rouge could earn more than $1 billion from concessions already granted to Thai
logging companies.

With the United Nations peacekeeping operation all but over, traders along the
border say that Thai businessmen are moving quickly to resume the enormous
cross-border trade in gems and lumber from areas under the control of the Khmer
Rouge.

Some Thai military commanders have earned fortunes by demanding kickbacks --
known along the border as "taxes" -- on shipments of lumber and gems. Traders
along the border say that as recently as last year, loggers had to pay officers
of Task Force 838, the unit that served as a liaison with the Khmer Rouge and
other rebel groups, $1.50 for every cubic meter of timber brought across the
border from guerrilla-held areas of Cambodia.

Rapacious logging by Thai companies has turned once lush stretches of western
Cambodia into a "moonscape," said a United Nations official who has seen recent
aerial surveillance pictures of the Khmer Rouge territory.

A United Nations report last May said the Thai military maintained a "Mafia-like
control" on the border and suggested that some Thai soldiers and border-control
officers were involved in the smuggling of cars stolen in Thailand. The border
has been a gold mine for them," the report said.


LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Fears about the extent of the relationship between the Khmer
Rouge and the Thai military were revived by the discovery this month of a cache
of arms. The Chinese-made weapons were found in Thai Army warehouses near the
Cambodian border, close to a Khmer Rouge stronghold. (Thai Roth) (pg. 16)

Map of Cambodia shows the location of Phnom Prak. (pg. 1)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              243 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: December 19, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1458 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   7   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 2      2  71   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 3      3  10   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                and a poem.

 4      4  17   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 5     14   2   THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of
                Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.

 6          1   THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A
                collection of stories about American men and the strains of
                contemporary life.

 7      6  12   LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues
                the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour."

 8      9  40   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 9      8  36   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 10     5   3   THE TRUCE AT BAKURA, by Kathy Tyers. (Spectra/ Bantam, $21.95.)
                The "Star Wars" Rebel Alliance responds to a call for help from
                a threatened outpost.

 11     7   6   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery
                writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined
                to kill him and take his place.

 12    10   9   A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A
                young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in
                Victorian England's high society.

 13    13   8   DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) An
                architect-engineer gets caught between the warring factions of
                a clan that owns an English racecourse.

 14    11  15   THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                Concluding the "Griffin & Sabine" trilogy, about an artist and
                his secret admirer.

 15    12   4   THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Talese/ Doubleday,
                $23.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly
                reappears in their lives.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   5   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More
                comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 2      2   9   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 3      3  15   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 4      4  17   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 5      6  11   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 6      7   3   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                100, reflect on their lives.

 7      5  32   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 8      9   2   LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The
                country singer's memoirs, with an account of her relations with
                daughters Wynonna and Ashley.

 9      8  11   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN . . . OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by
                Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Thoughts on 43 years of
                marriage.

 10    13   3   THE BEST CAT EVER, by Cleveland Amory. (Little, Brown, $19.95.)
                A third volume about the trials and tribulations of the feline
                Polar Bear and his owner.

 11    11   9   STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski.
                (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played
                Capt. James Tiberius Kirk.

 12    12  71   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 13         1   I TOOK A LICKIN' AND KEPT ON TICKIN', by Lewis Grizzard.
                (Villard, $19.) The humorist describes his near-death
                experience following heart surgery.

 14*   10   6   THE DOWNING STREET YEARS, by Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins,
                $30.) The former British Prime Minister recalls her 11 1/2
                years in power.

 15    14  11   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2   5   AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with
                Bud Shrake. (Simon & Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes
                from the golf instructor.

 2      1  21   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 3      3  31   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.

 4      4  10   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 4, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.  And Bear In Mind (Editors'
choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE COMPLETE LYRICS OF IRA
GERSHWIN, edited by Robert Kimball. (Knopf, $45.) More than 700 lyrics
displaying the fresh and inventive rhymes, supple phrasing, intelligence and wit
that made Gershwin a lyricist nobody can read for one minute without humming.
THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER, edited by Mark Tucker. (Oxford University, $30.) A
fascinating anthology of 70 years' worth of writing about (and occasionally by)
Ellington, who clearly inspired powerful emotions in even the most sober minds.
EXIT INTO HISTORY: A Journey Through the New Eastern Europe, by Eva Hoffman.
(Viking, $23.) Seeking out the ordinary, a Polish-born writer with a touch of
American objectivity makes a tour of Mitteleuropa, returning with subtle
insights about a world in transition. GARBAGE, by A. R. Ammons. (Norton,
$17.95.) A long poem of rueful grandeur and splendid oddity in which what's left
over is transmuted; winner of this year's National Book Award.  HENRY JAMES:
COLLECTED TRAVEL WRITINGS, edited by Richard Howard. (Library of America, 2
vols., $35 each.) Close to 1,700 pages, in the (as it were) aggregate, densely
but never coarsely packed with the observations abroad (for abroad he usually
was) of one upon whom nothing (as his own aspiration, immodest but justified by
the sequel, had put it) was lost.  A HISTORY OF WARFARE, by John Keegan. (Knopf,
$27.50.) Mr. Keegan, the most readable and original of military historians,
argues that war is an omnipresent cultural ritual of mankind, from which the
ruthless modern notion of disciplined total war was an aberration.  JOHN JAMES
AUDUBON: The Watercolors for "The Birds of America," edited by Annette Blaugrund
and Theodore E. Stebbins Jr. (New-York Historical Society/Villard, $75.) The
originals for the great engravings, handsomely reproduced, illuminated by
helpful essays.  RETURN TO PARADISE, by Breyten Breytenbach. (Harcourt Brace,
$22.95.) A bleak, beautiful, subjective collage of reminiscences, political
rants and prose poems about this Afrikaner poet's troubled sojourns in South
Africa.  SIT! The Dog Portraits of Thierry Poncelet, with text by Bruce McCall.
(Workman, $19.95.) Seventy "aristochiens," 19th-century portraits, each
overpainted with a suitable dog's head, accompanied by thumbnail biographies.
THAT'S THE WAY I SEE IT, by David Hockney. Edited by Nikos Stangos. (Chronicle
Books, $35.) The second volume of the artist's recollections is a long, perky
monologue -- autobiography alternating with ruminations on vision and the
reproduction of images.  W. E. B. DU BOIS: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919, by
David Levering Lewis. (John Macrae/Holt, $35.) The first half of the epical life
(it lasted till 1963) of the man who by World War I had become the most
outspoken, eloquent and influential black American.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              244 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Return of Colonel North

BYLINE: By Ronald H. Spector;   Ronald H. Spector, a professor of history and
international affairs at George Washington University, is the author of "After
Tet: The Bloodiest Year in Vietnam." He served with the Marines in Vietnam.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 790 words



ONE MORE MISSION
Oliver North Returns to Vietnam.
By Oliver L. North and David Roth.
Illustrated. 280 pp. New York:
Zondervan Publishing House/
HarperCollins Publishers. $22.

PART war memoir and part travelogue, "One More Mission" is an account of Oliver
L. North's experiences in Vietnam in 1968 and 1969 and his return visit in early
1993 to film a documentary on behalf of International Aid, a Christian
humanitarian relief organization run mainly by Vietnam War veterans. Those who
watched the Congressional testimony of then Colonel North during the Iran-contra
affair of the 1980's, or who have followed his career since, will not be
surprised to learn that his views of the Vietnam War differ from those of, say,
Noam Chomsky, Jane Fonda or Oliver Stone. Indeed, Mr. North's description of his
experience as a platoon leader with the Third Battalion, Third Marine Regiment
might be taken as the flip side of Oliver Stone's movie "Platoon." Mr. North's
platoon has some tough fights, but there are no foul-ups, no incompetent
officers or N.C.O.'s, no deaths due to accidents or friendly fire, no pointless
operations, no racial problems, no civilian deaths, no fraggings, no drug
problems. The South Vietnamese play no role in this war story, except to be
"abandoned" by the United States in the end.

We are told repeatedly in the first 100 pages that "someone, though we had no
idea who, had decided we were not going to go for a victory in The War" and that
the United States armed forces fought the war "with one hand tied behind their
backs." (It would be interesting to know whether any of the North Vietnamese
Army veterans with whom Mr. North met in his recent visit complained that they
had to fight the war with one hand tied behind their backs because the Americans
had B-52's and they did not, the Americans had armored fighting vehicles and
they did not, the Americans had modern medical equipment, radar, helicopters and
electronic sensors and they did not.)

Yet for all that, Mr. North's book is largely free of rancor and name-calling,
and it takes a moderate and sensible view toward present-day relations between
the United States and Vietnam. Mr. North, who is running for the Republican
nomination for United States Senator in Virginia, and his co-writer, David Roth,
the author of a biography of Colin Powell, call for expanded involvement by
veterans in nongovernmental humanitarian assistance programs in Vietnam as the
best way to heal some of the remaining psychic wounds and honor the memory of
lost friends and comrades. They are sympathetic to the people involved in the
movement to determine the fates of those missing in action, but point out that
many questions may never be satisfactorily resolved, that there are still 78,794
M.I.A.'s remaining from World War II, and that the Vietnamese themselves still
have some 300,000 M.I.A.'s.

The first part of "One More Mission," Mr. North's account of his tour of duty in
Vietnam, is clear, frank, concise, sometimes exciting, occasionally moving. Yet
it is in no way comparable to the already existing shelf of distinguished
firsthand accounts by Philip Caputo, Lewis Puller, Michael Herr and Tim O'Brien
-- admittedly tough acts to follow. Indeed, the most interesting portion of Mr.
North's reminiscences deals not with his Vietnam experiences but with the impact
of the war on his Annapolis classmates in the late 1960's: "By 1968, large
boards trimmed in black had been erected just inside the entrance to Bancroft
Hall. . . . Posted on these boards were rows of postcard-sized photos of
graduates who had gone to The War and died in combat. . . . To a man, my
classmates were red-blooded American patriots, but the sobering realities of
Vietnam displayed on those boards in Bancroft Hall affected the decisions many
of them would make." Not a few "decided at the last minute to opt for the Navy's
Supply Corps."

The second half of "One More Mission," the account of Mr. North's return to
Vietnam, often resembles an extended television commercial for a charitable
organization, with Mr. North in the role of the celebrity who acts as tour guide
and explains the good work being done. There are few of the arresting
conversations and encounters that give other "return" books -- like those of
William Broyles and Morley Safer -- their special interest. That is too bad,
since there is evidence that Mr. North and his companions had such encounters.
We are told, for example, that they "recorded two very frank and revealing
interviews with former South Vietnamese military veterans who had survived the
re-education camps," but we learn nothing more about those men. Well, watch for
the documentary; perhaps we'll see them there.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Oliver L. North arriving in Hanoi earlier this year. (FROM "ONE
MORE MISSION")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              245 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Prime Minister Orders Drive on Corruption

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 120 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Dec. 19


Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet has ordered a nationwide campaign to curb corruption
and smuggling within the Communist Party, state offices and local governments in
efforts to regain the public's confidence.

Mr. Kiet announced the campaign in an address to the National Assembly on
Saturday, calling for cuts in Government spending on celebrations, meetings and
receptions and for a crackdown on corrupt officials.

Interior Minister Bui Thien Ngo reported to the Assembly this month on increases
in trading in illicit goods, especially weapons, explosives, opium and
foreign-made cigarettes. Mr. Ngo reported that more than 900 cases of corruption
were uncovered nationwide this year, involving $28.5 million.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              246 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Hunt for Indochina Missing Halts

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 428 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Dec. 19


The first coordinated American-Vietnamese-Laotian search for Americans missing
in action ended Sunday with mixed results.

Searchers discovered new remains and helicopter wreckage but they were able to
complete only about two-thirds of their cases because of three tropical storms
that battered central Vietnam. The search began Dec. 3.

The 44 Americans working in Laos and Vietnam headed to Bangkok for a brief
stopover before moving on to their home base in Honolulu. They are members of
the Joint Task Force Full Accounting based at Camp H. M. Smith in Hawaii.

Remains Are Found

The Americans excavated a site in Xepon District of Savannakhet Province in Laos
and uncovered human remains and wreckage of an Air Force search-and-rescue
helicopter that was shot down with five men aboard in 1970.

On the Vietnam side of the border, a witness led the investigators to what he
said was the burial site of an American in the A Shau Valley, a major North
Vietnamese base west of Da Nang during the war. An excavation team dug up the
remains and Lt. Col. David L. Fredrikson, a United States Army spokesman,
confirmed that they are believed to be of an American.

Colonel Fredrikson said helicopter flights were curtailed by the weather and the
American teams were able to check out only roughly 40 of the 56 cases they had
set out to investigate.

He said more coordinated three-country operations would be carried out in the
future along the Vietnam-Laos border to finish the cases that the American teams
did not get to and to look into scores of others. He gave no timetable.

Hundreds of American airmen were downed in the region in the 1960's and 1970's
during operations along the Ho Chi Minh Trail aimed at stopping North Vietnamese
trucks and troops moving southward into South Vietnam.

The United States lists a total of 2,239 Americans as still unaccounted for in
Southeast Asia, including 1,648 in Vietnam, 505 in Laos, 78 in Cambodia and 8 in
China.

American officials have said it is unlikely that there will ever be a full
accounting, citing the amount of time that has passed and the fact that many of
the missing servicemen were shot down over water or in mountainous terrain.

Last Monday, Hanoi turned over to the United States the remains of eight
Americans found during searches in October and November.

At the same time, it handed a high-level delegation led by Assistant Secretary
of State Winston Lord new documents on missing servicemen that are being
analyzed now.

"They are cooperating at a very high level," said Mr. Lord.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              247 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Mystery and Suspense From Three Old Hands

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 948 words



Decider
By Dick Francis
318 pages. G. P. Putnam's Sons. $22.95.

Sacred Clowns
By Tony Hillerman
305 pages. HarperCollins. $23.

The Mexican Tree Duck
By James Crumley
247 pages. Mysterious Press/Warner Books. $19.95.

Racetracks, the Navajo reservation, Vietnam: these are the subjects with which
Dick Francis, Tony Hillerman and James Crumley respectively have come to be
identified, and in their latest suspense novels they perform more than reliably.

At the start of Mr. Francis's "Decider," Lee Morris, an Oxford architect and
builder, is asked to help save a race track in nearby Swindon from destruction
by the wealthy but violently feuding relatives who have inherited it. Knowing he
should stay clear, he nevertheless piles five of his six sons, ages 14 to 7,
into the family bus and drives them out for a look at the track. Before he knows
it, he and one of the boys are nearly killed by an explosion that destroys the
grandstand. Which crazed family member could have done such a thing?

As always, Mr. Francis, a retired jockey, writes winningly about horses.
"Imagine the world without them, I thought: history itself would have been
totally different. Land transport wouldn't have existed. Medieval battles
wouldn't have been fought. No six hundred to ride into a valley of death. No
Napoleon. The seafarers, Vikings and Greeks, might still rule the world."

As always, his humans are immediately likable or detestable, as his strong
plotting directs them. And as always, Mr. Francis, whose 34th novel "Decider"
is, extends his curiosity to a new interest, here the art of restoring old
buildings attractively. As Lee remarks after riskily rescuing the track's
fortunes: "For years I asked hundreds, literally hundreds of people, why they'd
bought the old houses they lived in. What was the decider, however irrational,
that made them choose that house and no other?"

The deeper question posed by the novel is why people take the crazier chances
they do, even to the point of endangering their children.

The sacred clowns to which the title of Tony Hillerman's new crime novel refers
are the so-called koshare who perform in a Tanoan religious ceremony and serve
to remind the audience how far short of God's ideal humanity has fallen. As Jim
Chee, Mr. Hillerman's Navajo policeman, explains: "I used to know a Hopi man who
was a koshare at Moenkopi. He would say to me: 'Compared to what our Creator
wanted us to be, all men are clowns. And that's what we koshare do. We act funny
to remind people. To make the people laugh at themselves. We are the sacred
clowns,' he said."

One of these koshare is murdered during a religious ceremony, with Jim Chee and
some of his friends looking on. Almost simultaneously, a shop teacher at a
reservation school is killed, a gay man who devoted himself to helping people
and trying to make them laugh. Is there a link between these two deaths of
"valuable men"? What was in the package that a boy took from the teacher and
delivered to the koshare? Why was the audience disturbed by the clown's
performance?

Officer Chee does the required gumshoe work and ratiocination, in uneasy
alliance with his superior, Lieut. Joe Leaphorn. But what is captivating about
the story is less the thrill of the chase and more the clarity of the scenes,
the reflectiveness of the characters and, most of all, the way Jim Chee succeeds
in resolving a conflict between Navajo values and those of the surrounding
society without weighting the plot unduly or battering the reader with invidious
cultural comparisons.


Where Mr. Francis and Mr. Hillerman predicate orderly, rational societies in
their stories, James Crumley in "The Mexican Tree Duck" descends into a
violently chaotic world that can be seen as a legacy of Vietnam, of which his
characters are nightmare-haunted veterans. Here, drugs are for breakfast, sex is
anytime and panic begins at what the author calls dark-thirty.

In an early passage, one character is described as having bitten off a state
trooper's nose and, to add "grievous insult to massive injury," chewed it up and
swallowed it. The Mexican tree duck of the title is purportedly a pre-Columbian
ceramic once used to purify human blood during ritual sacrifice, although to Mr.
Crumley's private investigator C. W. Sughrue (who previously appeared in "The
Last Good Kiss"), the ceramic looks like "a goofy bird I used to see in my
childhood."

You therefore don't ask of Mr. Crumley's tale whodunit. You ask what is
happening and why. In a small Montana town, a monstrously unkempt biker gang
leader known as Abnormal Norman Hazelbrook hires his old friend the private eye
Sughrue -- " 'Shoog' as in sugar,' honey . . . and 'rue' as in rue the goddamned
day" -- to track down his missing mother. She, Hazelbrook insists, is Sarita
Cisneros Pines, the infinitely wealthy wife of a major-league drug dealer. She
has presumably been kidnapped, for reasons nobody can figure out, least of all
the word-punched reader.

To find Sarita Pines, Sughrue gathers up his gang of Vietnam vets and sets off
on a cross-country quest that involves more bloody confrontations than an arcade
video game. They pass through Aspen, Colo., "rich with fake gentility, phony
fortunes and serious foolishness," and end up near the Mexican border prepared
to wage war against an army of drug-runners.

By the end, so much treachery has occurred that you can't tell who's doing what
to whom. But the Day-Glo characters and hopped-up language are what matter, so
you are best off relaxing into C. W. Sughrue's philosophy: "We laughed. Life is
a joke. You just have to hope it's funny. Instead of bad."

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dick Francis (Adrian Houston/Idols/G. P. Putnam's Sons); Tony
Hillerman (Barney Hillerman/HarperCollins); James Crumley (Michael
Gallacher/Mysterious Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              248 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 21, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 605 words



Companies

QVC Network said it had raised its bid for Paramount by $100 million in cash.
Its offer is worth about $10.4 billion. Viacom's new offer was not known. But
QVC asserted that Paramount had said that QVC's bid was higher. [Page D1.]

A television show featuring the Dodge Viper sports car is the latest in a series
of dazzling image-building moves by Chrysler, which is attracting legions of new
buyers. [D1.]

Three days after the Fox Network knocked CBS out of televising National Football
Conference games, NBC ushered CBS out of pro football altogether, buying rights
to American Football Conference games. CBS's offer was said to come too late.
[A1.]

New York State regulators ordered Nynex to cut telephone rates next year by 3
percent, or about $170 million, and told it to set aside an additional $156
million to improve phone service. [D1.]

Liz Claiborne named a relatively unknown insider to head its largest apparel
division, Liz Claiborne Misses and Petite Sportswear, and announced two other
promotions. [D1.]

Mobil said it had become the first U.S. oil company to win the right to drill
offshore of Vietnam. But Washington's trade embargo would now prevent the
company from exploiting the field. [D5.]

An oil industry critic and his wife who were targets of corporate spying settled
a suit against Alyeska Pipeline. [A28.]

Feuding between members of the Shoen family, which owns the U-Haul rental-truck
empire, has become an issue in the battle to control real-estate partnerships
run by Shurgard Inc. [D5.]

Intel said it was cutting prices and increasing production of its Pentium
microprocessors, upping the ante for its rivals. [D6.]

I.B.M.'s personal computer unit said a plan to upgrade its most advanced PS/2
models would be delayed. [D6.]

U.S. Bioscience won F.D.A. approval for a treatment to help AIDS patients fight
off a deadly pneumonia microbe. [C8.]

The Economy

Employers and employees in private industry and state and local governments
spent $258.5 billion for health care last year, the Labor Department reported in
the first Federal survey of such spending. Employers accounted for 86 percent of
the total. [A20.]

On the eve of the first introductions into U.S. supermarkets of genetically
engineered crops, a scientific policy group called on the Government to postpone
the commercial approvals. [A23.]

International

The purchase of a stake in the Hungarian state telephone company by an
American-German consortium is likely to set the pace for other phone
privatizations in Eastern Europe. [D5.]

Now that Japan has finally decided to allow foreign rice into the country, will
the Japanese people eat the unfamiliar-tasting stuff? And how will it be
distributed? [A17.]

Markets

Stocks closed mixed as trading moved in an aimless fashion. The Dow gained 3.64
points to close at 3,755.21. [D8.]

The municipal bond market looks attractive next year because the flood of new
issues that marked 1993 is expected to slow. [D16.]

The dollar rose against the yen amid talk of a cut in Japan's official discount
rate. [D15.]

Cocoa prices halted their rise amid a lessening of concerns about the Ivory
Coast's important crop. [D15.]

Today's Columns

Investors have been pushing up Playboy Enterprises shares, and the meshing of
Playboy bunnies and emerging telecommunications systems may be why. Market
Place. [D1.]

Now that Rupert Murdoch has taken an expensive gamble on N.F.L. games, how
successful will he be in persuading advertisers to help bankroll him? Stuart
Elliott: Advertising. [D18.]

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              249 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 21, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
Mobil Wins Right to Drill for Oil Off Vietnam

BYLINE: By AGIS SALPUKAS

SECTION: Section D; Page 5; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 614 words


The Mobil Corporation said yesterday that it had become the first United States
oil company to win the right to drill for oil offshore of Vietnam. But an
18-year-old United States embargo against trade with Vietnam would prevent the
company from exploiting the field if oil or gas was found.

Mobil said yesterday that it was part of a consortium with three Japanese
companies that had been awarded an interest in a block called the Blue Dragon
for undisclosed terms. Mobil had drilled there before it was forced to abandon
its effort when the United States military and businesses left Vietnam in 1975.

Thomas Collins, a spokesman for the exploration and producing division of Mobil,
said the company was hoping the embargo would be modified further so that the
field could be brought into production if oil and gas was found.

Vietnam has become the scene of increasing drilling activity and bidding for
blocks. Recent drilling has turned up some promising signs that there is oil in
quantities that could eventually pay off.

In essence, Mobil is betting that if it makes a major strike, political
conditions will have changed sufficiently that it will be able to produce and
sell the oil found there.

Mr. Collins said that Mobil had not been actively lobbying for a change in the
embargo but added that "we have observed the various conversations between
representatives of both Governments and are witnessing the relationship
develop."

Mr. Collins said that since 1988 Vietnam had given out 35 leases on 40 million
acres to 23 groups, some of which had found oil.

He said that the Vietnamese were more open to Mobil as the first United States
company to drill there since it had found the most productive field ever there
-- the White Tiger in the early 1970's.

That field, which was developed under a joint venture by Vietnam and Russia, now
produces 125,000 to 130,000 barrels a day and provides about one-third of the
hard currency for Vietnam.

The Clinton Administration has relaxed the embargo against Vietnam so that
United States companies can take part in projects financed by international
institutions. A further easing of the embargo is under consideration.

Mobil said that it had received a license from the Office of Foreign Assets
Control of the Treasury Department to allow the company to take part in the
bidding, seismic readings and exploratory drilling.

About 200 United States companies have been given the right to particpate in
various efforts with other groups by the Treasury Department.

The block is about 250 miles southeast of Ho Chi Minh City and is near the Big
Bear field where a consortium led by the Broken Hill Proprietary Company of
Australia confirmed a flow of oil of 6,640 barrels a day in October.

Mr. Collins said that work on the rigs and exploration would begin in the spring
and that he assumed that American companies could bid for the work.

Mobil was drilling in the Blue Dragon area in 1975 when the end of the war
forced it to abandon its effort.

"Our early experience was sucessful and led to our current enthusiasm," John
Lord, a spokesman for Mobil, said.

The three other companies in the consortium are the Japan Petroleum Exploration
Company, Indonesia Petroleum Ltd. and the Nissho Iwai Corporation. Mobil has a
50 percent interest in the consortium.

Another major oil company, the Exxon Corporation, said yesterday that it had
signed a contract to explore for oil in part of China's western desert. Exxon
said that the group included the Sumitomo Corporation and Indonesia Petroleum
and that they had signed a contract to explore in about 3.7 million acres in the
Tarim Basin of northwest China.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Vietnam showing area where Mobil will drill.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              250 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 21, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Military Chaplain Fights A Battle Over Loyalties

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1466 words

DATELINE: ABILENE, Tex.


The end to Chaplain Garland L. Robertson's distinguished 20-year Air Force
career can be traced to a moral dilemma: God or country?

Chaplain Robertson, who had consistently received outstanding evaluations, is a
man of high ethical standards, his associates here at Dyess Air Force Base say,
a straight-arrow who does not smoke, drink or swear. Before becoming a chaplain,
he was a decorated pilot in Vietnam.

It was his sense of moral purpose, they say, that led Chaplain Robertson, a
Southern Baptist, to write a letter to the editor of the Abilene Reporter-News
in January 1991, two weeks before the start of the Persian Gulf war, questioning
the use of force against Iraq.

That letter, printed on Jan. 5, touched off a nightmarish chain of events over
the next two and a half years: superiors canceled his orders to go to Germany to
minister to soldiers returning from the war; he clashed with supervisors and
other chaplains and was ordered to undergo three psychological examinations to
determine whether he had a personality disorder, and he was branded a
troublemaker and forbidden to transfer to other bases.

Finally, last September, an Air Force board of inquiry drummed Chaplain
Robertson out of the service, granting him an honorable discharge but saying he
had exhibited poor leadership.

A High-Stakes Appeal

He is now appealing his ouster to the Secretary of the Air Force, Sheila E.
Widnall, in a rare public case that illustrates the tensions for military
chaplains between their duties to the church and to the Commander in Chief. Ms.
Widnall, who could decide the matter in January, has wide latitude in her
decision. She could approve the discharge, for example, but grant full or
partial benefits.

At stake are not only the health benefits and a $29,000 annual military pension
that Chaplain Robertson -- a husband and father of two teen-agers -- stands to
lose if his appeal fails, but also what he calls the independence of military
chaplains to raise ethical concerns that conflict with national policy.

"If you're consistent with the teachings of your church, there will always be
tensions between being a minister and being an officer," said Chaplain
Robertson, a 48-year-old lieutenant colonel with graying black hair and a soft
drawl, an echo of his native Mississippi.

During the Vietnam War, scores of military chaplains resigned in protest or
criticized the conflict privately. What makes Chaplain Robertson's case
different is that he is persisting in raising ethical questions about the gulf
war even after his commanders told him to keep quiet.

Air Force officials say Chaplain Robertson is a maverick who spoke out of turn
when he identified himself in his letter as a chaplain at Dyess. They say he
should have just signed his name as a private citizen.

"The argument is not what he said but that he used his position to express
political or controversial issues," said Chaplain Lorraine Potter, the chief of
plans and programs for the Air Force Chief of Chaplains in Washington.

Chaplain Potter said that the Air Force had been willing to let Chaplain
Robertson retire next February with full benefits, but that he insisted he would
leave no earlier than next June.

Two Sides of a Man

Even Chaplain Robertson's friends acknowledge that he sometimes fails to
understand the practical consequences of his ethical positions.

"Garland is the kind of person who stands up for his convictions, and that
sometimes hurts him," said the Rev. Lewis Burnett, a former Army chaplain who is
now director of military chaplaincy for the Southern Baptists.

Yet this is not the story of a pacifist minister oblivious to the horrors of
combat. Before he attended divinity school, Garland Robertson was a decorated
reconnaissance pilot in Vietnam, and he later commanded a nuclear missile crew
in underground silos in North Dakota. He knows war.

But he also has a gentler side. He rides a bicycle eight miles to work and back
every day to save money for a foundation he has established to help poor black
children in Mississippi.

Garland Robertson was raised in the rural South of the 1950's and 1960's by
deeply religious parents. He studied chemical engineering and mathematics at
Mississippi State University and received a second-lieutenant's commission from
the R.O.T.C. program there in 1968.

The Fateful Letter

With the war in Vietnam escalating, he volunteered to go there. "I had a blind
faith in the people making decisions," he said in an interview. "In order to be
a good Christian, you had to be a good citizen. To be a good citizen, you did
what your country asked."

A young Lieutenant Robertson was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross in 1970
for helping to rescue a scout platoon pinned down by enemy fire. But like so
many other veterans of Vietnam, Lieutenant Robertson was alienated by the war,
and in 1976 he resigned from the Air Force to attend Southwestern Baptist
Theological Seminary in Fort Worth, where he earned a doctorate in ethics.

He returned to active duty as an Air Force chaplain in 1982, serving in Florida
and Germany before coming to Dyess in 1988. He worked here without incident
until he wrote his four-paragraph letter to the newspaper.

The letter said in part: "The impression which Vice President Quayle has
communicated to the American soldiers in Saudi Arabia cannot go unchallenged.
His comment, 'The American people are behind you,' must be clarified to indicate
that the American people are not united in their decision to support a military
offensive against the aggression of Saddam Hussein in Kuwait.

"If President Bush remains adamant about using force to drive Iraq from Kuwait,
the American soldiers will respond with the full measure of their capabilities.
The need to use military force in this circumstance, however, is an open issue
-- one which the citizens of this country will not allow to be decided in the
vacuum of sectarian perception."

Complaints and a Reprimand

Chaplain Robertson said the issue was whether a gulf war was just.

"Soldiers were coming to me for help in settling a conflict between their own
moral beliefs and the country's policy," he said in the interview. "I felt
writing the letter would raise awareness."

Instead, it raised the hackles of base commanders and many retired military
people in Abilene, who flooded the base with angry telephone calls. Abilene is
both a conservative city and a religious one, with 200 churches for 106,000
residents, including many retired military personnel.

Three days after the letter was printed, the base commander, Col. Michael A.
Lock, issued Chaplain Robertson a written reprimand for engaging in "political
activities" and "flouting of the President's military authority."

The chaplain fired back a long rebuttal and gave a copy of it to the
Reporter-News, which then ran a front-page article about the dispute,
infuriating Dyess commanders.

Shortly afterward, Chaplain Robertson's orders to go to Germany were canceled.
When he clashed with senior chaplains, they ordered mental health tests over
several months. In the first two exams, psychologists found nothing wrong, but
after the third one they said he suffered from a "personality disorder which is
so severe as to interfere with the normal and customary completion of his
duties."

Until Chaplain Robertson wrote his letter, he had earned glowing grades.

"Chaplain Robertson is an outstanding pastoral chaplain, always eager to help
others and consistently displays industriousness, conscientiousness and
diligence in his ministry," according to an April 1990 evaluation prepared by
his senior chaplain and endorsed by Colonel Lock, the base commander.

A year later, after the letter, Chaplain Robertson's evaluation plummeted. "On a
continuing basis, his leadership style produced minimal results in support of
total Protestant programming," said an April 1991 evaluation prepared by a
different chaplain and approved by Colonel Lock.

Ousted by Panel

Last May, Chaplain Robertson was moved from his chapel office to a small
windowless storage room near the flight line where B-1 bombers lumber skyward.
He continues working there while his case is on appeal.

After he rejected the Air Force's final offer on retirement, a board of three
colonels ruled in September that Chaplain Robertson was not insubordinate and
did not have a personality disorder. But the board did fault him for poor
leadership, and his honorable discharge carried no pension benefits.

Chaplain Robertson realizes he has jeopardized the future of his wife, Marsha,
and his children, Shane and Shauna, but he said it was a risk worth taking.

"The most pressing issue," he said, "is, Are we ministers of the church or
ministers of the state?"

NAME: Garland L. Robertson

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "If you're consistent with the teachings of your church, there
will always be tensions between being a minister and being an officer," said
Chaplain Garland L. Robertson of the Air Force. (Mark Perlstein for The New York
Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              251 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

First Lady, Defending President, Denounces 'Outrageous Attack'

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1219 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 21


The White House rolled out its second biggest gun today as Hillary Rodham
Clinton rose to defend her husband against new accusations about the state of
their marriage and new scrutiny of the suicide of Vincent W. Foster Jr., a
senior aide and longtime friend.

Mrs. Clinton, in interviews with news agency reporters, suggested that a
connection existed between the rise of rumors about her husband and his newfound
popularity in public opinion polls. And she asserted that the White House was
being subjected to "outrageous attack" fueled by payoffs made to the people
making the accusations.

Two Troublesome Issues

Mrs. Clinton's remarks were prompted by a series of reports on two matters.
First were accusations, published and broadcast widely this week, that her
husband had used the state troopers who guarded him while he was Governor of
Arkansas to arrange meetings with other women and to hide those meetings from
her. In addition there was the renewed interest in files that the White House
removed from Mr. Foster's West Wing office shortly after he killed himself in a
Virginia park last summer.

Federal law-enforcement officials said today that they would seek to examine
those files relating to the Clintons' private land dealings in Arkansas. [Page
A20.]

Mrs. Clinton said she was "bewildered" by the continued interest in the
investment she and her husband had made in an Arkansas development scheme that
ultimately went bankrupt and that tied them to a failed savings and loan
institution and the business partners who controlled it.

She said she saw no reason to make public any of the files on the Whitewater
Development Corporation that were retrieved from the office of Mr. Foster, who
was deputy White House counsel.

"I just think what we've said is adequate," Mrs. Clinton told The Associated
Press.

"I think my husband has proven that he's a man who really cares about this
country deeply and respects the Presidency and believes strongly that he's doing
the right thing," Mrs. Clinton told Reuters. "And when it's all said and done,
that's how most fair-minded Americans will judge my husband. And all the rest of
this stuff will end up in the garbage can where it deserves to be."

Mrs. Clinton's forceful defense of her husband, and the fact that she made it
herself rather than leaving it to aides, raised the two issues to a new level of
visibility and contrasted sharply with the cheerful holiday mood Mrs. Clinton
has tried to develop at the White House in recent weeks. While First Ladies have
historically been fierce defenders of their spouses in private and strongly
supportive in general terms in public, Mrs. Clinton's very specific
counterattack was highly unusual.

The White House earlier strongly denied the accusations made by two troopers,
Larry G. Patterson and Roger L. Perry, in a magazine article in The American
Spectator, which said efforts to corroborate the men's statements were rebuffed
by the women concerned. It has acknowledged, however, that Mr. Clinton had
telephoned other troopers to ask about the reports and solicit their support in
offering denials to journalists.

Dark Days Near Christmas

The Justice Department has begun separate investigations into the circumstances
surrounding Mr. Foster's death and the failure of Madison Guaranty Savings and
Loan, the Arkansas thrift institution owned by James McDougal, the Clintons'
partner in the real estate venture.

The President has not spoken publicly about these issues recently, and Mrs.
Clinton's remarks today were the most explicit part of a White House campaign to
present the First Family as victims of unwarranted attacks at a time when Mr.
Clinton was posting some of his highest approval ratings ever in published
polls.

In the Reuters interview, Mrs. Clinton said it was "sad and unfortunate" that
the rumors would surface so aggressively "especially during the Christmas
season."

"It also hurts," she said. "Even though you're a public figure, which means
apparently in America anybody can say anything about you. Even public figures
have feelings and families and reputations."

Mrs. Clinton granted the interviews to The Associated Press, Reuters and United
Press International as part of a round of year-end discussions, her aides said.

But in another year-end encounter today, with reporters from major newspapers
that included The New York Times, Mrs. Clinton refused to allow any of her
remarks to be made public.

'You're Going to Be Asked'

Mrs. Clinton spoke out in the wire service interviews today, aides to the
President said, because it was inevitable that one of the Clintons would have to
face down some of the questions.

"The alternative is worse," one official said. "At some point you're going to be
asked."

Mr. Clinton's closest advisers have frequently complained that the negative
reports about the President have conspiratorial tones, and Mrs. Clinton echoed
that complaint today.

"I find it not an accident that every time he is on the verge of fulfilling his
commitment to the American people and they are responding -- whether it's
forging ahead in the polls in New Hampshire or now with very high popularity --
out comes yet a new round of these outrageous, terrible stories that people
plant for political and financial reasons," Mrs. Clinton told The A. P.

During the New Hampshire primary campaign, Mr. Clinton was forced to deny
accusations that he conducted a 12-year extramarital affair with Gennifer
Flowers, a cabaret singer who was later given a state job in Arkansas. Mr. and
Mrs. Clinton appeared on the CBS News program "60 Minutes" to acknowledge past
troubles in their marriage and say they were committed to each other.

Fallout From a Friendship

The Clintons have been unable to escape the rumors and reports about their
personal lives, but Mr. Clinton has enjoyed good news of late. In a Washington
Post/ABC News poll published today, 58 percent of those surveyed said they
approved of the job he was doing; the figure is among the highest Mr. Clinton
has had since his earliest months in office.

Mrs. Clinton attributed much of the latest spate of bad news to the
determination of one Clinton enemy, Cliff Jackson, an Arkansas lawyer, to
discredit the President.

Mr. Jackson has acted as a lawyer and media liaison for the two troopers who
brought the accusations to light in a lengthy article in the American Spectator
this week. During the Presidential campaign last year Mr. Jackson also spent
considerable time compiling evidence for reporters concerning Mr. Clinton's
efforts to avoid the draft during the Vietnam War.

Mr. Jackson and Mr. Clinton attended Oxford University together in 1969 when Mr.
Clinton was a Rhodes scholar and Mr. Jackson a Fulbright scholar, and the two
men were friendly. But Mrs. Clinton said today that Mr. Jackson had "become
obsessed with the President" and attacked him "every time he is on the verge of
fulfilling his commitment to the American people."

"My husband's Presidency speaks for itself," Mrs. Clinton told Reuters.  "And
what he has done in just one year for America, ultimately, that's how the
American people are going to judge.  Not some story that somebody promotes for
their own financial gain or because they have a political vendetta."


LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Hillary Rodham Clinton during an interview at the White House.
(Associated Press) (pg. A1); President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, listening
to the World Children's Choir during a ceremony for Unicef yesterday at the
White House. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg. A20)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              252 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Turning Back to an American Turning Point, 1968

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 22; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 679 words


It was the best of years. It was the worst of years. That's 1968, the subject of
tonight's "CBS Reports." Abetted by punchy newsreel clips, Mike Wallace takes
what in more tranquil times might be called a stroll down memory lane. Since
most of these memories are of war abroad and clashes at home, it's more like
trying to stroll through Sarajevo on a busy day.

In Vietnam, there were the Tet offensive, a military defeat for North Vietnam
but a propaganda victory, and the massacre at My Lai, a moral disaster for the
United States. In Biafra, there was man-made starvation, and in Czechoslovakia,
Soviet tanks crushed the Prague Spring.

At home, the antiwar insurgency of Senators Eugene McCarthy and Robert F.
Kennedy brought an end to the Lyndon B. Johnson Presidency, and the rioting by
both protesters and the police during the Democratic National Convention in
Chicago assured the victory of Richard M. Nixon. The commotion was not strictly
political; the young were also making statements, noted tonight in passing, with
music, drugs, sex and hair styles.

There were the assassinations of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Senator
Kennedy, recalled in still-shattering pictures and by admirers who continue to
believe that a generation's hopes were stilled by those bullets. There were
riots in 130 American cities, takeovers of college campuses and outbursts by
Black Panthers, antiwar cadres, Yippies and others.

Most of the evening's analysis or opinion is provided by alumni of radical
groups, the best known being Tom Hayden, a founder of Students for a Democratic
Society who is now a State Senator in California. Kathleen Cleaver, who was
Communications Secretary of the Black Panthers, describes the period as
"exhilarating and exciting." Robin Morgan, recalling the beginnings of a new
women's movement, emphasizes that the celebrated bra burning at a Miss America
pageant never happened, but she, too, seems to have been exhilarated.

For Americans on the other side of the barricades, in the words of Harry
McPherson, a speechwriter for President Johnson, "1968 was the worst year I
remember in my lifetime." Mr. Wallace takes an unaccustomedly mild view of the
tumult, noting benignly that several of the onetime radical leaders are now
working more or less within the system they once sought to overthrow. He
concludes in Panglossian fashion, "Only a country of unimaginable strength could
have survived intact."

On an even more upbeat note, he caps the hour with the reminder of another
momentous event of 1968: no, not a great novel or play, but the start of "60
Minutes," the CBS news magazine starring, of all people, Mike Wallace. And
that's the way it was, according to CBS.


'48 Hours'
'Ready for Love?'

CBS, 10 P.M.

Can those who are now delicately called the "developmentally disabled" be
trusted to bring up families of their own? The question is addressed, though far
from resolved, on tonight's edition of "48 Hours." The touching cases include: a
single mother with an I.Q. of 70 trying to win her normal baby back from the
foster parents who want to adopt the infant; another single mother, I.Q. of 50,
doing her best to care for her normal 7-year-old son; parents of a moderately
retarded 21-year-old woman seeking permission to have her sterilized so that she
can enjoy the pleasures of sex without the consequences.

At the least, such stories confirm that the urge for sex and children is not
determined by one's I.Q. The program asks whether such desires can be satisfied
without opening the mentally retarded to harm or permitting them to harm others.
The answer, as for so many questions, seems to be yes, if society is willing to
pay for the help that people who are not quite normal need if they are to have
lives that approach the norm.

CBS Reports
1968
CBS, tonight
(In the New York area, Channel 2 at 9)

Directed by Maurice Murad and Ken Sable; written by Maurice Murad and Mike
Wallace; produced by Maurice Murad for CBS News; Linda Mason, executive
producer; Mike Wallace, host.

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              253 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

The Pain of Layoffs for Ex-Senior I.B.M. Workers;
In Dutchess County, a Disorienting Time for Employees Less Hardened to Job Loss

BYLINE: By JOSEPH BERGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2012 words

DATELINE: POUGHKEEPSIE, N.Y.


Every two weeks, three men and three women who put their faith in the eternal
prosperity and benevolence of I.B.M. gather in one another's living rooms to
talk and, at times, to shut their eyes and clasp their hands in prayer.

Last April, the three men, each a high-level professional in his 50's, were
among the 7,700 workers in the mid-Hudson Valley who through layoffs and buyouts
lost what they had come to believe were lifelong I.B.M. jobs, and their wives
were among thousands of spouses who lost a robust sense of the future.

Now, gathered around an antique coffee table, drinking hot spiced cider, the men
talk about how hard it is after more than 20 secure years at International
Business Machines Corporation to go hunting for jobs or clients, to realize they
will probably never again make anywhere near the salaries of $80,000 or more
that they once made, or to keep up their self-respect.

The wives talk about how upsetting it is see to see husbands fumbling about at
home at midday, to haggle with doctors over medical bills, to ask college-age
children not to fly home for Thanksgiving and to give up dreams of finally
opening a pottery studio or returning to college.

While the loss of a job may hurl a working-class family into a life of poverty,
it has a profound effect on these more cushioned lives as well. The precipitous
drop in status and security has been, in some ways, even more psychologically
disorienting than it might have been for families more hardened to the whims of
the job market.

"We don't know how to make it out there," said Virginia Young, who grew up in an
I.B.M. family and then married an I.B.M. man. "And that is probably the scariest
thing. All my life, I.B.M. has described the future. Now I don't know what it's
going to be."

The upheaval that has wrenched these former I.B.M. workers and their families
has rippled through much of the countryside of the mid-Hudson Valley, home to
the three mammoth plants that make the company's mainframes and its
semiconductor chips. The ripples have been wide and deep, and leaders of this
area, like the former workers themselves, are starting to regret hitching their
fate to that of a single company.

"Dutchess County has had this warm comfortable security blanket called I.B.M.
for decades," said William R. Steinhaus, the county executive. "People before me
were very passive when it came to job diversification because they felt I.B.M.
was their meal ticket. That has come back to haunt us big time."

Pain, Both Economic And Psychological

Just as dispiriting as the economic pain is how it has been mirrored by
psychological pain.

Social-service officials say men and women who did not necessarily work for
I.B.M. but whose lives nonetheless depended on its vitality, are succumbing to
drink, violence and despair. In one year, said Dr. Kenneth M. Glatt, Dutchess
County mental health commissioner, there has been an 11 percent upsurge in
people treated at the county's five mental health clinics and other programs, a
rise he attributed to the fallout from I.B.M. cutbacks. So far this year, the
agency has had to call the police 26 times to deal with people it felt were a
danger to themselves or others, twice the figure of two years ago.

There has been a kind of Catch 22 about the ordeal. While the area's anguish has
mushroomed, the county tax collections and charitable contributions that might
pay for some salve to the pain have been dwindling.

Allan D. Thomas, who directs Family Services of the Mid-Hudson and Harlem
Valleys, a nonprofit counseling agency, said its caseload of abused wives and
other crime victims has doubled. Laid-off men, he said, have time to stay home
and drink and sometimes take their shame out on their wives. At the same time
donations from United Way have fallen 25 percent, forcing the agency to drop
three workers.

The most indelible impact, of course, has been on the I.B.M. workers,
particularly the senior professionals who never had to cope with periodic
layoffs that blue-collar workers have long endured.

But the loss of their jobs has another dimension. The nation's largest computer
maker had always prided itself for its cradle-to-grave obligation for workers
and their families without the intervention of unions.

With Lost Benefits, A Loss of Identity

I.B.M. was the fulcrum of the workers' social life, the place that paid for
their country clubs, college courses and medical expenses and gave lavish
Christmas parties for their children. With lingering disbelief, workers remember
that when a couple would experience a rough period in their marriage or mourn a
relative, I.B.M. paid for a restorative vacation.

Dutchess County, which has two I.B.M. plants -- one in Poughkeepsie that
assembles mainframes -- and one in East Fishkill that manufactures chips -- was
the equivalent of a mill town, providing 60 percent of the county's
manufacturing jobs and 20 percent of overall jobs. And I.B.M. gave its workers
and their families a rock-hard identity.

"To be an I.B.M. executive was to have great significance," Mrs. Young said.
Mrs. Young, a school social worker, did not lose a job at I.B.M.; her husband
did. It is a measure of the power of the cutbacks that her identity has also
been unhinged.

A minister's daughter, she grew up in New Jersey and Pennsylvania with two
uncles and a cousin who worked for the company and felt part of the singular
culture. "When I was in college in Michigan and my car broke down, my uncle
called another I.B.M.er," she said. "It didn't matter where I was."

Marriage to John L. Young, a market analyst for mainframes, maintained her
immersion in that culture. I.B.M. asked them to move from Binghamton to White
Plains and then to Poughkeepsie, and they did so willingly, aware that I.B.M.
would take care of selling their homes and finding Mrs. Young jobs and letting
them join the virtually free I.B.M. Country Club here and giving them instant
entree into the community.

"We were part of a great big family," said John Young, a tall, broad-shouldered
man of 52. "The manager was not just a manager, he was a father figure."

In exchange, workers put in long hours and the spouses dutifully did their part.

"There was no question what the wife did," Mrs. Young said. "The wife's primary
roll was enrolling the kids in a new school, redecorating the house, finding a
new church, begin entertaining the I.B.M. employees."

I.B.M.'s Troubles End in Layoffs

The bargain, though, was founded on the company's tacit assurance of lifelong
employment. So there was stunned agony written on Mr. Young's face when Mrs.
Young returned from a trip to Florida in April and her husband told her he would
be leaving the company where he had worked for 23 years. "He looked like he was
7 or 8 years old," she said.

Besides laying off some employees, I.B.M. had offered executives like Mr. Young
buyout packages of a year's salary and continued medical insurance. Given the
likelihood that future cutbacks would produce less generous incentives, he felt
he had no choice but to leave.

I.B.M. had been in trouble for more than two years, posting worldwide losses of
$5 billion in 1992. In the mid- 1980's, I.B.M.'s work force in Poughkeepsie,
East Fishkill and Kingston stood at 31,306, but by July of this year it had
plummeted to 13,800.

Dutchess County's unemployment rate, which hovered at 3 percent as recently as
1988, the state's lowest, peaked in June at 11.2 percent, the state's highest,
said Dr. Ann Davis, director of economic research for Marist College here. She
estimated that 3,000 other people whose livelihood depended on I.B.M. have lost
their jobs.

While I.B.M. workers like Mr. Young and his friend, John R. McKinney,
"maintained the most incredulous sense of loyalty to I.B.M. until five minutes
before they had to leave," Mrs. Young said she felt a "sense of betrayal" and
was angry at her husband's "blind faith."

Now the Youngs and the two other prayer group couples, Mr. McKinney and his
wife, Lynette, and Gilbert and Virginia Curl, are living in ways to which their
luck and pluck have not accustomed them. They see spouses who once rose to work
with a bounce idling morosely around the house, reaching after Eugene
O'Neill-like pipe dreams of businesses or jobs that may not be there.

At 59, Mr. McKinney, a Harvard Business School graduate who was a senior product
planner, has had to do things for which I.B.M. did not arm him. Thirty-three
years ago, he started out as a salesman in Worcester, Mass., wearing the
regulation fedora and striped tie of the time and working alongside John F.
Akers, who rose to become I.B.M's chairman until he was replaced this year.

Since he decided to take the severance package, Mr. McKinney has been struggling
to start a computer consulting business and, while he has recruited former
I.B.M. workers to join him, he has yet to land a single customer.

"Sometimes I feel I'm a person who doesn't have a job," he told the group. "Then
sometimes I feel I'm the president of a company that's going places. When I can
define myself as a child of God, I feel O.K. When I define myself as unemployed,
then I don't feel so good about myself."

Most mornings, he and Mr. Young head for the Career Center, a Federal- and
state-financed program set up specifically for former I.B.M. workers that helps
them scout job prospects and draft resumes, and lets them make free
long-distance calls.

Still, after sending out more than 75 resumes in eight months, he has had only
one job interview.

"I'm discovering that the changes out there are radical, not temporary," Mr.
Young said. "It's literally going back and learning how to look for work from
zero basis. Mainframe users don't need people and are also downsizing."

Mr. McKinney said: "We tell each other we're scared. It's good to have a place
to say those things because men don't usually say those things to each other."

New Breadwinners
And New Thriftiness

Husbands and wives, too, are saying things to each other they have never said
before.

Mrs. McKinney told her husband at one recent group, that she thought he was
cheated by his loyalty to the company. "I feel that by selling your soul to
I.B.M., you didn't develop some of the relationships you might have," she said.

Mrs. McKinney and Mrs. Young are temporarily the chief breadwinners and they are
discovering, that even though the men sheepishly chip in with cleaning or
cooking, the defined roles in their homes were not easy to change.

"We come in from a hard day's work," Mrs. Young said. "There are dishes on the
counter, the newspaper's spread out, the TV's on and there's someone whose
comfortable and resting. And the first question after 'How was your day?' is
'What's for dinner?' "

The three couples have had to be thrifty in ways to which they had not been
accustomed and they are dreading the approaching time when their severance will
run out. With tears in her eyes, Mrs. Young told of having to discourage her
son, Christian, a senior at Calvin College in Michigan, from flying home for
Thanksgiving. Just as wrenching, she said, was receiving letters from colleges
like Middlebury and Wheaton that were accepting her daughter, Amanda.

The Youngs chose Muhlenburg College in Pennsylvania because it was willing to
admit Amanda as a sophomore, saving a year's tuition.

Mr. Curl, 50, a Vietnam veteran who developed software for I.B.M., has had to
give up plans of spending generous time with his family. He has found a software
job paying substantially less than his I.B.M. job, and he knows he will not soon
have vacations that match his previous ones.

Mrs. McKinney fears she will never start the pottery studio she craved, now that
her income as a ceramics instructor at Dutchess Community College has become
crucial.

Mrs. Curl had plans of returning to college and pursuing a career in social work
once her children were grown.

"Suddenly, life has become living today," she said. "I'm not going to start with
the dream stuff."

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 24, 1993, Friday

CORRECTION:

A picture caption on Wednesday about former I.B.M. employees and their wives who
are coping with layoffs scrambled the identities of the group shown at a regular
meeting. The members were, clockwise from the left foreground, Lynette and John
McKinney, Gilbert Curl, Virginia and John Young and Virginia Curl.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Laid-off I.B.M. workers and their wives praying during their
biweekly meeting in Poughkeepsie, N.Y. Clockwise from the right are Virginia
Curl, John L. Young, Virginia Young, John R. McKinney, Gilbert Curl and Lynette
McKinney. (G. Paul Burnett/The New York Times) (pg. B1); Allan D. Thomas, who
directs Family Services of the Mid-Hudson and Harlem Valleys, a nonprofit
counseling agency, said its caseload of abused wives and other crime victims has
doubled. (Dan Cronin for The New York Times) (pg. B5)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              254 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

How to Help Cambodia

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 490 words


Thanks to the United Nations, Cambodia now has a democratically elected
Government. But it faces a military threat straight out of its nightmarish past.

The Khmer Rouge, which killed more than a million Cambodians in the 1970's,
persists in waging armed struggle against the new Government. The guerrillas say
they are willing to make peace in exchange for a role in the new administration.
But meanwhile they are fortifying themselves with new arms shipped across the
porous Thai border.

Washington can help Cambodia in two important ways. It can press the Thai
military to cut off the border arms flow. And it can soften its own opposition
to a political deal between Phnom Penh and the Khmer Rouge.

No country, least of all the U.S., is prepared to give Cambodia's Government the
military help it would take to defeat the Khmer Rouge outright. Short of that,
the goal ought to be shifting the conflict from the battlefield to the
bargaining table.

The United Nations peace plan was supposed to achieve just such a shift, but it
fell short. Vietnam withdrew its occupying army from Cambodia. China, the Khmer
Rouge's most powerful arms supplier, cut off its shipments. The royalist rebels
supported by the U.S. participated in the election and won the largest share of
votes. But the Khmer Rouge truculently resisted the entire U.N. process,
refusing to surrender its arms and declining to run candidates in the election.
Instead it tried to wreck the vote by threatening Election Day mayhem.
Cambodians voted anyway, in large numbers.

Realizing that its boycott tactics had backfired, the Khmer Rouge shifted its
approach, seeking to negotiate a role for itself in the new administration. But
Washington has firmly discouraged any deal, implying that the U.S. would deny
aid to Cambodia if it conceded any role to the Khmer Rouge.

Meanwhile Thailand, once the main conduit for Chinese weapons to the Khmer
Rouge, has taken over the profitable gun-running business for itself. Earlier
this month a Thai army unit was caught transporting weapons across the border.
Such resupply operations make it possible for the Khmer Rouge to maintain
military credibility and so to escalate its political demands.

The problem is less with Thailand's civilian Government than with its
independent and corrupt military commanders. And that is where the U.S. can play
a role. Thailand's armed forces have enjoyed a long and close military
relationship with the United States. Military leaders would probably pay
attention to tough talk from Washington on ending the Khmer Rouge connection.
Instead, all the tough talk is directed at Phnom Penh.

For Washington to tolerate gun-running to the Khmer Rouge but discourage peace
talks with them is a double mistake. The Thai Army's cross-border meddling is a
legitimate subject for outside pressure. Negotiations between Cambodian factions
ought to be left up to Cambodians themselves.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              255 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

In Denver, Santa's Elves Wear Blue

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 808 words

DATELINE: DENVER, Dec. 23


Across the wall from a jail cell, 6-year-old Jessica Olsen sat on Santa's lap
and shared her Christmas wish list, while an elf in a police uniform waited
nearby with candy canes.

"I know why Santa's in the police station," the girl whispered after sliding off
the bearded man's lap. "A bad man said he was going to hurt him."

In the latest chilling example that nothing seems safe anymore, shopping malls
in Denver and its suburbs canceled appearances by Santa Claus this week after
receiving anonymous threats from a man who said he would shoot anyone dressed as
jolly old St. Nick. To salvage the holiday ritual, the Denver police are
dressing up as Santas inside police stations and listening to the whispered
wishes of children.

"We feel we are better equipped to address the safety issues," said Police Chief
Dave Michaud.

Pizzeria Slayings Mentioned

When the initial threat was received, the police posted plain-clothes officers
in the malls. But after a second letter repeated the threat and invoked the
recent killing of four people at a suburban Chuck E. Cheese pizzeria, the police
advised mall managers to pull the Santas. No suspect has been arrested.

"Time is running out on that fatso," the second letter warned. "By Thursday he
will be history, along with anybody that gets in my way. Chucky Cheese was
nothing compared to this."

On Tuesday, disappointed children and their parents walked into malls to find
signs explaining that Santa had gone back to the North Pole and would be
visiting their homes on Christmas Eve. Some parents told their children that
Santa was ill.

The letter writer, who claimed to be an expert marksman trained in Vietnam,
complained that Santa Claus was making a mockery of the religious significance
of Christmas. He also wrote, "This is very sexist to think that only fat men
should give presents."

Gangs and Bloodshed

The news of the threats stunned residents of Denver, a city of 470,000 people
who have seen a number of drive-by shootings and gang-related acts of violence
this year.

"What is the world coming to when you've got to go to jail to see Santa?" said
Eleanor Loucero, a 69-year-old waitress. "I'm telling you, nothing is safe
anymore."

Jessica's parents, Jon and Maggie Olsen, said their daughter was watching
television the other night when she ran in to tell them, "Some man is going to
shoot Santa!"

On the drive to the police station to see Santa Claus, a police officer named
Ron Oreskovich who was wearing a red stocking cap, the little girl told them she
was worried about the bad man.

"Is it going to be all right there?" she asked. "Is the bad man going to come
there?"

Her parents told her, "Don't worry, they've got Santa in a safe place."

'Indicative of the Times'

The Olsens said their daughter was not as shocked by the threats as they might
have expected. They speculated that children today have become almost inured to
violence, with television shows and news programs dominated by crime and
bloodshed.

"I guess it's just indicative of the times," said Ms. Olsen, with a shrug.

Like most other parents here, the Olsens tried to make the best of the
situation. "It's a good way for kids to learn to trust the police," said Mr.
Olsen, a 40-year-old insurance broker. "This way, they'll associated officers
with Santa Claus."

The children lined up to see Santa, near a wall posted with photographs of
suspects wanted for armed robbery, drug dealing and forgery, and not far from a
holding cell sometimes used for muggers and prostitutes.

"We haven't said a word about any of this," said Jeanne Oshaughnessy, a
39-year-old mother who brought her three children to the police station. "The
important thing is that they're seeing Santa. It doesn't matter where Santa is."


When Smiles Disappear

To June DeVries, one of the best things about being a grandmother is watching
the children with Santa. Her eyes seemed as bright as those of her
grandchildren, Debra, 4, and David, 1. But at the mention of the threats, the
smile disappeared.

"I don't think I'd better say what I think," she whispered angrily, shaking her
head as if to sweep the troubles away. And then she wrapped her arms around
Debra, who was full of dreams of ballerinas on Christmas morning, and kissed her
cheek.

With Christmas Eve almost here, Mrs. Oshaughnessy said she was mostly
concentrating on ways to dissuade her children from asking Santa for animals
under the tree.

After telling them that "Santa's a little low on pets this year," she watched as
her 6-year-old son, Streeter, talked to Santa, hoping he would ask for some kind
of a toy.

"I want a turtle," the boy said.

The mother shook her head and sighed in exasperation.

"Oh, Santa, one other thing," Streeter said as his mother flinched, not sure she
wanted to hear. "I'd like a pig, too."

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              256 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Rules on Vietnam Projects

BYLINE: By Bloomberg Business News

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 237 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 23


The Treasury Department released regulations today that formally allow American
companies and investors to take part in international development-bank projects
in Vietnam.

The regulations put into effect President Clinton's pledge in September to relax
the commercial embargo against Vietnam. However, under the rules, American
companies can only take part in projects sponsored and approved by international
financial institutions like the World Bank or the Asian Development Bank.

Companies have pressed the Government to permit freer access to the emerging
Vietnamese market. The Clinton Administration's stance is that Hanoi must
provide more help in finding American prisoners of war or soldiers missing in
action before trade restrictions are lifted.

After Mr. Clinton said he would lighten the embargo, the World Bank received
about 60 phone inquiries a day about projects in Vietnam, said Peter Stephens, a
spokesman for the bank's East Asia and Pacific section.

It approved two projects in 1993, for education and transportation, worth $228
million. Because of delays, companies can still apply to take part in those
projects. A $100 million loan to help pay for essential imports and a $110
million agriculture project are also under consideration, Mr. Stephens said.

The World Bank expects to run about a dozen more projects in Vietnam over the
next decade, worth about $1 billion, he added.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              257 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film: Heaven and Earth;
A Woman's View Of Vietnam Horrors

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1010 words


MAKING his third film about the Vietnam War and its consequences, Oliver Stone
suddenly finds himself on foreign terrain. The reason: "Heaven and Earth," his
latest and least controversial film on the subject, tells its story from the
standpoint of a Vietnamese woman. This is a tale of extraordinarily melodramatic
hardship, involving rape, torture, disgrace, prostitution and a disastrous
marriage to an American G.I., all heightened by the despoliation of the
heroine's homeland. Her name is Le Ly Hayslip. But considering all these perils,
it could have been Pauline.

A computer could have suggested that after describing the American soldier's
combat experience ("Platoon") and its aftermath ("Born on the Fourth of July"),
Mr. Stone might round out his work with a shift of gender and nationality. But a
computer would not have factored in the essentials of Mr. Stone's style. His
best direction is volatile, angry and muscular in ways that Ms. Hayslip's story,
that of a resilient, long-suffering victim, simply cannot accommodate. Mr. Stone
tells this tale vigorously, but he has the wrong cinematic vocabulary for his
heroine's essentially passive experience.

"Heaven and Earth," which opens tomorrow, runs nearly two and a half hours and
still manages to seem abrupt in places, thanks to the tumultuous, chameleonlike
quality of Ms. Hayslip's life. (Her own account, on which the film is based,
fills two books.) It encompasses wild extremes of lyrical beauty -- most notably
in the opening glimpses of Le Ly's Vietnamese village -- and of lurid excess,
too.

The same is true of most of Mr. Stone's films, but this one lacks an emotional
center, despite Ms. Hayslip's presence in nearly every scene. Sympathetic as she
seems, she is never allowed a wide range of attitudes or reactions. She emerges
as a strong person rather than a strong dramatic character.

As played with impressive confidence by Hiep Thi Le, a Vietnamese-born
California college student making her film debut, Le Ly certainly does not lack
energy. She moves through the film with a scrappy vigor that suits her story.
First seen as a young girl living with her parents (the beautiful Joan Chen,
disguised here as a toothless peasant, and Haing S. Ngor), Le Ly watches
apprehensively as the French and then the Viet Cong take over her village. The
film often returns evocatively to her memories of a lost, peaceful home.

The early sections have the feeling of an illustrated history lesson, despite
Mr. Stone's ravishing images of the unspoiled natural scenery. (The film,
photographed vibrantly by Mr. Stone's usual cinematographer, Robert Richardson,
was shot mostly in Thailand.) Only when Le Ly begins to be abused does the story
come perversely alive.

After bringing a shade too much zeal to scenes depicting Le Ly's suffering at
the hands of the Viet Cong, Mr. Stone next takes her to Da Nang, where she
becomes a servant in the household of a wealthy man and soon becomes attracted
to, and pregnant by, her employer. The film, trying to present this episode as
both romantic and cruel, winds up making it muddy and unconvincing, which is
what often happens in sequences describing Le Ly's feelings about men. When Mr.
Stone treats his Vietnamese heroine as both sexual martyr and national metaphor,
he so overburdens her story that Le Ly disappears as a real person.

The film's extremes of masculine guilt are often overpowering, as in the
sequence that has Le Ly lured into having lucrative sex with American soldiers.
When one G.I. tries to talk her into this ("Fifteen minutes and it ain't even
work"), the director sympathetically depicts Le Ly as having no choice and
shamefacedly accepting her fate. But as she walks helplessly toward the
Americans, she leaves her half-naked baby crying in the dust, in the midst of
bustling soldiers, as a truck rolls by. The audience will sense something
oversimplified and incredible in such images of Le Ly's total abjection.

Certainly "Heaven and Earth" sets off sparks with the arrival of Tommy Lee
Jones, as the one American soldier who isn't out to exploit this woman. But Mr.
Jones, whose Sgt. Steve Butler is a composite of several men the real Ms.
Hayslip knew, has a tough row to hoe. Steve changes from unbelievably nice guy
into violent, abusive husband in record time, even if these are among the film's
most colorful and involving episodes. When Mr. Stone brings Le Ly to the United
States as an astonished war bride, he is suddenly comfortable again. He may not
know what life in a Vietnamese hamlet is like, but he certainly knows how
middle-class America looks, as seen through a worldly and jaundiced eye.

"Heaven and Earth" incorporates an element of Buddhist acceptance and serenity,
particularly in the thoughts that end the film on a philosphical note. It seems
unimaginable that Mr. Stone would conclude a film about any man's wartime
experiences quite this beatifically, no matter how true the film is to Ms.
Hayslip's attitudes or her ordeal. On screen, her story is vivid but incomplete,
diminished by its nobility and by the director's obvious respect for his
subject. Mr. Stone's reverence is understandable. But he remains a fiery,
impassioned film maker, and reverence is not what he does best.

"Heaven and Earth" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult
guardian). It includes violence, profanity and sexual situations.

Heaven and Earth

Directed by Oliver Stone; written by Mr. Stone, based on the books "When Heaven
and Earth Changed Places," by Le Ly Hayslip with Jay Wurts, and "Child of War,
Woman of Peace," by Le Ly Hayslip and James Hayslip; director of photography,
Robert Richardson; edited by David Brenner and Sally Menke; music by Kitaro;
production designer, Victor Kempster; produced by Mr. Stone, Arnon Milchan,
Robert Kline and A. Kitman Ho; released by Warner Brothers. Running time: 135
minutes. This film is rated R.

Le Ly . . . Hiep Thi Le
Steve Butler . . . Tommy Lee Jones
Mama . . . Joan Chen
Papa . . . Haing S. Ngor

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hiep Thi Le, right, as the character Le Ly, and Haing S. Ngor,
who plays her father, in Oliver Stone's film "Heaven and Earth." (Roland
Neveu/Warner Brothers) (pg. C2)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              258 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Ghosts

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 609 words


Christmas comes at us like an avalanche.

It starts the day after Thanksgiving (earlier in some shopping malls) and
tumbles down upon us, picking up speed through December with shopping sprees,
Christmas sales, catalogues, greeting cards, trees, lights, tinsel, wreaths,
chestnuts, roasting fires, snowmen, office parties, reindeer, wrapping paper,
midnight Mass and Santa Claus.

Until finally, the dings and dongs of last night's silver bells give way to the
bleeps and blurps of this morning's video games, and the battle cry of the past
five weeks -- "Charge it!" -- is replaced by the more sheepish words, "If you
don't like it, we can always take it back."

In the corner, next to a package of argyle socks and a still unfolded winter
sweater, there invariably sits the latest miracle kitchen appliance, waiting to
be used but once, then forgotten by New Year's Day.

Ordinarily, this is the morning when editorial writers across the nation attempt
to muse lyrically about the "spirit of Christmas." The usual pulse points
include child-like wonder, snow (or the lack thereof), dead batteries, a longing
for a simpler time, peace on earth (almost always the lack thereof) and toys --
with the evergreen observation that this year's craze (Mighty Morphin Power
Rangers) has replaced last year's mania (Barney Dolls and the Little Princess),
which eclipsed whatever obsession came before that.

These remain valid topics. But since this Christmas marks the 150th anniversary
of Charles Dickens's "A Christmas Carol," it seems not inappropriate to look
back at some of our own ghosts of Christmas past.

In 1883, for example, The Times resoundingly condemned the newfangled trend of
Christmas trees. "A rootless and lifeless corpse," our writer complained. "Never
worthy of the day." In 1894, we railed against Christmas tree lights (unsafe and
too expensive) and in the following years criticized Christmas commercialism,
Christmas working conditions (no overtime) and Christmas traffic (no, it wasn't
called buggy-lock).

This page also took note of the impact of Christmas on America's balance of
payments. In the pre-GATT, pre-Nafta era, it appears, there was much concern
about the amount of cash that newly arrived immigrants were sending home to
their relatives in Europe each December.

And in the "whatever happened to white Christmas?" category, The Times was
complaining as far back as 1881 that the holiday weather wasn't what it used to
be, and that people might have to change their image from a red-suited Santa
dashing over snow-covered roofs to a man splashing his way through muddy streets
in a raincoat. (Two years later there was snow on the ground.)

It may also be notable that perhaps the most famous editorial of all time -- the
New York Sun's 1897 assertion that "Yes, Virginia, there is a Santa Claus" --
was written by Francis Parcellus Church, a former Civil War correspondent for
The Times.

Still, Christmas remains a time for hopes and wishes. It would be all too easy
this morning to ask for a one-day moratorium from hearing about the information
highway, personal digital assistants, telecommuting, interactive video and
Prozac, not to mention a 24-hour respite from Howard Stern and Donald Trump.

But on a more serious note, the idea of Christmas past lingers. In particular is
the memory of the Christmas of 1968 -- the December after the deaths of Robert
Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr. -- when there was a holiday truce in Vietnam.

How terribly sad that 25 years later we still wish for a holiday truce, although
of a slightly different order: a Christmas cease-fire on the streets of America.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              259 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 26, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: December 26, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1451 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   8   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 2      2  72   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 3      3  11   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                and a poem.

 4      4  18   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 5      5   3   THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of
                Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.

 6      8  41   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 7      6   2   THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A
                collection of stories about American men and the strains of
                contemporary life.

 8      8  37   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 9      7  13   LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues
                the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour."

 10    11   7   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery
                writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined
                to kill him and take his place.

 11    12  10   A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A
                young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in
                Victorian England's high society.

 12    10   4   THE TRUCE AT BAKURA, by Kathy Tyers. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.)
                The "Star Wars" Rebel Alliance responds to a call for help from
                a threatened outpost.

 13    15   5   THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Talese/Doubleday,
                $23.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly
                reappears in their lives.

 14        15   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction
                of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and
                woman and for the woman's first lover.

 15        11   SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two
                Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics
                and murder.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   6   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More
                comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 2      2  10   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 3      3  16   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 4      4  18   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 5      5  12   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 6      6   4   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                100, reflect on their lives.

 7      7  33   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 8      9  12   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by
                Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Thoughts on 43 years of
                marriage.

 9      8   3   LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The
                country singer's memoirs.

 10    10   4   THE BEST CAT EVER, by Cleveland Amory. (Little, Brown, $19.95.)
                A third volume about the trials and tribulations of the feline
                Polar Bear and his owner.

 11    15  12   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 12    11  10   STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski.
                (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played
                Capt. James Tiberius Kirk.

 13         1   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                American folklore and other sources.

 14    12  72   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 15    14   7   THE DOWNING STREET YEARS, by Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins,
                $30.) The former British Prime Minister recalls her 11 1/2
                years in power.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2  22   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 2      1   6   AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with
                Bud Shrake. (Simon & Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes
                from the golf instructor.

 3         55   HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud
                Shrake. (Simon & Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about
                playing golf.

 4      4  11   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 11, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind

BILLY, by Albert French. (Viking, $19.) A racial incident turns into
hair-raising tragedy in a classical mode when a black boy kills a white girl in
this novel of rural Mississippi in 1937.

THE COLUMBIA HISTORY OF AMERICAN POETRY, edited by Jay Parini. (Columbia
University, $59.95.) Essays by 31 scholars, many of them quirky, opinionated and
authoritative; revaluations and reverberations abound.

THE COMPLETE LYRICS OF IRA GERSHWIN, edited by Robert Kimball. (Knopf, $45.)
More than 700 lyrics displaying the fresh and inventive rhymes, supple phrasing,
intelligence and wit that made Gershwin a lyricist nobody can read for one
minute without humming.

THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER, edited by Mark Tucker. (Oxford University, $30.) A
fascinating anthology of 70 years' worth of writing about (and occasionally by)
Ellington, who clearly inspired powerful emotions in even the most sober minds.

GARBAGE, by A.R. Ammons. (Norton, $17.95.) A long poem of rueful grandeur and
splendid oddity in which what's left over is transmuted; winner of this year's
National Book Award.

HENRY JAMES: COLLECTED TRAVEL WRITINGS, edited by Richard Howard. (Library of
America, 2 vols., $35 each.) Close to 1,700 pages, in the (as it were)
aggregate, densely but never coarsely packed with the observations abroad (for
abroad he usually was) of one upon whom nothing (as his own aspiration, immodest
but justified by the sequel, had put it) was lost.

IN EUROPE'S NAME: Germany and the Divided Continent, by Timothy Garton Ash.
(Random House, $27.50.) This sober major study in recent international history
examines West Germany's conciliatory Ostpolitik: did it help or hinder the
collapse of Communism? A hard question, approached with respect for its
ambiguity.

SARAJEVO: A War Journal, by Zlatko Dizdarevic. (Fromm, $19.95.) A lament for
Bosnia and for civilization, by a newspaper editor who celebrates the endurance
and heroism of ordinary people caught in an insane conflict.

SISTERS OF FORTUNE, by Nancy Coffey Heffernan and Ann Page Stecker. (University
Press of New England, cloth, $40; paper, $15.95.) The letters of three New
Hampshire girls over 11 years to their father, who left them for the gold of
California in 1850, testify to the status of women and the dominance of hope
over experience.

SPLENDOURS AND MISERIES: A Life of Sacheverell Sitwell, by Sarah Bradford.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) Ms. Bradford, an expert biographer, illuminates
the Sitwell era and the remarkable success of Osbert, Edith and Sachie at being
taken at their own valuation.

W.E.B. DU BOIS: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919, by David Levering Lewis. (John
Macrae/Holt, $35.) The first half of the epical life (it lasted till 1963) of
the man who by World War I had become the most outspoken, eloquent and
influential black American.

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              260 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 26, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Crime

BYLINE: By Marilyn Stasio

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1143 words


"You don't want to know me," warns Eddie Dain, the tormented antihero of Joe
Gores's nerve-plucking crime novel DEAD MAN (Mysterious Press/Warner, $18.95).
"I'm bad news. Even my cat won't purr."

Before he turns himself into an implacable killing machine, Dain is a real
sweetie pie. Devoted to his wife and child, he loves rare books and a good game
of chess, and is content to make an honest, if unexciting, living by using his
formidable computer skills to track down criminal deadbeats for his lawyer
clients in San Francisco. But being young and cocky, Dain thinks he can get away
with the same insouciant game-playing techniques to catch a professional killer,
a mistake that costs the lives of his family and leaves him lusting for
vengeance.

Mr. Gores writes some of the hardest, smoothest, most lucid prose in the field;
like the mercurial Dain -- who at one point tests his reflexes by wrestling a
rattlesnake -- he plays a quick and mean mind game. After inventing a cunning
embezzlement scheme that smokes out the hit men who killed Dain's family, the
author works some elaborately brutal variations on the basic hunt-and-prey plot.
The action seethes with violence, building its killing momentum to a brilliantly
orchestrated blood bath in the treacherous swamps of Louisiana. No place for
pussycats.

William G. Tapply wrings some rare passion from Brady Coyne, the smart Boston
lawyer who is normally so imperturbable in the author's sophisticated
private-eye series. "Discreet and careful. That's me," says Coyne, who sees red
in THE SNAKE EATER (Otto Penzler, $20) when a Vietnam veteran named Daniel
McCloud is busted in his small town for growing marijuana, which he smokes to
relieve his suffering from the effects of Agent Orange. Although the big-city
lawyer is un familiar with the legal rites and ruses of rural New England, he
figures that something's screwy when the charges against his client are suddenly
dropped. And he knows something is really rotten when McCloud is killed and the
book he wrote about his war experiences disappears.

The key to the mystery, of course, rests with the missing manuscript, which is
such hot stuff that a publisher who merely agrees to give it a courtesy reading
is murdered. Through intelligent and persistent detective work, Coyne eventually
learns the ugly secret revealed in the memoir, which involves not only McCloud
and his Green Beret buddies but also military figures much higher up in the
ranks of government. Mr. Tapply is such an old hand that there's never a break
in that practiced, flowing style he has mastered over a dozen books. But this
time his theme of friendship has jagged edges of anger and pain that cut through
Coyne's reserve and draw blood.

An interesting setting, presentable characters and a decent puzzle will do the
trick for most British whodunits cast in the classic mode. Patricia Hall's first
novel, THE POISON POOL (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $19.95), goes along with the
conventions, but has more to say about modern-day environmental pollution and
moral corruption.

The industrial town in Yorkshire where an old pensioner is mugged and murdered
has a layer of grit and pockets of poverty that rarely come to light in polite
mysteries, which also tend to be more circumspect about the profound class
divisions and the overt hostility to police authority that figure prominently in
Ms. Hall's story. Even the obligatory romance -- between Inspector Alex
Sinclair, who arrests a mentally incompetent youth from the local housing
project for the killing, and Kate Weston, a social worker who helps organize the
community protest when the jailed boy commits suicide -- has a tone of
exhaustion that suits the depressing facts of life in a town that lost all value
to society when its mining industry shut down.

Although Ms. Hall's characters represent a broad cross section of humanity, the
most vibrant among them tend to be the poor but proud -- and crusty old geezers
like Sinclair's father, a die-hard socialist who keeps reminding his son where
he comes from. Good literary stock, actually.

If there really is a fountain of youth, the Florida Everglades does seem a
likely place to find it. That's what a cute old coot named Tucker Gatrell claims
to have done in THE MAN WHO INVENTED FLORIDA (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's,
$20.95), but who would believe such a notorious tall-tale artist? Not Doc Ford,
an easygoing marine biologist who lives in a stilt house on Sanibel Island and
who regularly plays the hero in Randy Wayne White's high-spirited adventure
mysteries.

As a scientist, Ford is wary of anecdotal evidence about the regenerative
properties of a sulfur spring bubbling up from an ancient Indian mound on land
that Tucker once owned. Never mind that Roscoe, Tucker's ancient gelding, grows
new testicles after drinking the miraculous waters, or that a Calusa Indian who
is Tucker's best friend takes a few sips and bounds from his deathbed. Ford, who
happens to be Tucker's nephew, is more inclined to suspect his colorful relative
of some sneaky scheme to get back his land from the developers.

Readers familiar with the novels of James W. Hall and Carl Hiaasen might hear
some echo-chamber laughter in Mr. White's comedic rages against the regional
land-grabbers and eco-politicians fighting over what's left of Florida's natural
resources. But Mr. White's loopy and lovable characters seem to have found their
own source for the funny water they've been drinking.

One can imagine the ghost of Luigi Pirandello hovering over Finn Carling as he
wrote COMMISSION (Peter Owen/Dufour, $29), a spare but searing mystery made all
the more haunting by Louis A. Muinzer's skeletal translation of the Norwegian
novelist's bone-dry prose. The unconventional story is narrated, as if from the
grave, by a famous author who has exiled himself to the island of Corsica, where
"an inner necessity" compels him to speak of himself in the third person and to
shun all companionship save that of an emaciated dog.

The bitter isolation of this poor wretch is disturbed by an unexpected
commission from a wealthy family to write a book about their youngest son,
Sebastian, whose apparent suicide in Singapore seems inexplicable and could even
have been murder. "Why does one let a dead person press into one's mind?"
complains the reclusive author, who is drawn out of exile to France, England and
China for interviews with principals in the case. Intrigued by their conflicting
views of Sebastian -- who was an antic Hellenic god, or a Christlike healer, or
a political agitator, or a gun smuggler, or "a man who accomplished hardly
anything" -- the narrator at last embraces their obsession as his own.

Because Sebastian remains an enigma, the mystery is technically unresolved. But
it is finished, in an ending that leaves one shattered.

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              261 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 26, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hollywood at a Fever Pitch

BYLINE: By Philip Weiss;   Philip Weiss is a contributing editor to Harper's and
Esquire.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 22; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 9877 words


1. Fushes and Pangs. On its own, the movie business comes up with a few of the
dreams it sells. It depends on talent for raw material, and talent must be
wooed. The real Hollywood seductions are'nt the ones we see on the screen but
the dramas in restaurants, settings with their own kind of stagy, tricked-up
opulence where talent and studio come together. That's why Australian director
Jocelyn Moorehouse is sitting in the ivy on a Sunday in late September. The Ivy
id one of Hollywood's more tasteful places. There's painted country furniture
against white plastered walls. Indian baskets, majolica plates. Moorehouse is
lovely. She has fine, pale skin and dark hair. Her arms, bared in a green
blouse, have a hint of motherly roundness. Last year, she made "Proof," a rather
experimental film about a blind photographer. Now she's beginning to work in the
States.

"What are your favorite American films?" says Scott Rudin, the producer across
from her.

"Oh -- " Moorhouse touches her chest in a show of modesty. "Cassavetes.
Scorsese. All those dark American pictures in the 70's. 'They Shoot Horses,
Don't They?' "

" 'Rocky' ended all of that," Rudin says bluntly. "That movie changed the
business. Everything had to have a happy ending."

The producer's a bearish man, 6 feet tall, 220 pounds, who seems much older than
his 35 years. Wearing a capelike shirt in an ethnic print over old jeans, white
socks and worn, black Vibram-soled shoes, he might be the head roadie for
Aerosmith, not the owner of a production company on the Paramount lot. He's
thinking of Moorhouse for the film version of "Marvin's Room," a play by Scott
McPherson.

The waiter brings him tea. Rudin's feverish; his doctors don't know why. "I
don't need the foliage," he says, tossing out the sprig of mint. "How would you
feel if this was a great movie and nobody came to it?"

"I'd be very depressed," Moorhouse says.

"Because it's part of facing this. It's a tough movie to sell," Rudin says.
That's because "Marvin's Room" is small, and about illness.

"You wouldn't think 'Fried Green Tomatoes' would be a hit," she says.

The food comes, and Rudin coughs.

"You don't have the hot flushes and pangs?" Moorhouse says.

"No," he says.

But he does, he's flushed. The prominent bulge on his forehead is misted with
sweat. His big, reddened head seems in danger of knocking a primitive oil, a
riverscape, off the wall.

"I think it's a male thing, wanting to fight it," Moorhouse says. "You get angry
at the sickness."

He doesn't respond, and when the plates are cleared there are chocolate chip
cookies, a specialty of the house. Rudin breaks half of one into his mouth and
moves to the heart of the matter.

"The way I like to work -- I think we should have this conversation now," he
says. "I like to agree to agree. I don't make you do something you don't want to
do and you don't make me do something I don't want to do. I don't think of
myself as anything other than the producer of the movie, but that's half the
job. I will kill to get something moving. Directors will tell you that."

In the silent battle for the rest of the cookies, Rudin gets most of them, then
flags the check.

We go outside, right into a movie set. Disney is filming a scene from "The
Mighty Ducks" sequel on North Robertson Boulevard. Cables cross the sidewalk. A
sound truck is jammed up opposite the boutique Agnes B.

I am following Rudin because I want to watch a player operate. Rudin has
recently emerged as a power in Hollywood. He's a throwback to the classic studio
executive of the 30's who could pull all the elements of a film together.
"Because films are so expensive, the system is stacked to make the making of
movies difficult, as a way of trying to separate the bad ones out," says Tom
Pollock, the Universal chairman, who was once Rudin's lawyer. "The volume of
pictures he gets made is striking." Nine out of ten films die in "development
hell," but Rudin bulls most of his projects through to completion.

Last summer, Rudin had three pictures in theaters: "The Firm," a blockbuster,
"Searching for Bobby Fischer," a critical success with a lackluster box office,
and "Life With Mikey," a bomb. Now he has two more: "Addams Family Values" and
"Sister Act 2." Both of them appear to be financial disappointments, but this
bad news doesn't detract from Rudin's principal achievement, getting movies
made. Five films released in the last year -- that's more than some small
studios.  In October, when the young writer Andrew Niccol was weighing offers
for a much-sought-after script called "The Truman Show," a friend advised him,
"Go with God" -- movieland bombast, but a reflection of Rudin's will. He's
famous for refusing to take no for an answer. Niccol sold the script to Rudin
for $1 million.

There are two other reasons for Rudin's ascendant reputation: he's intelligent,
and he's mean-spirited. "Studio executives respect him because he has his own
opinion; he's not just thinking, 'Can I set this picture up, can I sell it?' "
says the agent Martin Bauer. Cultural lights like Stephen Sondheim, Frederick
Barthelme, Joan Didion and David Rabe are drawn to his literary turn of mind.
Many producers have taste, Bauer notes, but they tend to be made uncomfortable
by Hollywood. Few enjoy being operators, as Rudin does. He's also an enfant
terrible. His rages and cruelties are widely reported, almost admiringly, like
the time he forced an assistant who had come late to pick him up at the airport
out of the car after the assistant announced, "My last day is today." (To which
Rudin replied, "Your last moment is now." The man walked home.)

2. THE CONVERTIBLE. Breakfast is at the Beverly Wilshire. As always, Rudin is
early, though he doesn't wear a watch. He sits reading at a table by the French
doors. A few feet away, crystal pitchers of orange juice and grapefruit juice
sweat in a deep silver bowl filled with ice.

A couple of agents drop by the table. John Burnham works at William Morris. He's
something of a dandy. He wears a good brown suit and is holding a fine leather
datebook. Bill Block, an agent who has cultivated a reputation as a street
fighter, comes over, too. Block and Burnham talk about a raft trip they took.
Jeffrey Katzenberg, the Disney film chief, was on it. So were Tom Pollock and
Matt Williams, a creator of "Home Improvement."

"The greatest concentration of evil ever in the world," Rudin says.

Burnham looks over at Rudin. "Expert testimony," he says, then sits down.

Block goes, and a fellow William Morris agent, Chris Godsick, arrives with their
client: Chen Kaige, the Chinese director of "Farewell My Concubine," an epic
about opera and homosexuality in the People's Republic. The reason for the
breakfast is for Rudin to meet Chen before he goes back to Beijing. Chen is tall
and urbane. His black hair has strokes of gray in it and his blue suit looks
expensive.

The Hollywood dance begins, producer and talent circling warily, flirtatiously,
finally shamelessly.

"Do you think of making a film here?" Rudin says.

"This is what I want to do." Chen says.

"What's an American film you might have made?" Rudin asks.

"I think I could have made 'Godfather.' Also 'Deer Hunter.' Because I was a
soldier."

Godsick says, "Tell the story about Vietnam."

Chen brings his hand to his chin. "I went to Laos in the early 70's for six
months. Building roads. I'm a survivor. We were bombed by B-52's. . . . "

He pauses. "For the first time, I understand what the meaning of war was,
because I saw American soldiers who were P.O.W.'s. What impressed me mostly. . .
. " Another pause. "Their eyes. Blue eyes. Totally scared blue eyes."

After breakfast, there follows the ritual of the cars: tickets given to valets,
palmed tips. Then a brief gathering of tension, as the cars come. This is a
moment of status revealed.

Burnham turns to Rudin. "Did you get that car?"

"I sold it." the producer replies. Last summer, Paramount gave Rudin a Mercedes
when "The Firm" topped $45 million in grosses.

"Did you actually take possession of it, or did they chisel you out of it?"

"No, I sold it back to them. I got $75,000."

"What color was it?"

"Black."

"I have the same thing, a 300." Burnham motions to his car. "Why didn't you want
it?"

"It's a convertible. I don't want to drive around in a convertible." Rudin
frowns. He's serious about this. "Someone could shoot me."

Burnham looks at Rudin's car, a late-model black BMW 750il. "They could shoot
you just as easily in what you're driving," he says.

3. THE CARAVAN. Rudin tells me to follow him. The BMW skims past parked cars and
bursts to speeds of 55 in 25 m.p.h. school zones. He cruises through yellow
lights as I floor my Buick to keep up. Much of the time he's on the phone.

The Paramount Pictures lot is a long stockade wall of cream-colored stucco.
Rudin turns in under the mission-style ironwork arches and waves me past the
guard. Up and down the lot, glossy-leaved ficus trees are pruned smooth as
licked lollipops, and bird-of-paradise flowers open their lusty orange beaks in
border gardens. I park next to a lot that's dug five feet into the ground. Later
I learn they empty and fill it with water for ocean shots.

Rudin is waiting outside the Cecil B. DeMille Building. "I'm no good at
caravaning," he says with a sharp laugh.

His office is on the second floor. The 4-by-8-foot desk is made of bird's-eye
maple, and is empty. There's no computer in sight. An assistant, a dark-haired
young man, comes up to the desk with a book held open like an expensive menu. He
reads down a list of phone calls, about 35 that morning, and Rudin barks names
back in the order he'd like to respond.

A small man with long, light-brown hair appears in the doorway: it's Paul
Feldsher, the president of Scott Rudin Productions. He's about 30 and
good-looking in a weathered, Brat-Packish way. He wears an open sweater over a
white T-shirt.

"I read your script," Rudin says. "It's not for me. I don't get the story."

Feldsher slumps. He has been pushing his friend Sean Penn's script "The Crossing
Guard." "What do you mean you don't get the story?"

"It's not about something."

"It certainly is about something."

"To me it was just like the same scene over and over and over. I can't go talk
someone into this."

Rudin means the people who put up money for his pictures -- the Paramount
president, Stanley Jaffe, and the head of the movie division, Sherry Lansing.
Rudin's method is to consolidate power. He takes on only those projects he
likes. Then he gets all the higher-ups he needs on his team through jawboning
and force of will. He has a clear vision of the end result, and he doesn't like
surprises.

The phone chimes (no discordant rings here), and Rudin calls out, "Hold up,
guys." His assistants stop the calls.

"Would you sit down with Sean?" Feldsher says.

"I would sit down with him, but what would I say? To me, it was really a
wipeout. I don't want to insult him."

Feldsher doesn't flag. "I think the relationship between Jack Nicholson and
David Morse is phenomenal."

"Who does David Morse play?"

"David Morse plays the guy who gets out of jail, the drunk driver. Annette
Bening is the ex-wife. Robin Wright is the girlfriend."

"I don't want to live with that material for two years," Rudin says. "If you
want me to have a meeting with him, I will."

"I don't need to deliver a meeting with him. I think there are a lot of
compelling reasons to make it."

"To me, there are no compelling reasons to make anything aside from the
screenplay. I don't think any of the dialogue will work in a movie. People stop
to make speeches for no reason."

Feldsher crosses his arms. "It's not a huge, sweeping movie. But it is Jack
Nicholson, and it is being done for a price."

A price means cheap. Penn has put together a $10 million film that he hopes to
direct. Rudin has been trying for a while to work with Penn. Other studios are
interested, but this isn't Rudin's material. It's raw, not glamorous. Above all,
it's fully developed. Rudin likes projects he can control, shape.

"So was 'Ironweed' done with Jack Nicholson," he says.

"That wasn't done for a price."

"It's possible to do a movie with Jack Nicholson that goes out and grosses
$150," Rudin says. "That's no assurance. He'd be good in anything."

Feldsher leaves. "Let's go guys," Rudin shouts. The calls start coming in again.


4. A DREAM. Rudin drinks lots of Evian water to try to keep the fever down. He
gets the water the right temperature by mixing unrefrigerated bottles with
refrigerated bottles. His desk is strewn with Evian caps.

In the outer office, three young male assistants mill around four computers and
keep the calls coming. Rudin likes to have calls lined up one after another so
he doesn't have to waste a second. That's when he starts screaming. The turnover
rate among his assistants is very high. When he calls you, you often get put on
hold, then you must hope your turn will come. Sometimes the hushed voice of a
persecuted assistant breaks in -- "We'll have to return" -- and the line goes
dead. One friend of mine compares the experience with getting a call from an
operating room. The Hollywood agent Lynn Pleshette, who was called at home at 11
one night and pressured to accept a pre-emptive $1 million bid on a client's
screenplay, told Rudin's assistant: "Let's be a sane person. It's not like we're
trying to find a cure for a disease."

Now and then the phone chain breaks. The moment feels strange and scary, because
Rudin thrives on vigorous exchange, and suddenly he's alone, unwanted. During
one lull, Rudin looks up at me:

"I had a dream the other night that I can't wait to tell my doctor," he says. "I
went to get a blood test. The nurse was drawing blood, filling a bottle. I don't
look because I can't stand the sight of my own blood, and I looked over at the
end as she was taking the last vial off my arm and it was filled with, like,
vinaigrette. Which she was drawing from my arm. It was so perfect."

5. PINK LADY. Paul Rudnick, the playwright and screenwriter on the "Addams
Family" movies, comes in. He has just flown in from New York and, dropping his
briefcase on the desk, takes out a card he got in the mail. It's from a
synagogue.

"Do you know what 'Tishri' is?" he says.

"No," Rudin says, uninterested. "Anyone famous on the plane?"

"Cindy Crawford -- who I've been on planes many times with -- and a very
handsome man who looked like he might have been a model. Last time I was on the
plane, she was with Richard Gere, and I kept looking at them to see if they
looked right at you, like 'I'm just a person, treat me like a person,' or if
they look right past you like, 'I know you're staring and, yes, we are another
species.' " Rudnick pauses. "They tend to do that. But she is incredibly
beautiful."

Rudnick is handsome, with thick dark hair and an aquiline nose, but he's goofy
too. He wrote a late draft of "The Addams Family" and an early draft of "Sister
Act" for Rudin, two campy comedies that grossed more than $100 million and
marked the producer's commercial breakout. "The Addams Family," a 1991 film, was
directed by a first-timer, Barry Sonnenfeld. That same year, Rudin presided over
another fine effort by a first-timer, "Little Man Tate," directed by Jodie
Foster. The range and quality of the two pictures suggested the arrival of an
impresario. Before that, Rudin had been indistinguishable from the pack. His
credits included "Regarding Henry," "Flatliners" and "Pacific Heights."

Rudin yells at an assistant, "Do you think you'll even vaguely perform your
duties as my employee?" Rudnick turns to me with mock foreboding.

"Has he threatened you yet?"

"No."

"Well, don't tease him," he says. "And don't put your fingers through the cage."

Rudin grabs the phone. A money battle is brewing over some jokes he's trying to
add to "Addams Family Values" a few weeks before it opens. As he talks, he
squeezes three Evian bottle caps in one hand, clicking them together a la
Captain Queeg.

"Where's Wade?" Rudin shouts, hanging up.

"He's in the bathroom," says another assistant.

"For the 400th time!"

"Remove his colon," Rudnick whispers.

Barry Sonnenfeld walks in. He's the director of the "Addams Family" sequel too,
a tall, skinny man with a round face. He wears wire-rimmed glasses and has a
kinetic quality.

"Do you know what 'Tishri' is?" Rudnick asks.

"No. It sounds good, though."

Rudin swivels in his chair to look at Sonnenfeld. "You want to stay and join
this meeting? You have nothing to do."

The producer and writer are meeting to start talking about "Addams III."
Sonnenfeld bounces on the balls of his feet next to the desk. In a sense, Rudin
made Sonnenfeld, who was a cinematographer until he got to direct "The Addams
Family." Now Sonnenfeld is trying to move on, past the high jinks. At first, he
told me, he'd even held out against doing "Addams Family Values," but changed
his mind after seeing Rudnick's script, and after the studio offered "several
millions of dollars."

"I have no desire to know anything about the new movie," Sonnenfeld says.

"Except how much you're being paid to direct it," Rudin says.

The director points at Rudin. "I will bet you right now $3 million that I don't
direct 'Addams Family III.' "

"That's a ridiculous bet for me to take," Rudin says.

"But not for me," Sonnenfeld says, grinning. "It's pretty darn smart for me."

"Do you like the wellness wigwam?" Rudnick asks.

It's another joke they want to add to "Addams Family Values," for a summer-camp
scene. Rudin looks at Sonnenfeld. "You're the auteur," he says. Sonnenfeld makes
a face.

"Wellness wigwam it is," Rudin says.

The director leaves, but appears in the doorway a minute later, waving his
middle finger wildly at Rudin's back.

Rudin and Rudnick have their own shorthand. They are both gay. They know the
theater inside and out. And they're given to telegraphic pronouncements like
"Let's try a 'Guardsman' thing," a reference, Rudin explains later, to the
Molnar play the Lunts performed on Broadway in the 1920's, and to the device of
a husband disguising himself to test his wife's loyalty.

Like "Addams" II, "Addams" III, if it ever gets made, will be a love story
involving an interloper. This is necessary, Rudin explains, because the Addams
Family is made up of unflawed characters who cannot drive the narrative in the
traditional fashion, i.e., presenting problems that need to be resolved. The
problems must be supplied from outside, by people who intrude on the family.

The conversation turns to the actor Armand Assante.

"I liked him in whatchimacalit, 'Mambo Kings,' " Rudnick says.

"And he did that Napoleon play," Rudin says. "What was it called. That horrible
play, he and Roy Dotrice?"

"About two powerful people?" Rudnick says.

"Someone was the Pope and somebody was Napoleon," Rudin says. "He was also in,
remember what musical he was in? 'Boccaccio.' "

"I vaguely remember that 'Boccaccio' existed. You win," Rudnick goes sotto voce,
"on Gay Jeopardy."

After that, a Paramount auditor named Crystal Hawkins comes into the office.
Hawkins is distressed that the shots Rudin wants to add to "Addams Family
Values" will cost $450,000, and the film has already gone over its nearly $50
million budget. Rudin promptly insults the auditor ("I'd say I'm happy to meet
you, but I'm not"), then takes gruff control of the meeting. He's damned if some
green eyeshade from the studio is going to "bust" him, "bust" being his word for
calling someone on a scam. He uses the tactic himself all the time to bring
directors and writers into line. Now he dodges Hawkins by announcing that the
five-second shot he wants most dearly -- an "applause moment" in which a baby
born to Morticia and Gomez Addams is propelled into the sky and appears in a
Boeing 747's window -- will come in for under $90,000.

We all walk over to the Studio Theater for a preview of "Addams Family Values."
It is a clever movie, with all the Rudin trademarks: energy, lavish production
and surface brilliance. But after half an hour of good laughs, the picture's
soullessness grows exhausting. The perfect characters offer no access. The love
story, involving Fester, is empty. It would have been easy to sympathize with
Fester if he had displayed some awareness of his state. But he is only
grotestque, and the movie has no poetry. This is Rudin's artistic limitation,
fear of rawness. "Searching for Bobby Fischer" suffered from the same thing.
Emotional honesty might have brought it to life. And "Bobby Fischer" wasn't
nearly as hollow as "The Firm."

The preview gets a tepid response. The mall rats the studio has summoned from
the real world stream out quietly past Stanley Jaffe and Sherry Lansing.
Executives stand around in funereal clumps. This is flop sweat; even Rudin seems
nervous.

Rudnick, Rudin and Sonnenfeld repair to Orso and get a table in the garden, by a
brick wall. They discuss a new ending for the picture, and right after Rudin's
pizza comes, the waiter sets a drink at the producer's elbow. Rudin doesn't
drink. It's a pink lady, courtesy of a man a couple of tables away. The man
comes over. He has long hair that shadows his face and wears a black jacket and
black paratrooperish pants with a large belt. It's Alek Keshishian, Madonna's
collaborator on the movie "Truth or Dare."

The check comes, and the movie makers play a game called Stupid Jews. The object
of the game is to come up with the names of the stupidest Jews they know.

6. THE PRODUCER'S HOUSE. The producer's house is, by movie-mogul standards,
relatively modest, a $1 million clapboard cottage tucked in the Hollywood Hills.
If Rudin truly cared about money, it might be a $5 million house. He doesn't not
care -- placards with the grosses from his blockbusters decorate his walls, and
his standard fee is $1 million. (His total take can be several times that
because he also gets a percentage of the gross.) But then if he didn't care, he
wouldn't be a player. Bougainvillea creep out over an edge of the roof, whose
ceramic shingles imitate thatch. Up and down the street, security signs say
Armed Response.

Inside the house, there are some museum-quality pieces, notably a magnificent
pair of Arts and Crafts andirons he bought at Rudy Vallee's estate sale, but the
place has an unlived-in feeling. Rudin says he has not eaten a meal at his house
in the four years he has owned it. The living room is painted pale yellow --
just like his office -- and has an identical iron-legged coffee table. The only
signs of life are the pile of scripts on the floor and the telephone plopped
down by the armchair. "He doesn't have a life . . . and he reads," is the way
Brandon Tartikoff explains Rudin's success. Reading is unusual in the movie
business. Most commercial producers insist on reading "the coverage" -- not the
script itself but summaries prepared by assistants. To have any place amid the
city's ravening appetites, literacy has to disguise itself. The leading
bookstore is called Book Soup.

The writer Barbara Benedek arrives. She is a small, pretty woman with a cap of
dark hair and a luxe look about her, a good leather bag and a cashmere sweater.
Her blue jeans have a hole over the knee that Benedek, co-author of "The Big
Chill," describes as "hippieish" but that Rudin, who wears an aggressive print
shirt in the maternity cut he favors, observes is actually "hip."

Rudin has hired Benedek to write a remake of the Audrey Hepburn movie "Sabrina."
He wants Mike Nichols to direct. I've heard him selling the director on the
phone: "Mr. Nichols. . . . This should be something that would be very
pleasurable to make. It's people talking, in beautifully appointed rooms. . . .
It should be Harrison, Redford or Gere."

He and Benedek read through her latest draft. The meeting, like most of Rudin's
meeting with talent, has something of a Beauty and the Beast feeling to it. The
Beast is still the more compelling character.

At one point, Rudin drops the script in his lap.  "Isn't it interesting how the
three great movie farces are all set on trains?" he says. " 'Palm Beach Story.'
'Some Like It Hot.' 'Twentieth Century.' It's because the action has to be
contained. People have to enter and exit but have no way out."

They take a break. Someone from Rudin's office has left snack food in the
kitchen, and black bread, sliced, with raisins in it.

"I had a dream the other night," Rudin says. He tells her the dream about
drawing blood. "It had those little flecks of oregano and garlic. It was
definitely vinaigrette."

When they get back to work, the subject of nurturing comes up.

"I've never been nurtured," Rudin says. "Have you?"

"I've always been nurtured," Benedek says.

"You have!" Rudin gives a delighted shout. "I've never been nurtured."

Through the rest of the afternoon, the glare from the sun comes off the swimming
pool that he has also never used in four years, and, glancing through the French
doors, makes a pattern on the ceiling that slowly ebbs away.

7. SOME RUMORS. It's the weekend, and Rudin and I are driving around in his car.
Plastic cassette boxes of operas and concerts slide around the platform between
the front seats as he rounds corners at high speed.

"I heard a rumor," I say, "that you found out one of your assistants had left a
message off a phone log and you called him in and held your hands out like
scales and said: 'Six million Jews in the Holocaust. A message left off my log.
I'd say they're about the same.' "

Rudin barks with laughter. "That is totally untrue. I take the Holocaust too
seriously to make a joke about it. I don't ever do that stuff with someone in
the room. If I'm going to take somebody on, I'm going to do it privately."

"But couldn't the assistant have told someone?"

"There are 30 stories that are as good as that that are true," Rudin says.

"I heard another rumor, that you were driving in your car and a call came in and
you shouted, 'How did you get this number?' and you threw the phone at the
windshield. And it was your mother."

Rudin laughs. The inquest invigorates him. "I once threw the phone into my
windshield when I was on the phone with Jodie Foster. It was her telling me she
wanted to cast Harry Connick in 'Little Man Tate' and me saying, 'Not without a
test you're not.' I don't want to be told who's going to be in a movie I'm
producing."

"Was there a test?"

"Yeah."

"What was the effect of throwing the phone."

"It broke the windshield."

I try another rumor, that he harassed a former employee till she got a
restraining order.

"Absolutely untrue."

Rudin says the story may be a garbled version of another incident, when he
blocked an assistant from leaving to work at Columbia.

"I slapped an inducement to breach action on Columbia. It was basically, 'I have
a contract with you, I own you for this period of time, you can't work for
anybody else.' So until it was settled, for a year, I kept her from working."

"Could she resign?"

"No. She had a contract."

"Would she be paid?"

"She would be paid, but she refused to come to work, so I didn't pay her."

"How could she have had her freedom?"

"If I had let her go."

"Why did she choose to leave?"

"I was too hard on her."

"In what way?"

"I expected her to do her job."

Later I say, "The term control freak has pejorative implications."

"I think it's totally positive," he says. "Someone has to be the boss."

8. ELEMENTS OF FARCE. We end up at Hugo's, a Hollywood hangout on Santa Monica
Boulevard. Rudin parks his car illegally by the front door, and volunteers
another story, about parking tickets. For a time, he used the handicapped
parking space on the Paramount lot. Finally, the guards got sick of warning him
and having him smile back and they called the Los Angeles police. Rudin got
three $330 tickets before moving on.

"I loosely interpreted handicapped as covering emotionally handicapped in
addition to physically," he explains.

Inside, he orders Cheerios and talks about the theater. It's his first love.
Movies as an art form don't truly interest him. "If I never saw another movie
again, it wouldn't be that big a deal to me." He longs to have a position of
influence in the theater. Last spring, he lost $1.3 million on a Broadway show,
"Face Value," a play by David Henry Hwang, that closed before its opening.  It
was his "tuition," he says, to study theater and how it works and doesn't work,
in the same way he once set about to study movies. In March he'll be producing
Stephen Sondheim's next musical, "Passion," in collaboration with the Shubert
Organization. He has an ongoing deal with Jujamcyn Theaters to mount shows on
Broadway.

I ask him to elaborate on what he said earlier about farce.

"Farce needs desperation. It needs people with different agendas being trapped
in a room together. Read Feydeau's 'Flea in Her Ear.' "

"Feydeau?"

Rudin shuts his eyes. "Don't make me sound pretentious. I'm going to sound like
a total schmuck."

A good-looking, forty-five-ish man wearing a New York Yankees cap lopes over to
our table. It's Gregory Mosher, the former artistic director of Lincoln Center.
He has praise for "Searching for Bobby Fischer."

"I was just bowled over," he says, sinking to his knees next to Rudin. "I was
just completely thrilled. I talked to Joey" -- Mantegna -- "for a half hour.
Dead on." He clenches his fist in the air. "Dead on. Bravo. That was real good
movie-making."

Mosher goes and Rudin frowns. Taking in only $15 million at the box office,
"Bobby Fischer" may cost Paramount several million. "People tell me they like
it, in the sense of admiration mixed with pity," Rudin says. "In the sense of, I
have cancer."

Much as Rudin loves Mantegna's work, Mantegna is not a screen star. Rudin rues
the fact he did not have enough confidence to battle with the studio for the
extra millions it would have required to get a box-office actor in the role, say
Tom Hanks. And if Rudin had got Robin Williams for the role of the Svengali
teacher, Pandolfini, played by Ben Kingsley, then, maybe, the movie would have
been a hit.

I argue with Rudin. The movie without Kingsley and his dark, foxlike restraint
is not a movie I'd want to see. The producer insists the film would have lost
nothing.

He finishes his Cheerios and we come out into the sunlight, into one of those
disconnected, nearly blasted Hollywood landscapes -- curving highway, low
buildings, expensive cars. The light is white, clifflike, opaque.

"No ticket," Rudin cries. He seems disappointed.

9. THE EISENBERG PRINCIPLE. At 8 on Monday morning, a couple of film editors
come into Rudin's office with Sonnenfeld to talk about adding jokes.

"American bald eagle got a laugh at the last good preview," the producer says.

"No, I don't think so, I'll play the DAT." Sonnenfeld says. He means a tape of
the audience.

Rudin coughs. He sounds as if he has TB. Rudin says he wants a joke to be "more
Jewish," then goes out to take a call.

Sonnenfeld puts his cowboy boots up on the coffee table and looks quizzically at
me.

"What's the name of that thing in science and statistics, where the presence of
the person changes everything?" he says.

"The Heisenberg Principle."

"Eisenberg?"

"Heisenberg."

"Well, that's what you're doing to him," Sonnenfeld says. "He's really on his
best behavior."

Rudin comes back in and Sonnenfeld says, "So -- how is your Mom?"

"It was your Mom."

They laugh uproariously. Neither man gets along with his mother. Sonnenfeld says
his mother overprotected him to the point where he wishes she were dead. He
tells about the time she had him paged at an Earth Day concert at Madison Square
Garden at 2 in the morning: "Barry Sonnenfeld, call your mother."

Rudin doesn't talk about his parents. This much he tells me: He grew up in
Baldwin, L.I., the older of two brothers, and fled after high-school graduation.
He became a gofer for theater producers, and, within a couple of years, the
owner of a Broadway casting office. He moved to Hollywood at 21, and found a
succession of powerful mentors, notably Larry Gordon, the head of production at
Fox. Gordon brought Rudin to Fox and, at 27, Rudin succeeded Gordon as
production head. He learned about showmanship from Barry Diller, then Fox's
chairman. At that time, Rudin wore a suit, and often felt like a banker. Soon he
had enough power to wear jeans. He says he hasn't been home to Baldwin in 10
years, and he has seen his parents only twice since then: once at his brother's
wedding, later at his nephew's bris.

"I said hello. That was all."

He tells me to call his brother, Bruce Rudin, an orthopedic surgeon in
Wilmington, Del. Bruce Rudin, 32, says his brother operated on a different
plane, even as a little boy. "I was downstairs in the garage working on a
minibike, and he would be upstairs recasting 'Aida.' This was at 11." Bruce says
that after high school his brother shocked their parents by declaring he was
turning down a scholarship to Brown. Not going to college -- the notion was
heretical to middle-class Jewish parents. "I have something better," Rudin said,
with a vision no one else shared.

But Bruce Rudin says his parents take deep pride in their older son's
accomplishments and are aware of "everything he's done."

The way Scott Rudin tells it, there's an Old World aura about his progress, as
if he were escaping a pogrom. "I was a Jewish kid from Long Island who didn't
want to be a Jewish kid from Long Island," Rudin says. "There's no mystery to
it. It's fairly self-explanatory. My father sold men's clothing. I don't know
where he works now. He was a salesman. You know, with sample cases."


10. A KANGAROO EMERGENCY. Feldsher brings the novelist and screenwriter Trey
Ellis into the office, and Rudin sprawls in the big kilim-upholstered armchair
against the wall he uses for such meetings. From where Ellis sits, he can look
out the window at a feather-duster palm tree swaying in the breeze and at
Paramount's fake sky, a five-story concrete slab painted blue for sky shots.
From where he sits, Rudin can see his phone.

The phone has a screen showing who's calling and buttons on it that allow him to
communicate with his assistants while talking to someone else. Every time the
phone chimes, he reaches over to press a button. He can hit buttons for food or
water. He can hit one that says "Save Me" when he wants to get pulled out of an
uncomfortable meeting.

Rudin's phone chimes, and he slings up the receiver.

"Happy New Year, honey, how are you?" he says. "You looked so good on
'Letterman,' Ellen, the idea you had a baby like how long ago? It was
unbelievable. You just looked fantastic. Will you read my play? It's really
good. You will win the Tony in this part. It's a great part."

He hangs up with a thrilled sigh.

"I love Ellen Barkin so much," he says. "I want to do the life of Dawn Steel
starring Ellen Barkin. It's like perfect casting." Steel, who once ran Columbia
Pictures, is now an independent producer.

"Is Dawn really that mean?" Feldsher says.

"Barkin's incredible, but her face . . . ," Trey Ellis says, pulling at the
bones in his face. "It looks like she's been in the ring."

Rudin is excited. He seems to be a little in love. "I'm totally insane for
Ellen," he confesses. "I have this masochistic relationship where I beg her and
she sort of [expletive] all over me. I've offered this woman 30 movies."

As the meeting ends, the sun is full on the west windows of the office, and an
assistant closes the blinds. Rudin is lobster red. The later it gets in the day,
he says, the higher his fever goes.

Feldsher returns, round-shouldered, anticipating the lash. He says Jocelyn
Moorhouse is having trouble making a meeting they've scheduled; she has to get
back home to Australia to produce a movie her husband is directing.

"There's a kangaroo emergency?" Rudin says contemptuously. "Excuse me."

"She feels this weird obligation to her husband," Feldsher says.

"She should get over it."

11. AN ACTOR WITH IDEAS. In New York, Rudin stays at the St. Regis and keeps his
room extra cool. His messages arrive in envelopes under the door; every few
minutes another envelope chaffs against the carpet. He tells a composer that a
tango written for "Addams Family Values" is "too gentile" and, when I ask
whether Sonnenfeld will direct the next "Addams" movie, he says: "Absolutely! I
looked at the blueprints for his new house in the Hamptons -- 8,000 square feet.
I said, 'I own you.' "

At 3 o'clock, there's a casting meeting in Robert Benton's office in Carnegie
Hall Tower. The director of "Kramer vs. Kramer," Benton has been hired by Rudin
to direct "Nobody's Fool," starring Paul Newman. The script is based on the
Richard Russo novel about a ne'er do well and his grandson in an upstate New
York town. Benton, sixtyish, has snowy hair and owlish eyeglasses. He wears the
charcoal flannels he wore to church that morning.

Rudin, Benton and two casting agents sit at an oval table with a view of Central
Park through dirty windows. Rudin's manner is congenial, despite the fact that
the week before in Los Angeles, he was, to use a Rudinism, "muscling" Benton,
manipulating associates to put the kibosh on the director's choice for a major
role. Here's what he told the agent Sam Cohn: "The idea that we would do a $20
million movie with a guy at the center of it who is a vanilla wafer is lunatic.
Part of being a producer is stopping a mistake from being made. Producing is not
abdicating."

The office grows dim as they slog through a long list of names for the several
male roles. There's unspoken tension between Rudin and the rest, between Los
Angeles (commerce) and New York (art). They're talking grosses when a casting
agent asks how Robert Altman's "Short Cuts" is doing, and Rudin says: "People in
L.A. hate it, viciously hate it. Because it's been insanely overhyped and it's
demeaning to L.A. and critical of how people live there."

That's the way he is throughout, the most forceful and interesting person at the
table. Benton mentions that a certain actor reads books to form ideas about a
character, and Rudin says, "Is there a way you can talk to him and make sure his
ideas are your ideas?"

In general, they talk about actors as difficult but gifted human beings. One
actor they're considering for the film is Gary Oldman. He has a self-confidence
that verges on arrogance.

"He's a very generous actor," Benton says, turning emotional. "The energy would
ricochet between him and Paul."

Benton sits back. "He's just a brilliant actor," he says. "Where does that come
from?"

Briefly the room hushes with shared awe of talent, the mystery of talent, before
returning to the list of supporting roles.

One of the casting agents says she's been getting pressure from Randy Quaid's
people to look at "the new Randy Quaid."

"The new Randy Quaid?" Rudin says.

"He's lost a lot of weight and looks a lot like his brother," says the casting
agent.

"He'll never look enough like his brother."

12. THE CHAMP. Back in Los Angeles, Rudin spends the morning on the phone. He
has to line up the Paramount plane to take Bruce Willis to a reading in New York
with Benton because Willis doesn't fly commercial for security reasons. He has
to dissuade an assistant, Peggy Siegal, from using the Festival Theater for the
Addams premiere by chanting: "It's a pigsty. Every other seat is broken. It
smells like rat poison. It looks like Dresden." He calls one assistant a
"platehead" and tells his chief aide, Brandon Camp, to "get me another idiot."

Feldsher comes in at 12:45 and Rudin reports that the New York Stock Exchange
has halted trading in Paramount. It's the day QVC is upping its offer for the
company. Rudin doesn't seem worried. He's not a stockholder, and a change in
ownership is not likely to affect his own stock in Hollywood.

We take Rudin's car down Melrose to a place called Patina. Feldsher holds a
stack of books on the Bible that he's gathered for the lunch with Muhammad Ali.
"He's interested in Biblical scholarship," Feldsher says. "That's what this
lunch is about."

Rudin nods. He's on the car phone, cooing to a company vice president with whom
he's wrapping up the "Addams" film: "You vixen, you slut."

Patina has an airy feeling. The doors are of brushed steel, and the decor is
minimal. The producers get a table in the corner, and the maitre d'hotel, a
blonde with hair teased up high, comes over.

"We understand you have a very special guest," she says, and when she goes away
Rudin mocks her, mocks the local values: "A very special guest, sure -- Angie
Dickinson."

Then Muhammad Ali comes in with his wife, Lonnie. He moves slowly, carrying a
brown suitcase in his right hand and a black attache in his left. He's also got
a sheaf of pamphlets titled "Introducing Islam" shoved into his waistband.

Ali is so big he's sculptural. His forearms are smooth and massive; so is his
face. Afflicted with Parkinson's disease, he looks at you with a benign,
unassailable expression, and his voice comes out in a low whisper. Rudin is
making an offer to buy the rights to Ali's life for nearly $2 million. The lunch
is for them to get acquainted. Feldsher huddles with the champ to discuss
religion. Ali matches Feldsher's Bible literature with a blue paperback he lifts
out from his suitcase. It's called "Contradictions and Errors in the Biblical
Text," by Izhar-Ul-Haq.

The waiter announces the specials: "Cauliflower soup over crab legs. Hawaiian
opa. . . . "

"Muhammad will have chicken," says Lonnie.

Ali shadow-jabs Feldsher with his left hand. "That would be the second time this
week," Feldsher says. "I got hit in the head Saturday."

"You did?" Rudin says.

Feldsher shuts his eyes. "I told you this story, Scott," he says. "See -- you
never listen."

Feldsher tells the story of an altercation at a traffic light. The other guy hit
him over the head with a beer bottle.

Rudin nods. "That rings a bell."

Feldsher says, "A friend of mine says: 'Paul, you're a Jew. You don't get out of
cars.' "

Rudin tells his own story, about getting mugged in a subway station as a kid.

Ali tilts toward him. "You a Jew?" he says hoarsely.

People laugh, and Lonnie says, "Muhammad, anyone ever beat you up?"

Ali gets a puckish expression. "No, I took off" -- he skids the heel of his
right hand against the palm of his left -- "like a Jew."

Coffee comes for Ali, and the champ drips it on the stiff white table cloth as
he sips. Rudin tells Ali he saw him years ago on the stage, in the musical "Buck
White."

Ali bends over the table. He's radiant. Everyone's waiting to see what he's
going to do next. A choked croon issues from his mouth. He sings an entire song.
You can't really make out the words.

Later, in the office, Rudin and Feldsher have an almost spiritual disagreement.
In Ali, Feldsher saw a man at peace, Rudin saw a wreck. He says he didn't
understand anything the champ said.

"But he is so dignified," Feldsher says.

Rudin ignores the comment.

"You need a fractured structure so the movie doesn't end with the end of his
life," he says, walking around his big desk. "The absolute highest moment in
relief against the lowest moment, in an '8 1/2,' 'All That Jazz' kind of way. It
could be an incredible movie or it could be very depressing."

"I'm not worried about that," Feldsher says.

"Well, you ought to be. Because it's real. The guy has a debilitating illness.
You can't end the movie with it."

Feldsher leaves. I ask the name of Ali's musical number. Rudin turns in his
chair, grabs a well-worn copy of "Theatre World, 1969-1970," off his shelf.
"Mighty Whitey," he says, then calls in an assistant to tape a tear in the book
jacket.

13. ON FIRE AT THE GRILL. We walk across the Paramount lot together to a meeting
at the Zukor Building. In the lobby, there's a giant bust of Adolph Zukor, the
studio founder, and in the conference room, there's a full-length painting of
Zukor holding a stack of papers, maybe a script. He looks like William Penn
brandishing his treaty with the Indians. On closer inspection, Zukor's papers
are some sort of Paramount corporate document. (One day in Rudin's office, a
veteran comedy writer, Jerry Belson, recalled meeting Zukor in the Paramount
commissary: "He was like 96 years old. They were celebrating his birthday. They
were helping him chew and everything. He was telling a story, I swear to God,
about screwing Samuel Clemens on a story deal -- happily remembering screwing
Mark Twain.")

Marketing people have gathered at a pink granite table to discuss promotion of
"Addams Family Values." High on Rudin's agenda is muscling Lorne Michaels to
promote the movie on "Saturday Night Live." It's doable because Michaels is a
producer on the Paramount lot, and he owes Rudin -- he shot a trailer for
"Wayne's World" on the first Addams set, giving his own film a boost. (Later,
Michaels comes through, putting Addams characters Wednesday and Pugsley on the
show.)

We rush off to lunch at the Grill in Beverly Hills. The Grill is very masculine
-- white tiles, green leather booths. The maitre d'hotel wears an orange tie
painted with a woman who looks like Jayne Mansfield.

"Hey, Ron!" Rudin waves to Ronald Perelman, chairman of Revlon, in the next
booth. Lee Iacocca shakes Rudin's hand and sits down with Perelman.

A small, thick man slides in across from us. "I'm up to my [expletive] in
billionaires," he whispers.

It's Ed Hookstratten, a Hollywood lawyer who represents television stars. He's
here to talk about a pet project, a movie about his friend Jessica Savitch, the
NBC anchorwoman who died in a freak auto accident in 1983 at age 35. The project
has kicked around at Disney for years. Now Rudin's become involved, on the
condition that he can use a script by Joan Didion and John Gregory Dunne.
Finally, the project is moving.

"What was she like? Rudin asks. "Tell me about her."

"Jesse?" Hookstratten says tenderly. "She was absolutely beautiful. She was 5-5,
she had an almost hourglass figure. All right -- she had a little bit of a
speech impediment, she had a little trouble with her L's and W's, but her
ambition worked her through that. At NBC News, when she finally got to the
networks, she went buttoned up to here." He holds his fingers at his neck. "And
she had a 36-inch bust. She never showed that. She dressed for air. She was very
private."

"Wonderful," Rudin says. "How smart was she?"

"Very smart. But her ambition and her insecurity drove her wacko."

Hookstratten begins sawing through his gravlax with a fork, and Rudin explains
why Disney couldn't make the film.

"Every time they tried to make her likable at the beginning of the movie, there
was no movie," he says. "But the Dunnes understand ambition, and that, to me, is
what it's about, it's what price glory? I think this girl, when you meet her,
has to be the roughest, meanest, most ambitious. . . . "

"I call her a see-you-next-Tuesday," Hookstratten says.

"She has to be on fire, this girl."

Jon Peters walks over. He's the Hollywood hairdresser-turned-producer, then
studio chieftain, who was bought out for $30 million by his bosses at Sony. He's
dressed a little like a hustler, in an expensive gray suit and a bold blue-plaid
shirt. Shaking hands, he grips Rudin's hand from above, across the first two
fingers -- a power shake -- then wags a finger at the producer. "I'm having some
problems with you," he says, mock threateningly. He wanted the Ali story for
himself. In fact, Columbia, where Peters now has his own deal, is exchanging
lawyers' letters with Rudin because it owns rights to "The Greatest," an earlier
Ali biopic.

Plates of grilled chicken arrive, and I ask, "Does she die in the movie?"

"No," Rudin says. "She's constantly tested against more and more despicable
behavior. With a great villain, there's a participatory element. You watch 'All
About Eve,' and you're on the edge of your seat wondering how far will she go."

He takes a sip of Diet Coke.

"Here's the thing that interests me about this movie -- how completely
self-invented she was. She created a person that was Jessica Savitch that had
nothing to do with who she really was, and I want to get at the price you pay
for that. Because I think most people who are successful have invented who they
are and brought themselves up from something else."

He's all the way into his rain dance now, and Hookstratten and I just sit and
listen.

"Then she falls in love with this guy, and she has to face that the
self-invention is only going to carry her so far, and at some point she's going
to have to be a human being." He waves his fork around. "But is there any human
being left in her?"

Rudin pays the bill.

"Anyone interesting on your plane?" he asks me, as we head to the car.

"No. Anyone interesting on yours?"

"Only me."

14. YET ANOTHER RESTAURANT. Does everything in Hollywood happen in restaurants?
That night Rudin takes me to a new one on La Cienega called Drai's, to meet a
powerful ICM agent, Ed Limato. We're seated in the corner, and Rudin has a dance
of eye contact with someone at the next table. Finally, Rudin reaches over for a
handshake. "Scott Rudin," he says with a splinter of nervousness to Dustin
Hoffman.

Limato is courtly and impeccably groomed. He drinks Stolichnaya with an olive
and sneaks a cigarette by moving his bread plate to the floor and tilting over
for drags. He's chosen to abandon the Hollywood hangout Morton's lately, because
they busted him for doing same.

He's got a bitchy streak we all delve into. When Rudin brings up a celebrity
actress -- "We talked about a part but I couldn't believe what her face looked
like, it was so tight" -- Limato says dryly, "One too many." Operations, that
is.

"There was no way to photograph her," Rudin says. "She'd wash out."

Limato sighs. "Like a strobe light off linoleum."

Even though it's 9:30, Rudin has to go back to work. He loves work. Making deals
seems to crowd out his romantic life. In fact he appears to fulfill his outsize
need for intimacy with no end of urgent phone calls and meetings with business
associates. Maybe that's why he can't stand disagreement among allies. It
communicates itself to him as betrayal.

We drive to the lot and walk to a barrackslike structure containing the studio's
scoring stage. We enter the darkened control room. On the other side of a glass
wall, a full orchestra is going. Sonnenfeld is sitting on a metal-cornered
equipment box in the back of the control room. He's been feeding me critical
quotes about Rudin in Rudin's presence. "That's the other genius about Scott,"
Sonnefeld says now. "No matter how big the lie, he believes it himself."


15. A NERVOUS WAITER. Lunch is at a place just outside Beverly Hills called
Osteria Romana Orsini. It's down a few steps from the street, with an iron
railing and grillwork in a grapevine theme.

Rudin is meeting a mentor figure, a movie mogul who asks that I not use his
name. He has longish dark hair combed gleamingly back over his head and a loud,
restless manner. Perspiration beads his upper lip. As he speaks, he scratches
his cane-bottomed chair around on the terrazzo floor at an angle to the table
and his eyes rake the room.

'You got to see this waiter," he says. "He's so neurotic. He's got like
performance anxiety, even when he tells you the specials. It's like he's
pitching."

The waiter's skinny with blond hair. Very intense. He squeezes his hands
together as he describes the specials. He bends over at a sharp angle, bracing
himself, as we give our orders. He nods with his entire body, then rushes away
as if afraid he may have disturbed us. Of course, he's nervous. He's in the
presence of two of the most aggressive people on the planet.

The food comes in giant Italian bowls, half filled with pasta. Shrimp whiskers
and mussel shells poke up out of red sauce, and lunch is a bit of a pigout. The
two men talk about their projects, then the unnamed executive says
sarcastically: "People in this town have lost more money off of 'Fried Green
Tomatoes.' I bet people've lost $500 million off that picture."

Rudin laughs in agreement.

The truth of the statement is that "Fried Green Tomatoes" was a small movie with
no big stars and a downer, meandering plot that was made cheap but brought in
huge amounts of money. It's frequently offered as proof that a small picture can
do well. But there aren't many "Fried Green Tomatoes." Most small movies without
stars flop.

That's one rule of the game that Rudin studies. He has the temperament of the
self-made man: in his bones, he fears that if he ever tried to challenge the
rules, he wouldn't survive, so he studies the system through and through then
exploits the hell out of it. Rudin's rules are Hollywood's rules. Here are some:

Beware of the picture a director wants to make after a huge hit. The director
now has the clout to be uncollaborative. He'll want to make his dream project;
it will flop. When he's on the ropes, he's much easier to work with. Is it just
coincidence that Sydney Pollack and Rudin made a blockbuster hit, "The Firm,"
after Pollack flopped with "Havana"?

Gross is everything. Whenever Rudin buys a ticket to a competitor's movie, he
simultaneously buys a ticket to his own (and throws it away) so he doesn't hurt
his film's relative gross.

Movies must have "movie discipline": beginning, middle and end. Usually the
story of one person. "Someone in a juggernaut experience, whatever that is,"
Rudin says.

Good books make bad movies. Good books operate according to literary, not
cinematic, principles. But a good movie idea often comes out of a bad book. I
hear Rudin tell a writer that a book is precious, but the script is great. "The
script made me cry," he says. "The book made me want an insulin injection."
Movies are simply montage, pieces of kinetic trickery that create the illusion
of action. "They're all about cuts." They are dead things, especially compared
to theater, which is alive. A play can't leave the room it's in. It must
recreate the world every night in a black box with living people. "It's
conjuring as much as anything. A movie to me is like watching a rerun of a ball
game."

There are no auteurs here. Hollywood roots against artistically ambitious films.
A frisson passed through the film community when "The Age of Innocence" proved
underwhelming at the box office. "A director friend told me last night, 'It's a
movie about cuff links,' " Rudin tells Jocelyn Moorhouse. "When the critics say,
'Great attention to detail,' that's what they mean."

Hire from the top or the bottom, avoid the middle. "Get someone at the top of
the game or someone who has a lot to prove. In the middle, you pay too much for
too little."

Actors have no blood. Over the long haul, Rudin says, it takes tremendous
ferocity and desire to make it as a movie star. Every time movie stars commit to
a movie, they could be ending their careers. Only tough players last.

16. THE MISSING PIECE. Persecuted assistants mill around the desk. There's
confusion about a book Rudin has been given to read, "Stand Before Your God," by
Paul Watkins. Hans Schiff, a twenty-something assistant, says there's a second
Paul Watkins title in the outer office. He goes, then returns with a book.
Glancing at the book in Rudin's hands, Hans seems to die right where he is. The
books are identical. His confusion arose because one is a galley.

"You have to be killed," Rudin says. "You should be exterminated. Goodbye."
(Schiff soon quit. He'd been on the job two months.)

A schlumpy figure enters. Steve Zaillian wears a blue shirt with the tail
hanging out. A cigarette is tucked over his right ear. He droops over a corner
of the desk, with a sleepy-bordering-on-sulky manner. Zaillian's a writer (he
wrote "Schindler's List," among other movies) whom Rudin made a director.

Rudin lifts a sheaf of pages.

"We have to do this?" Zaillian says.

"We have to do this," Rudin says.

"I'm not sure what we're trying to get away from."

"We're trying to get away from Bobby Fischer, who in many countries in Europe is
a villain."

They're renaming the picture for its European release. Rudin reels off a couple
hundred titles marketing has sent over. "Josh's Castle." "In the Realm of the
King." "Castles in the Sky." "Heart of a Champion." "Little Boy Lost." "Only a
Game."

Bored, I study Rudin's bookshelves. There are three copies of "Act One" by Moss
Hart (Rudin's inspiration), and a whole row of great scripts: "The Godfather,"
"Chinatown," "Kramer vs. Kramer."

Rudin goes on: "The Knight's Passage." "The Missing Piece." "Colossus." "What
Have We Now?"

They pare the list, then Zaillian gets up. But Rudin has another item on his
agenda: he'd like Zaillian to think about "Marvin's Room."

"It's so good, there doesn't seem to be much work to be done," Zaillian says.

"It's got a third act that's a bit of a mess, a plot that doesn't pay off, and
things not so important go on 10 pages," Rudin says.

Zaillian nods.

"You're going to be making the movie with Meryl Streep, Ellen Barkin and
Leonardo DiCaprio."

This is muscling: Rudin doesn't have all those names hammered down yet.

The director goes, and after a lull, I say, "I thought you were getting Jocelyn
Moorhouse to direct 'Marvin's Room.' "

Rudin frowns and coughs. In an hour or two, the doctor is going to diagnose his
condition as mononucleosis and order him to stop working. But he's too driven,
too desperate a character, to do that. From his bed he will run calls for a day
or so, then go back to the office.

"I'm having second thoughts about this whole Jocelyn thing," he says. "I don't
have a clear enough picture of what she would do with the material. She didn't
convey a clear enough idea. And Steve is always the person I wanted to direct
the movie."

He must sense that I'm on Moorhouse's side. She was sensitive and
straightforward, and she'd have an artist's command of the piece. An artist's
command is the problem. Rudin hates independence. Not for himself, not for his
charges. It's the nature of his business, seeking out artistic material and
trying to control it, trying to get everything spelled out so there's no risk.
"There's no mystery." That is Rudin's mantra.

He has a majestic intelligence, but the best movies don't come from such tight
surveillance, from directors who defer judgment to the DAT (the digital
audiotape of the audience response), from writers who have to please the crowd
with "applause moments," from people who feel owned. For all his esthetic
discrimination, Rudin is a tactician. He will forever be calculating whom he can
muscle and whom he can't, and trying to add names from the latter category to
the former.

His movies will be among Hollywood's most successful. They may surprise you, but
will they ever do what films can do -- blow you away? Talent floods toward
mystery, and mystery is something he and Hollywood cannot abide. He would rein
in Fellini with a million demands, every one brilliant, every one soulless.
Because, it's true, he has faultless taste: he will always turn blood into
vinaigrette.

NAME: Scott Rudin

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Rudin on the set of "Nobody's Fool." He differed with the
film's director, Robert Benton, over the casting of a major role and, as usual,
came out on top. (MARK PETERSON/SABA, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. 22); Tom
Cruise in "The Firm." Paramount gave Rudin a Mercedes when the film topped $45
million. (DUHAMEL/GLOBE PHOTOS); Whoopi Goldberg in "Sister Act," one of Rudin's
100-million-dollar-plus movies. (THE KOBAL COLLECTION); For one extra shot in
"Addams Family Values," Rudin paid nearly $90,000. (MELINDA SUE GORDON/THE KOBAL
COLLECTION)(pg. 23); Rudin and Anjelica Houston at a press junket for "Addams
Family Values." Before it opened there was talk of a third "Addams" film. (DAVID
BUTOW FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Rudin confers with Paul Newman on the upstate New
York set of "Nobody's Fool." (MARK PETERSON/SABA, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES.)(pg.
24); An actor's actor brings out the jocular side of a producer's producer:
Jessica Tandy and Rudin on the "Nobody's Fool" set. (MARK PETERSON/SABA, FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES.)(pg. 25); Rudin at the St. Regis Hotel in New York with his most
constant companion, the telephone. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID BUTOW FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)(pg. 27)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              262 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 26, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE MIST OFF PERFUME RIVER

SECTION: Section 6; Page 6; Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 92 words


It is hard to read about "true glamour" and romance, the misty emerald river and
"lazy deltas," without wondering when we will stop using Vietnam as ground on
which to project our fantasies (Style: "The Mist Off Perfume River," Nov. 21).
There is something decidedly disturbing about conjuring otherworldliness in the
name of high fashion and high capitalism against the nostalgic backdrop of a
feminized, pacified and romanticized space.

TOBY ALICE VOLKMAN
Director, Southeast Asia Program, Social Science Research Council
New York, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              263 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 26, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE MIST OFF PERFUME RIVER

SECTION: Section 6; Page 6; Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 41 words


Perhaps you do not see anything unseemly about photographing models wearing
$3,000 dresses in a country where the annual per capita income is about $200.
Can we look forward to a similar feature set in Bosnia?

FRED KAMENY
Hew Haven

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              264 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 26, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sound Bytes;
A Song-Writing Cowpoke Hits the Cyberspace Trail

BYLINE: By Peter H. Lewis

SECTION: Section 3; Page 8; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 715 words


JOHN PERRY BARLOW ran a cattle ranch in Wyoming for 17 years while writing
lyrics for Grateful Dead songs ("Cassidy," "Estimated Profit," "I Need a
Miracle" and others) and rising within the state Republican Party. He still
writes for the Dead. But in 1988, he says, "under impending financial duress,"
he sold the ranch, which had been in the family for three generations, and began
a career writing and speaking about the electronic community called cyberspace.
He is a co-founder, with Mitch Kapor, of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a
group that seeks to influence judicial and legal issues relating to cyberspace.
He is also on the board of directors of the Well, an Internet community based in
San Francisco.

Question: For years the Internet has had its own culture, and suddenly it's
being flooded with tens of thousands of new subscribers each month. Is there a
culture clash?

Answer: The Net culture is very libertarian, very outspoken, anarchistic, male,
white, nerdy, mathematical. And suddenly the hoi polloi is arriving in droves.
There's going to be an enormous amount of cultural immune response.

But one of the things about cultural immune response is that communities get
formed when there are immune barriers of any sort. Then they go off and try to
create another type of community that is congenial to their point of view. The
nice thing about cyberspace is there's an infinite amount of real estate in
which to do that.

Q: So the original Net culture will survive?

A: In the physical world, community usually arises as a result of shared
adversity. You have to figure out what the conditions are that cause that group
of people to define themselves as being up against the same thing. It's very
different because in the physical world you have economic factors, weather,
whatever, and these don't exist here. Another thing that I think is essential to
community is some sense of physical proximity.

Q: So it won't survive?

A: One of the reasons that intentional communities didn't make it in the 60's
was that they were monocultures, they didn't have diversity. Speaking as someone
who comes from a small town that's a real community, one of the things that
makes that work is that you've got 160 different kinds of people there who have
absolutely nothing in common and who would not hang out with one another if they
had the choice. But they don't have the choice. So you've got that sort of
psychological diversity factor that creates all the same things you have in a
normal ecosystem, all the hybridization.

That's the problem with cyberspace. People segment according to their interests,
and that makes the overall web a lot less durable.

Q: Why does that make the community more fragile?

A: All they've got is a shared interest, not a shared necessity. They don't have
cultural diversity within that interest. I have been part of many different
discussion groups on the Net which I found very easy to leave once the
signal-to-noise ratio deteriorated to the point where I didn't dig it any more.
I had a choice. I had too much choice, really. It's not that easy for me to
leave my little town in Wyoming. There, we have to learn to stick it out and
make it work.

Q: So the key is a mix of boundless cyberspace and physical proximity?

A: I think there's going to be a real future for things like the Well, not
simple interest communities but places that are associated with physical places
in some way, where you've got a diversity of people and interests, and the
opportunity for those folks to get together in the physical world on a regular
basis and actually make eye contact with one another. If you look at the overall
trend, not just in cyberspace but everywhere, it's toward globalization and
localization. What seems to be coming apart is everything in the middle.

John Perry Barlow

Born: Oct. 3, 1947, Jackson Hole, Wyo.

Homes: New York City, Pinedale, Wyo., "and cyberspace."

Education: B.A. (comparative religion), Wesleyan University.

Drives: A bicycle in New York City, a horse in Wyoming.

Family: Separated. Three daughters, Leah, 11, Anna Winter, 9, and Amelia, 7.

Ideal vacation: Vietnam.

PC: Macintosh Powerbook 170, Next Cube.

Software: Microsoft Word, Eudora.

NAME: John Perry Barlow

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              265 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 26, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Norman Vincent Peale, Preacher of Gospel Optimism, Dies at 95

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 40; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2465 words


The Rev. Dr. Norman Vincent Peale, one of the most influential religious figures
of his time, died on Friday afternoon at his estate in Pawling, N.Y. He had
suffered a stroke earlier this month. He was 95.

His wife of 63 years, Ruth, was at his bedside when he died.

Dr. Peale helped create a spiritual tone in the postwar United States with
sermons, broadcasts, newspaper columns and 41 books, especially his best-seller,
"The Power of Positive Thinking," published in 1952.

He told Presidents and business executives and millions of other people that a
proper state of mind, induced by simple prayer, could produce spiritual and
material success on earth, which he demonstrated by becoming a wealthy man. Many
in a country recovering from the Depression and a world war were more than ready
to follow Dr. Peale's thinking.

Dr. Peale never lacked for critics, who accused him of simplifying Christianity
by avoiding deeper confrontations with sin and guilt, yet he had millions of
supporters who said he had brought them religious contentment.

A 'Benign Owl'

Short and pudgy (one writer said he resembled a "benign owl"), Dr. Peale was
fidgety before delivering a sermon. But he seemed to grow in stature when
exhorting people to feel better about themselves.

He often admitted that his main target for these spiritual pep rallies was
himself, that "even as recently as last night" he had found himself lacking in
wisdom, courage or grace. Yet, he said, a few simple prayers had given him the
energy to urge others onward.

When he became pastor of the Marble Collegiate Church on Fifth Avenue in
Manhattan in 1932, Dr. Peale became one of the first American clergymen to bring
psychiatric practices into religion, preparing the way for thousands of
professional, religious-based counselors. His later emphasis on "positive
thinking" predated the current flood of self-help books and movements.

He was a favorite of wealthy business people, a critic of protesters who opposed
the Vietnam War, an opponent of John F. Kennedy in 1960 for fear of a Vatican
influence in the White House, and a supporter of his friend and congregant,
Richard M. Nixon, throughout the Watergate period.

Well into his 80's, Dr. Peale was still preaching nearly every Sunday at the
11:15 A.M. service at the handsome 1854 church at Fifth Avenue and 29th Street
until he retired as senior minister in 1984. When interviewed in 1978, Dr. Peale
had dozens of projects and remained a zestful, healthy preacher.

"Many ministers said my book was oversimplified and wasn't couched in the
correct ecclesiastical language," he said in discussing "The Power of Positive
Thinking" during the interview. "That was true. It was written in simple
language because I was trying to reach people who were not in church."

Looking back, Dr. Peale said he wished he could go back through his books and
change some of his views, particularly to strengthen the Christian view of
repentance.

"Lives are being destroyed by sin," he said in 1978. "The need is to get sin out
and bring the person to the point where he can know something better. In 1952
sin was generally recognized, and I didn't have to accentuate it. But I'm
basically a very traditional Christian, and a sense of guilt is important. Too
much guilt is unhealthy, though."

Dr. Peale's roots were in the true-believer, heartland Christianity of
Bowersville, Ohio, where he was born on May 31, 1898. His father, Charles
Clifford Peale, a former physician, was a Methodist minister who served several
congregations in southern Ohio.

Beyond Self-Doubt

Dr. Peale would often recall being labeled "a weak willy-nilly" by a high school
teacher in Bellefontaine, Ohio. He had reacted with anger until, he said, he
realized the teacher was right. Throughout his career, he would readily admit he
had to push himself beyond his self-doubt.

The idea of following his father into the ministry solidified for the young man
one Sunday morning when he saw his father issue a call for sinners to come forth
and be saved. The town drunkard lumbered forward, knelt at the altar and prayed
to be saved from his sins, and did indeed give up drinking after that.

After graduation from Ohio Wesleyan University, the younger Peale enrolled at
the Boston University School of Theology. In his first summer back home, he was
asked to replace an ailing pastor one Sunday, and wrote a sermon in his divinity
school style.

"My advice would be to take it out back and burn it," said his father, telling
his son "that the way to the human heart is through simplicity."

The son followed his father's advice and years later recalled the good reception
he had received, the "look of gratitude and goodness that appears when Jesus
Christ is talked about and related to the simplicities of human lives."

To earn money, the young man spent a year as a reporter for The Morning
Republican in Findlay, Ohio, and later worked at The Detroit Journal before he
decided to leave journalism and concentrate on the ministry. In 1922 he was
ordained in the Methodist Episcopal Church and received his first assignment in
Berkeley, R.I. In 1924 he moved to a small congregation in Brooklyn, where he
built a new church and increased the membership from 40 to 900 in one year.

In 1927 he went to the University Methodist Church in Syracuse, where he was one
of the first clergymen in the United States to preach on his own radio program.
In 1932 he was called to the Marble Collegiate Church, said to be the oldest
continuous Protestant congregation in the country, dating to 1628.

To assume the pastorate at Marble Collegiate, Dr. Peale had to switch his
denomination from Methodist to the Reformed Church in America, a transfer made
smoothly with no apparent problem for him.

Advice From Wife

Only 200 people came out for his first service, but his spirited sermons soon
began attracting thousands of New Yorkers.

As a spiritual counselor, Dr. Peale often recounted, he had felt himself
unprepared for the complex problems of his congregants, particularly after the
stock market crash of 1929.

However, he received helpful advice from his wife, the former Loretta Ruth
Stafford, whom he married on June 20, 1930. Mrs. Peale (who prefers to be called
by her middle name, Ruth) urged her husband to consult his physician, Dr.
Clarence W. Lieb, about finding a psychiatrist who could help parish members.

Dr. Peale was introduced to Dr. Smiley Blanton, a psychiatrist who had been
trained in Vienna by Freud. Years later Dr. Peale would recall Dr. Blanton
asking him: "Do you believe in the power of prayer? I've been praying for years
that some minister would see that psychiatry and religion not only might but
should work together. And now here you are."

The two men approached people from their separate training, creating a
"religion-psychiatric clinic" in the basement of the church. In 1951 the service
was expanded into the American Foundation of Religion and Psychiatry, a
nonprofit group serving hundreds of patients.

Dr. Peale often described "this obsession of mine to reach as many people as I
could with the message of Jesus Christ." This "obsession" was served by his
ministry on the radio, which after his initial programs from Syracuse was
started in New York City in 1935. Soon he was appearing every week on "The Art
of Living," sponsored by the National Council of Churches, a program that
eventually reached an estimated 5 million listeners on the NBC network.

What Dr. Peale was saying in his first decade in New York was pretty much the
same message that made him famous in the 1950's. In his first book, "The Art of
Living," published by Abingdon in 1937, he wrote that "applied Christianity
helps people to tap reservoirs of power within themselves."

His second book, "You Can Win" (Abingdon, 1939), followed similar thinking, as
shown by chapter titles such as "The Art of Self-Mastery," "God and You Are
Unconquerable" and "Overcoming the Tension of Modern Life."

Postw-War Sales

While his philosophy was already apparent, Dr. Peale had not yet begun advising
people how to apply it to their lives. His books did not begin to sell well
until after World War II, when, for the first time in nearly two decades,
Americans had some leeway to question what they believed and how they should
live.

In 1948 Dr. Peale issued his first best-seller, "A Guide for Confident Living"
(Prentice-Hall), which told how religion could combat problems. But his real
impact was yet to come. In 1951 he wrote another book, but an editor suggested
revisions, so Dr. Peale kept the book in a desk drawer until Ruth Peale sent it
to another editor without her husband's knowledge.

The book, "The Power of Positive Thinking," remained on the list of best-sellers
for 186 weeks, ranking it -- behind the Bible -- as one of the highest-selling
spiritual books in history.

The book repeated many concepts from earlier books, but this time the public
could not get enough of such chapters as "I Don't Believe in Defeat," "How to
Get People to Like You" and "Expect the Best and Get It."

Each chapter contained "confidence-concepts," "faith attitudes" and
"energy-producing thoughts" or "spirit-lifters." Dr. Peale frequently broke his
wisdom into "10 simple, workable rules" or "eight practical formulas" or "seven
simple steps."

A key sentence was: "The secret of a better and more successful life is to cast
out those old dead unhealthy thoughts."

At another point he wrote: "To make your mind healthy, you must feed it
nourishing, wholesome thoughts."

As sales of the book continued to climb, criticism of Dr. Peale began to mount.
In an essay entitled "Some Negative Thinking About Norman Vincent Peale," a
theologian from Yale University, William Lee Miller, wrote that Dr. Peale's
books had become "worse" because "the rhetoric of the sermon has been replaced
by the short, punchy sentences of the advertisement."

Dr. Miller also wrote: "Dr. Peale's idea and his ability to present it might
enable him to be popular in any place at any time, but it seems to work
especially well in America now. The importance of studying Dr. Peale lies in
what his enormous success means about our present situation in this country."

A TV Program

The book made Dr. Peale one of America's most public figures. From 1952 through
1968, he and his wife appeared on a weekly television program, "What's Your
Trouble?," that attracted 5,000 letters a week. He wrote a column called
"Confident Living," which at one point appeared in more than 200 newspapers.

His efforts made him a wealthy man, although the degree of his wealth remains
unclear despite attempts over the years by biographers and news organizations to
find out specifics.

He was the author of 46 books, the last being "This Incredible Century,"
published in 1991, having sales of nearly 20 million copies and published in 41
languages. Dr. Peale served on several Presidential committees and was awarded
several honorary degrees. In addition to receiving Freedom Foundation awards in
1952 and 1955, he was given the Horatio Alger Award in 1952 and was voted
"Clergyman of the Year" by the Religious Foundation of America in 1964. He was
also a 33d-degree Mason.

Although Dr. Peale often said ministers should stay out of politics, he seemed
to support Republicans regularly against Franklin Delano Roosevelt. In 1952 Dr.
Peale endorsed the Eisenhower-Nixon ticket, saying moral issues had dictated
that he take a stand.

This prompted Adlai E. Stevenson, the Democratic candidate, to make this
evaluation of evangelists: "I find Paul appealing and Peale appalling."

According to Dr. Peale, general criticism of him made him decide to resign from
his Marble Collegiate pastorate in 1955 while visiting his ailing father. But
the senior Mr. Peale sensed his son's unspoken anguish and sent a deathbed
message for his son to continue.

Seen as a conservative force, Dr. Peale sometimes surprised people with his
stands. He served four terms as president of the Council of Churches of the City
of New York, advocating decentralization of schools when it was a bitter issue
in the city.

In 1963, a movie, "One Man's Way," told the story of Dr. Peale's life in a more
or less accurate way.

Although still a vast commercial success in the 1960's, Dr. Peale's public power
was diminished with the election of President John F. Kennedy, whom he had
opposed, citing fear of Vatican interference. During the 1960 Presidential
campaign, Dr. Peale attended several meetings with other prominent Protestant
clergyman to rally concern about the possibility of a Roman Catholic in the
White House.

When the sessions were disclosed, other religious leaders, including Reinhold
Niebuhr and Rabbi Maurice N. Eisendrath, accused Dr. Peale and the others of
"blind prejudice."

Dr. Peale was quoted as saying at that time: "Faced with the election of a
Catholic, our culture is at stake," but he was later to withdraw this opinion,
although he still clearly favored Richard M. Nixon in the election.

In 1962 Mr. Nixon lost the California gubernatorial election and moved to New
York to practice law. Mr. Nixon had first worshiped at Marble Collegiate while
serving in the Navy during the war, and he now took his family to the church,
although he was still nominally a member of a Quaker congregation in California.
Some political analysts have suggested that Mr. Nixon gained the strength for
his 1968 comeback from listening to Dr. Peale's familiar message about
overcoming doubts.

After Mr. Nixon's election, Dr. Peale officiated at the wedding of David
Eisenhower and Julie Nixon at Marble Collegiate on Dec. 22, 1968. In 1969
President Nixon sent Dr. Peale as a special envoy to Vietnam, and the minister
remained a family friend during the Watergate investigations.

Throughout his eighth decade, Dr. Peale remained an active co-pastor at Marble
Collegiate, dividing his time between a Fifth Avenue apartment and his estate in
Pawling. His friends and neighbors included Lowell Thomas and Thomas E. Dewey,
whom he and Mrs. Peale occasionally entertained, generally serving grape juice.

The Peales had three children: Margaret Ann (Mrs. Paul F. Everett), the wife of
a Presbyterian minister who was a leader of a church group called the
"Pittsburgh Experiment" in Pennsylvania; John Stafford of Farmville, Va., a
professor at Longwood College in Virginia, and Elizabeth Ruth (Mrs. John M.
Allen) of Pawling, whose husband is a retired executive of Reader's Digest and
now is the president of the board of trustees of the Peale Center, and eight
grandchildren.

Funeral services will be at 11 A.M. Wednesday at Marble Collegiate Church.


LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 26, 1993, Sunday

 CORRECTION:
An obituary of the Rev. Dr. Norman Vincent Peale on Dec. 26 misidentified his
last published book. It was "Bible Power for Successful Living," edited by
Donald T. Kauffman, who assisted in the writing; it was not "This Incredible
Century." The obituary also misstated the total sales of "This Incredible
Century." The number was 74,373 through December -- not nearly 20 million, which
is the figure for "The Power of Positive Thinking." And the obituary misstated
the number of languages in which "This Incredible Century" has been published.
It has come out only in English, not in 41 languages.

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Rev. Norman Vincent Peale (The New York Times, 1988)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              266 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 27, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. COMPANIES USE AFFILIATES ABROAD TO SKIRT SANCTIONS

BYLINE: By DEAN BAQUET

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2407 words


Seizing on porous laws and lax enforcement of United States sanctions, American
corporations have used foreign subsidiaries to conduct business openly with Cuba
and Libya, according to documents and interviews.

The rules governing sanctions are so loosely drawn that law enforcement
officials have had to abandon or back away from several investigations of
American companies suspected of doing illegal business abroad, an examination of
some cases shows.

The most striking example involves Cargill Inc., one of the world's largest
agricultural companies.


Cargill's Cuban Shipment

Three years ago, a team of Government agents opened an investigation into
charges that Cargill brokered ships loaded with sugar for the Cuban Government,
in apparent violation of the Trading With the Enemies Act. In the ensuing
months, investigators found hundreds of messages between Cargill and shippers
overseas, evidence that executives at the company's headquarters in Minnetonka,
Minn., had been involved.

And last year senior Justice Department officials predicted in internal
memorandums that an indictment of Cargill, which could cost it hundreds of
millions of dollars in Federal subsidies and contracts, was imminent.

Today, however, Government officials acknowledge that Cargill, which denies
wrongdoing, may never be charged, even though internal company records leave no
doubt that its United States executives helped arrange some of the financing.
The company had seized on a loophole in the law that made it virtually
impossible to enforce the United States sanctions against multinational
corporations: It traded with Cuba through a foreign subsidiary beyond the reach
of American law.

Companies Avoid Sanctions

Cargill is one of numerous American companies that have used foreign
subsidiaries to trade with countries under United States sanctions, with the
profits flowing back home. The trading raises questions about the effectiveness
of one of the most visible tools of United States foreign policy.

In January 1986, for example, when President Ronald Reagan ordered sweeping
sanctions against Libya, Brown & Root Inc., a Houston engineering concern,
pulled out of Libya's $20 billion Great Man-Made River project, which was
intended to tap water beneath the desert and create an agricultural oasis. But
the company immediately shifted its work, which trade journals valued at an
estimated $100 million, to its British subsidiary, Brown & Root Ltd.

Asked if this was done because of the sanctions, Duncan Guy, head of government
operations for the British company, said, "Presumably, yes."

The Price Brothers Company, of Dayton, Ohio, a consulting and machinery company,
also walked away from the river project when Mr. Reagan, citing evidence that
Libya supported terrorism, announced sweeping sanctions. But some work was
picked up by Price Brothers (U.K.), the company's small British subsidiary.

Brad Evers, general counsel for Price Brothers, said the British operation got
the work on its own and was working on the water project even before sanctions
were imposed.

Still, he said, the enforcement on United States companies in Libya has been
loose. "A lot of people created foreign subsidiaries in the one month between
the time the Reagan Administration declared sanctions and the time they went
into effect."

The Coastal Corporation, a Houston oil exploration company, has used a
subsidiary based in Bermuda to go into business with the Libyan Government at an
oil refinery in Germany.

Coastal has been under Federal investigation for more than three years, law
enforcement officials say. But investigators have had trouble determining if
executives of the Houston parent are involved in the project, which would be
illegal.

Once, Customs Service agents stationed at the Houston airport stopped Coastal's
lawyer, Donald Looper, and seized his briefcase when Mr. Looper stepped off a
flight from Germany. The agents hoped they could find evidence that Coastal's
Houston headquarters was actually calling the shots. Mr. Looper got his
briefcase back after an emergency hearing in Federal court in Houston.

Loopholes Erode Effectiveness

Officials of these companies said they did not believe they were violating the
spirit of sanctions by doing business with nations the United States sees as its
enemies. But some said the loopholes raised questions about the effectiveness of
sanctions.

Law enforcement and intelligence officials around the country said they thought
that many executives of American companies controlled the work of subsidiaries.
But they said murky Federal rules made it tough to build cases. Is it illegal,
for instance, for the top executive of a parent to give bonuses for successful
work with Libya? Or to share new technology?

"We tell our people that if the subsidiary calls with a question about the Libya
contract, just slam down the phone," Edward E. Dyson, a Washington lawyer who
has advised Price Brothers and other companies, said.

R. Richard Newcomb, the senior Treasury Department official in charge of
enforcing sanctions, said he could not comment on specific investigations,
including the Cargill case.

"But forgetting about Cargill or any case," he added, "the U.S. parent may not
be involved in any part of the transaction. It is clear. The subsidiary has to
be acting totally on its own."

The best estimate of the American corporate presence in Libya was a 1987 study
by the Treasury Department. It concluded that 169 foreign subsidiaries of 80
United States companies were doing at least $266 million of trade with Tripoli.

In 1991, subsidiaries of American companies did more than $700 million of trade
with Cuba, according to the Treasury Department. The amount has dropped
significantly, officials said, because the 1992 Cuba Democracy Act forbids even
subsidiaries from doing business with Havana.

International sanctions, like the United Nation's embargoes against Iraq, are
hard to evade because so many countries honor them. But the sanctions against
Cuba, Libya, Vietnam and North Korea are imposed by the United States alone.

The Cargill Deal
Did a U.S. Office Play Middleman?

The Cargill inquiry shows that it is hard to make cases even when there is ample
evidence that United States executives were involved.

Documents examined by The New York Times -- including the same records available
to prosecutors -- show significant contact between Cargill and its Swiss
subsidiary, Cargill International, involved in selling the Cuban sugar.

A Cargill trader named Eduardo Vigil helped the company's Swiss subsidiary get
financing from the Atlanta branch of the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, the
documents show. In addition, the former vice president of Banca Lavoro's Atlanta
office has told investigators that the Cuban sugar transaction was directed by
executives at Cargill's headquarters in Minnetonka, with the Swiss unit acting
as a front to evade sanctions.

A Cargill spokesman declined to provide detailed comment. Mr. Vigil, who is no
longer with the company, did not return phone messages left at his home.

But in a statement to The Times, Cargill said that it had done nothing improper
and that it was cooperating with the inquiry.

Cargill, in its statement, also said it had received a special United States
license permitting the 1988 Cuban sugar sale, as required by the laws in force
at that time. But the license said specifically that American executives would
not be involved in the deal.

Privately, the company's lawyers have told the Government that overseas trade is
complex, involving many steps by international players, and that it is
impossible for United States executives not to play some role in aiding foreign
operations.

Cargill's lawyers have not denied the roles of Mr. Vigil and other executives.
But in hundreds of pages of legal arguments presented to prosecutors, they have
contended that the subsidiary in Geneva dominated the transaction, and that Mr.
Vigil and other United States executives had no contact with Cuba.

The Inquiry
Tales from Atlanta To Iraq and Back

The inquiry into Cargill, a fiercely private international trading company run
by the same two families for more than 125 years, began with a case unrelated to
Cuba or sugar, but with international repercussions of its own.

In the fall of 1989, investigators from several Government agencies interrogated
Christopher P. Drogoul, the outgoing banker who ran Banca Lavoro's Atlanta
office. Surrounded by a dozen investigators, who were struck by his openness as
much as his story, Mr. Drogoul said he made $5 billion in loans to Iraq.

Mr. Drogoul would attract headlines with his claim, never proved, that the loans
were made with the approval of the United States Government, which at the time
was engaged in a doomed courtship of Mr. Hussein.

Among other statements, Mr. Drogoul recounted what he said were illegal
activities by some of the bank's clients, interview transcripts show. Most
intriguing to the Government was the tale of Cargill's role in selling Cuban
sugar to Venezuela.

By Mr. Drogoul's account, Fritz Baehler, an executive at Cargill's Swiss
subsidiary, came to him in 1988 with a crisis. Ships loaded with sugar owned by
Cargill, worth $26 million, were ready to sail to Venezuela. But Cargill had to
arrange a way for Venezuela to pay for it.

A Request for Help

In such transactions to foreign buyers, suppliers like Cargill typically get
paid in advance by an American bank, usually in American dollars. The bank then
collects from the foreign buyer. But Mr. Drogoul quoted Mr. Baehler as saying
that banks were rejecting Cargill.

Mr. Drogoul said he turned Cargill down upon learning the source of the trouble:
Some sugar was from Cuba. Since the Cuban embargo was put in place in 1963, it
had been illegal to do most kinds of business with Cuba.

In November 1988, Mr. Drogoul cabled Mr. Baehler, telling him that the company
could not get financing from an American bank "given the origin of the
merchandise."

Not wanting to upset a valued customer, however, Mr. Drogoul, now serving a
37-month jail sentence for bank fraud, said he asked his bank's Swiss branch to
provide financing.

But Mr. Drogoul told the Geneva branch that Atlanta would stand behind the loan
and would pay if the Venezuelans defaulted.

The Report
A Trail of Dollars Leads to Charges

By the time the transaction was completed, the Government concluded, Cargill had
received American dollars and Mr. Drogoul, at least, had violated the Trading
with the Enemies Act.

In an internal memorandum to prosecutors in Atlanta in October 1989, Mr. Newcomb
of the Treasury wrote that Mr. Drogoul and his top assistant, Paul Von Wedel,
had broken the law and that there were also serious questions about Cargill.

"It is the policy of this office that no U.S. person may be involved with such
foreign subsidiary trade, and that payments for Cuban commodities must be in
currencies other than U.S. dollars and may not involve U.S. financing," Mr.
Newcomb wrote.

"Our Enforcement and Licensing Compliance areas are conducting a separate
inquiry into the actions of Cargill Inc. and its Swiss subsidiary which was the
beneficiary of the U.S. dollar-denominated letter of credit," he added.

Charges of Concealment

Mr. Von Wedel, in an unpublished book manuscript, insisted that the sugar sale
was handled from the United States, with the Geneva branch brought in to conceal
American involvement in a transaction with Cuba. Cargill has denied the
allegation, insisting the sale was Geneva's.

In making the charge, Mr. Von Wedel described the atmosphere in Banca Lavoro's
Atlanta office in 1988, when executives learned that there may have been a
violation of United States sanctions.

"Do you know what that means?" he recalled telling a co-worker. The co-worker,
Mr. Von Wedel wrote, "looked at me with a real sick look and said, 'Yeah, we
just financed Cuban sugar.' "

Mr. Von Wedel said he rushed to Mr. Drogoul's office and insisted that he
immediately set up an overseas conference call with Mr. Baehler.

In that call, Mr. Von Wedel said, Mr. Baehler said that the deal was not really
his, but that of Cargill's Minnesota headquarters.

Documents reviewed by The Times show that most of the telexes and cables ran
through Mr. Baehler's office in Geneva. But the records also show that Mr.
Vigil, of the company's headquarters, was deeply involved in the transaction.

More than a dozen cables went to Mr. Vigil's office in Minnetonka, as he
negotiated with Banca Lavoro, and tried to get the Venezuelans to repay the
Atlanta branch after a currency crisis in Venezuela. It remains unclear if the
bank was ever paid.

One cable, marked "Confidential," said it was important that Mr. Vigil help
collect from the Venezuelans. A third, dated Nov. 24, 1988, was sent just as the
vessel carrying the sugar, the Primrose Island, was to depart from Cuba for
Venezuela. It does not clearly refer to Mr. Vigil, but it provides additional
evidence of the United States' involvement. The cable said, "Talked to Ed in
Miami who said that he would take the responsibility of discharging this
vessel."

The Indictment
With Infighting, A Case Is on Hold

On Feb. 28, 1991, the Justice Department announced an indictment of Mr. Drogoul.
Tucked inside the 347-count indictment, but receiving scant attention amid
charges of multibillion-dollar loans to Saddam Hussein, was a brief mention of
the Cuban sugar sale.

Later, the Government listed Mr. Vigil and other Cargill executives in Minnesota
and Switzerland as "unindicted co-conspirators."

But at about the same time, two lead agencies in the case -- the Justice
Department and the Customs Service, an arm of the Treasury Department -- got
into a bitter fight.

Customs, which was responsible for doing the legwork, contended that Justice
Department lawyers were not being aggressive enough on Cargill and other
sanctions cases.

The fight became heated and at one point the Justice Department asked for an
internal investigation of whether Customs agents, in investigating another
company, had conducted an illegal search.

Finally, officials of both agencies said, Justice put all of the Customs
inquiries, including Cargill, on hold.

The case was revived several months ago when Attorney General Janet Reno formed
a new task force.

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              267 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 27, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
What Was Lost to Win the Cold War

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 892 words



The Devil We Knew
Americans and the Cold War
By H. W. Brands
243 pages. Oxford University Press. $25.

Losing Our Souls
The American Experience in the Cold War
By Edward Pessen
255 pages. Ivan R. Dee Inc. $24.95.

With the United States and the former Soviet Union now trying to bury their
nuclear arms instead of each other, American historians are beginning to write
more candidly about their own country's role in the cold war. Instead of holding
the common view, H. W. Brands, the author of "The Devil We Knew," and Edward
Pessen, the author of "Losing Our Souls," appear to be saying (in Pogo's
imperishable phrase), "The enemy is us." Independently, both agree that the
United States shares a large measure of blame for nearly half a century of
nuclear confrontation and that the cold war diminished Washington as the moral
beacon for the world.

Neither author belongs to the "evil empire" school of past White House history.


Mr. Brands, professor of history at Texas A&M, clearly cannot be accused of
lacking the candor of his convictions in "The Devil We Knew." His previous books
include "Inside the Cold War: Loy Henderson and the Rise of the American
Empire," and "Bound to Empire: The United States and the Philippines." Writing
with a blowtorch, he says the cold war resulted from the attempt of the United
States to export capitalism and to make the world safe for American products. He
contends that the Soviet Union, far from being the aggressor, found itself on
the defensive, and, while the Kremlin sometimes reacted belligerently, the
responsibility for the cold war belonged to the United States because of its
nuclear monopoly.

Getting down to cases, Mr. Brands points to the casualties caused by the Korean
and Vietnam Wars. He writes: "For two generations, until the end of the 1980's,
Americans girded to fight Communism on land, on sea and in the air, in the
Arctic and tropics, from the barren hills of Greece to the jungles of Southeast
Asia. In two instances, American opposition produced full-blown wars, killing
more than 100,000 Americans and millions of un-Americans. Although the 1970's
briefly moderated the Bolshie-bashing, in the age of Ronald Reagan the Communist
specter once more haunted America."

On the domestic side of the ledger, Mr. Brands says American politicians made
their reputations out of the Communist threat and destroyed the reputations of
many people. Not surprisingly, Senator Joseph McCarthy leads his parade of
villainy. Democratic and Republican Presidents -- Harry S. Truman, Dwight D.
Eisenhower, John F. Kennedy, Lyndon B. Johnson, Richard M. Nixon -- are
condemned for using the cold war as a staple of political discourse and for
supporting covert activities and shooting wars. By contrast, the author praises
Jimmy Carter because of his emphasis on human rights at home and abroad. Led by
Mr. Reagan, he says, the constituency for denunciations of Communism remained
strong well into the 1980's.

Does Mr. Brands hold the Soviet Union blameless for the cold war?  Not at all.
Still, his book could have offered more of a balance sheet of wrongdoing by both
sides. The catalogue of the Kremlin's corrosive sins against its own people and
its military intervention to suppress freedom in Hungary, Czechoslovakia and
elsewhere is long and damning. What finally caused the downfall of the Soviet
superpower? The impassioned professor concludes: "The fact is that Communism --
not capitalism or democracy -- has been the Communists' worst enemy."


Mr. Pessen, who died a year ago, after finishing "Losing Our Souls," was a
distinguished professor of history at Baruch College and at the graduate school
of the City University of New York. His searching book clarifies the full extent
of the cold war. He emphasizes that it was a real war, not simply a theoretical
war between capitalism and Communism, and that it was fought at great cost,
economically and morally. Like Mr. Brands, he deplores the loss of more than
100,000 Americans in the Korean and Vietnam Wars. Without any war declaration,
the cold war was by far the longest of all American wars.

The author traces the cold war's origins to the Truman Doctrine in 1947, which
called for the United States to support free people who resist subjugation by
armed minorities or by outside pressures, a bellicose warning to the Soviet
Union.  Taking a long view of American foreign policy, he notes that the Truman
Doctrine, which began with economic and military aid to Greece and Turkey,
turned George Washington's principle of forbearance toward all nations upside
down.

Mr. Pessen believes that American policy during the cold war did indeed
contribute to the demise of the Soviet state. Only in this respect does he
differ from Mr. Brands; otherwise, both historians agree about America's role in
initiating and prolonging the cold war. At the core of Mr. Pessen's argument is
that the United States was so grievously harmed by the cold war that the country
may never fully recover from its effects upon "our values, our freedoms, our
politics, our security, the conditions of our material life, the quality of our
productive plant and the very air we breathe."

"Losing Our Souls" is a cheerless book, but it can be read as a negative lesson
in how to rule a free nation fearlessly.

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: of H.W. Branda (Ginger Savely/Oxford University Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              268 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 27, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Secrecy and Cynicism

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 695 words


Anyone who remembers when Americans instinctively trusted their Government is by
definition an antique. Today the general assumption is that our officials
deceive us. President Clinton says that one of his striking impressions since
coming to Washington has been the pervasive public cynicism about government.

The change in American attitudes has had one major cause, I believe: secrecy.
During the years of the cold war, opposing a conspiratorial adversary, the
United States for the first time developed an enormous permanent national
security apparatus -- and a culture of secrecy to match. In the darkness
Washington did things that destroyed the public's faith.

This last month of 1993 has produced dramatic examples of the corruption that
secrecy engenders. We have learned that, years ago, plutonium was injected into
five hospital patients in one of several experiments with unknowing human
subjects. In another, researchers gave radioactive pills to 751 pregnant women;
three of the children they bore died of cancer by age 11.

In an effort to develop a radiation weapon -- one that would kill enemy soldiers
by fallout -- the Army in what was then the Atomic Energy Commission
deliberately released radiation over unsuspecting Americans. In 1950, for
example, a conventional bomb containing dangerously radioactive material was
exploded in the air over northern New Mexico, and radiation detected 70 miles
away. There were hundreds of such tests.

Congress's investigative arm, the General Accounting Office, disclosed that
radiation testing. An Energy Department official, Robert Alvarez, then said:
"The public record is very clear that the United States Government engaged in
deliberate acts of deception against the American public in the 1940's and
1950's in order to prosecute the nuclear arms race."

Mr. Alvarez is an aide to the Secretary of Energy, Hazel R. O'Leary, who has
made a great difference on the issue of secrecy. During the Reagan and Bush
years the department resisted public and Congressional demands for disclosure of
such abuses as human experimentation. Mrs. O'Leary has acted decisively to open
up the records.

No such spirit of openness has appeared during the first year of the Clinton
Administration at the chief national security ministries: the C.I.A., the
Pentagon and the State Department. Only reluctantly and in driblets, for
example, have they admitted what they knew at the time about the activities of
right-wing death squads and military forces in El Salvador.

When U.S. journalists reported in 1982 that Salvadoran Government forces had
massacred hundreds of civilians in El Mozote, U.S. officials denied the story
and covered up what they knew -- then and for years after. The Truth Commission
set up when the civil war ended quickly found that the massacre had indeed
occurred.

In 1984 the C.I.A. found that Salvadoran Government efforts to end right-wing
killing were ineffective and "aimed almost exclusively at placating Washington."
Though that truth was obvious, the C.I.A. would release only a truncated version
of its report that implied the opposite -- until, last month, the full report
was declassified, obtained by investigators at the National Security Archive and
published on The New York Times Op-Ed page.

In past wars, right up through Vietnam, details of battles were disclosed soon
after they were over. Today the Pentagon refuses to release its films of the
Persian Gulf war.

President Clinton last April ordered a complete review of the secrecy system
built up during the cold war. But the review is being carried out by bureaucrats
whose job has been stamping documents secret. Their proposals are now before the
staff of the National Security Council, and the chances for real reform seem
doubtful. The habit of secrecy, once acquired, is extremely hard to get rid of.

The premise of the American Constitution was that the governors must be
accountable to the governed. The Framers believed that that system, for all its
inconveniences, would best prevent abuses and maintain public faith in
government. In departing from their wisdom we have learned how right they were.

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              269 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 28, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Thriving on Difference;
International High Students Speak Language of Learning

BYLINE: By LYNDA RICHARDSON

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1537 words


Abdul Samad, a 20-year-old from Afghanistan, went to school for the first time
three years ago. He said he did not know a word of English when he was admitted
into the International High School in Queens. He felt blind and deaf and
panicky.

"I was very crazy," said the high school student, dressed in a black leather
jacket and jeans. "I wondered, 'How am I going to learn this language or study
this? I've never been to school.' I didn't know how to write the alphabet."

Abdul is now a model student at International High, an alternative public school
that is nationally recognized for the way immigrant students are taught and
valued. He will graduate this spring as a senior, but came to school already a
man.

Since age 10, Abdul had fought as a guerrilla rebel against the occupying Soviet
forces in his homeland. He saw 10 friends die in combat and was hospitalized
himself at age 14 with a bullet in his leg. He recalls precisely how he killed
two Russian soldiers at point-blank range. He said they had fatally wounded his
mother and seriously injured his father and three brothers in a bombing of his
house.

He found his way to America through a network of Afghan contacts, and like
thousands of other young immigrants each year, filtered into the New York City
school system, where the foreign-born population has more than tripled in the
last four years.

As issues such as violence, apathy and disenfranchisement dominate public
discussion of the New York City school system, the International High School
offers a glimmer of hope to immigrant youths on a first-come, first-served
basis.

The school, on the sprawling campus of La Guardia Community College, admits only
students who have been in the United States for less than four years and score
low in English proficiency on a standardized language assessment test.

Enrollment reflects geopolitics. The 460 students, who are from 60 countries and
speak 42 languages, come from places often in turmoil. When the school opened
eight years ago as a joint effort of the Board of Education and the City
University of New York, there were only a handful of students from Eastern
Europe. Now Eastern Europeans are the third largest group, with 128 students.
The biggest representation is from Spanish-speaking countries, followed by the
Asian bloc, including China, Hong Kong, Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Iran and
Afghanistan.

When Abdul arrived, he was met with a swell of support from teachers and other
students. He was thrown into classes -- the school does not separate students
according to their varying abilities in English -- and his Afghan-speaking
classmates helped him learn English, even as he went to classes in science,
math, history and art. The teachers would speak slowly, write names and draw
pictures to guide him along, and they started him off with easier assignments.

Impressive Academic Record

At International High, teachers and staff break the mold in the way English is
traditionally taught to students with limited English proficiency. Every teacher
doubles as an English instructor to some extent, reinforcing language
development as they teach instruction in the core subject areas.

The school has an impressive record of academic success. Ninety-three percent of
the students go on to college and more than 90 percent graduate having taken at
least one regular college-level course at LaGuardia Community College.

"It's an extraordinary place," said Jacqueline Ancess, a senior research
associate at the National Center for Restructuring Education, Schools and
Teaching at Teachers' College, Columbia University. "This school makes sure
these students have a future and gives them the skills for the future. It lets
them know that they are valued."

There is a calm, mature air about the business of education at International
High. There are no school bells.  Classrooms are dispersed throughout the
campus, and students carry college IDs, enroll in college courses, eat in the
college cafeteria and work out in the college gym. They participate in a
career-oriented internship program outside the school for one third of each
school year.

The population of the school, which was intended to accommodate between 400 and
500 students, is also small enough so that the staff gets to know students.

Learning to Get Along

It was not long after Abdul arrived at the high school before teachers and
counselors noticed his tenseness around Russian students. "He used to jump on
anything a Russian said and make fun of it," said Ruthellyn Weiner, an assistant
principal. "He would not get into physical stuff, but there would be verbal
sparring."

But Abdul found that his enmity toward Russians had no place in the school.
Every day, students have to work together in small groups to complete
assignments. Some of his classmates were Russian.

"Just because of the constant working in groups, conflicts couldn't exist in
that fashion," said the assistant principal. "He dealt with it. It was not even
acceptable to him."

Abdul has now set his sights on life after high school. He aspires to be a
pilot.

"I'm here to get an education and to get something for the future," he said
during a class break. "In America, anything you want to do is possible."

Optimism Encouraged

Abdul's optimism is echoed by many students in the school, as they stride the
hallways and listen intently in class. The feeling does not come by accident,
teachers and administrators say.

"The optimism is infectious," said the principal, Eric Nadelstern, whose own
parents were Holocaust refugees from Poland and Romania. "To the extent that we
are successful, students leave us as competent learners and competent
individuals. The spirit that is shared by the entire faculty is that our
students represent the future."

In a classroom humming with Polish, Spanish and Chinese accents on a recent
morning, students expressed a litany of hopes and dreams in response to a math
teacher's question about what kind of student they wanted to be.

"I want to be the best I can and I want to be an A-student and always improve,"
15-year-old Maria Christian of Ecuador said in one happy breath.

"The more you want, the more we have," assured the teacher, Simon Cohen.

International High is constantly evolving to meet the needs of students. Over
the years, the class periods have gone from 35 minutes to 70.  This year, for
the first time, the curriculum has gone entirely interdisciplinary, with
instruction in core subjects linked by themes.

The school is now broken into six thematic clusters in what amounts to six
mini-schools. Each trimester, a small team of teachers from each cluster is
responsible for whta happens to about 70 students in the core subject areas
during the day.

During their four years, the students cycle through 12 clusters to accumulate
the credits needed to graduate. In one cluster called "Beginnings," incoming
students like Rafael Dobrowolski explore their immigrant experience through
lessons in English, math, science and art.

Remembering Homelands

Rafael is a 15-year-old Polish boy. As far as he is concerned, the future shines
bright. A year and a half ago, Rafael left Poland where there were soldiers on
the street and the outlook was bleak. His father has found a job cutting grass
in a Queens cemetery and his mother works as a secretary. Rafael, who was once
ashamed to speak because of his hobbled English, is learning big new words like
"sophisticated" this year.

"I say it quite a bit," Rafael boasted the other day.

Even as students labor over their English-speaking skills, International High
makes a point of fostering the memories of homelands around the world. Teachers
don't get upset if students speak in their first language in class. At a native
language celebration at the school earlier this month, Martin Vu rose to read an
essay he had written about his native country, Vietnam:

". . .Only deep, deep inside my heart actually knows how I miss those coconut
trees running along the river side, those tenderly sweet taste of the mango,
those intensely warm flavor of the durian. I don't want to recall any further
because this makes me sad."

The voice rising with emotion came from a quiet 18-year-old who left Vietnam
because he said he was not allowed to attend college. His father had served as a
surgeon in the South Vietnamese Army and is still regarded as the enemy, he
said. At age 13, Martin was imprisoned for 2 1/2 months as he tried to flee the
country. When he finally did leave Vietnam in 1988, he spent two years in
refugee camps in Malaysia and the Philippines.

Martin now lives in Queens with his mother and three sisters but his heart
remains in Vietnam. His father, who is unemployed, and brother subsist there on
financial support from relatives in America.

". . .I just want to say to all immigrants that America may be your home for the
rest of your life, but don't forget where you came from," Martin told the
assembly. "It's like you're in the present and heading to the future, but don't
forget your past no matter how good or bad it was. You can't go forward unless
you know what steps you have passed. Everyone has a country!"

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In the city's school system, where the foreign-born population
has more than tripled in the last four years, the International High School
offers a hand to immigrant youths. Abdul Samad, a 20-year-old from Afghanistan,
said, "I'm here to get an education and to get something for the future." He
greeted a classmate. (Ruby Washington/The New York Times)(pg. B1)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              270 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 28, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
How World War II Made The Movies Grow Up

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 22; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 930 words



Projections of War
Hollywood, American Culture and World War II
By Thomas Doherty
Illustrated. 364 pages. Columbia University Press. $32.50.

The cynical Humphrey Bogart doing his part for the Allied effort by sending
Ingrid Bergman off with Paul Henreid, the hero of the underground, at the end of
"Casablanca" (1942). Donald Duck exhorting audiences to sing "Heil!" in the
Fuhrer's face in "A Nightmare in Nutziland" (1942). Spencer Tracy dying during a
heroic reconnaissance mission and returning as a guardian spirit to watch over
his former girlfriend and her new lover in "A Guy Named Joe" (1943). These were
a few of the cinematic images consumed by American audiences during World War
II.

It is the argument of Thomas Doherty, an assistant professor of American studies
at Brandeis University, that the experience of World War II profoundly (and
permanently) altered the relationship between Hollywood and American society at
large, and in his new book, "Projections of War," he tries to illustrate this
thesis with a succinct anatomy of movies and documentaries made between 1941 and
1945.

Mr. Doherty argues that the war emphasized the "educational import and
ideological impact" of movies, removing them from the realm of pure
entertainment and thrusting them into a formative role in American culture. He
also argues that the war worked to liberalize attitudes toward women and
minorities. The new wartime roles of women as factory workers and nurses were
explored on screen, he says, while the roles of blacks were expanded by film
makers eager to avoid equations of "Deutschland and Dixieland" and "Hitlerism
abroad with Hitlerism at home."


The subjects tackled by Mr. Doherty are huge and unwieldy, and he makes his
canvas even larger by trying to relate World War II attitudes to attitudes
toward World War I, the cold war and Vietnam. Indeed, many chapters of this
volume could easily make full-length books on their own.

Having bitten off far more than he can comfortably chew, Mr. Doherty struggles
throughout this volume. He never really manages to flesh out his central thesis,
and for all the colorful anecdotes that pepper his narrative, his discussions of
ancillary subjects tend to sound perfunctory and pinched. He dismisses cinematic
treatments of the atomic bomb in two pages and skims over McCarthyism and the
movies in three. Even more disturbing is his propensity for glibness, a tendency
that can lead to such ludicrous statements as "what the Nazis did to Poland,
wartime critics did to Lubitsch."

As Mr. Doherty sees it, World War II compelled Hollywood film makers to
de-mythologize World War I, which had been depicted in movies like "All Quiet on
the Western Front" and "The Big Parade" as a slaughterhouse of senseless death.
In his words, "despair, meaninglessness, pacifism -- the dominant legacy of the
suicide of Europe -- had to be erased, rejected or revamped."


"Sergeant York" (1941), starring Gary Cooper as a would-be conscientious
objector who single-handedly kills 23 Germans during World War I, effectively
rehabilitated combat movies, opening the way for a flood of them. Before 1945,
Mr. Doherty reports, most of these films focused not on ground engagements but
on the glamourous exploits of pilots and bombardiers. "The Story of G.I. Joe,"
the first major film to celebrate the infantry's role in World War II, he says,
did not appear until 1945.

With the war's progress, regulations concerning the depiction of violence in the
movies slowly began to change. The famous Production Code, instituted in 1934,
had traditionally enforced the message that the guilty are always punished and
murder is always avenged. Yet when the Production Code Administration demanded
punishment for the killer of a Nazi agent in Lillian Hellman's "Watch on the
Rhine," the author responded with a note inquiring whether the administration
"was aware that killing Nazis was now a matter of national policy." The
contested scene, Mr. Doherty notes, remained intact.


As for newsreel depictions of the war, they, too, grew increasingly graphic,
surpassing in both content and impact anything that was generated by the
imagination of Hollywood. "Prior to the war," writes Mr. Doherty, "Fox Movietone
News had abided by an in-house policy of never showing a dead body. Under the
code, too, combat was quite literally bloodless. War's full fury and
gruesomeness -- shrieks of terror and torment, pools of blood, the evisceration
and dismemberment that accompanies the impact of sophisticated weaponry on the
human frame -- never reached the home front screen. But gradually,
incrementally, spurred on by Life and newspaper wire photos, the newsreels and
combat documentaries exposed a measure of the human ravages of war."

Yet however hardened American audiences had become to the violence they saw
depicted on the screen, nothing could prepare them for the horrors first
glimpsed at the Embassy Theater in New York on April 26, 1945, with the release
of Artkino's one-reel "Nazi Atrocities" about four concentration camps where
Jews were systematically killed.

"At Eisenhower's request," writes Mr. Doherty, "the camp footage was shown
nationwide, and audiences seem to have responded with an appalled solemnity.
Some gasped, a few hissed obscenities at the Germans, but most sat in shocked
silence. In London, reportedly, patrons tried to flee the theaters -- only to be
constrained by servicemen who compelled the civilians to confront on the
newsreel screen some of what the soldiers had experienced in action."

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas Doherty (Sandra Doherty)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              271 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Nominee at State Dept.: An Upbeat 'Friend of Bill'

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1191 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 28


Friends of Strobe Talbott like to recall a moment last April in an Oregon hotel,
a few minutes after the Senate overwhelmingly confirmed him as Ambassador at
Large to the countries that once formed the Soviet Union.

While the Vice President, the White House chief of staff and the national
security adviser looked on in surprise, the 47-year-old former journalist
triumphantly embraced two of his fellow Rhodes scholars from Oxford University
-- the Secretary of Labor, Robert B. Reich, and the President of the United
States, Bill Clinton. It was a moment full of self-congratulation, perhaps even
self-satisfaction.

"We were in Portland on the eve of the Vancouver summit, and Clinton surprised
Strobe and swore him in himself," recalled an official who was in the room at
the time. "Then came this real my-God-look-what's-become-of-us-boys hug. It was
joyous and weighty and very emotional, as if all of a sudden all of them were
struck by the weight of their responsibilities."

Then the trio burst out laughing.

No. 2 and, Perhaps, Rising

That sense of destiny and of triumph makes Mr. Talbott's nomination today as
Deputy Secretary of State seem far more portentous than the filling of a routine
bureaucratic gap. Despite having only eight months of Government service, the
man who is now supposed to be No. 2 in the State Department is in reality
probably Mr. Clinton's most trusted foreign policy adviser -- and certainly one
of his closest friends.

Does that make Mr. Talbott the shadow Secretary of State? Does it make him a
threat to Warren Christopher's tenure in Foggy Bottom?

Certainly not, aides to Mr. Christopher are quick to assert, stressing the
Secretary's self-confidence in his own relationship with Mr. Clinton, which they
say was nurtured last year when Mr. Christopher served as head of the
Presidential transition team.

By contrast, however, Mr. Clinton and Mr. Talbott got to know each other 25
years ago as roommates at Oxford, and they have maintained the friendship ever
since.

In introducing Mr. Talbott to President Boris N. Yeltsin at the Vancouver summit
meeting, for example, Mr. Clinton recalled how he would prepare scrambled eggs
and pots of tea for his workaholic roommate as he labored over a translation of
Khrushchev's memoirs.

And as Mr. Christopher's alter ego, Mr. Talbott is clearly well placed to move
up yet again.

But Mr. Talbott is renowned for his loyalty and discretion, and staunchly
defends Mr. Christopher as an excellent -- and deeply misunderstood -- Secretary
of State. In accepting the nomination at a news conference today in Los Angeles,
Mr. Talbott promised Mr. Christopher, "I will try to help you in any way that I
can."

Mr. Christopher, a lawyer who held the No. 2 job himself in the Carter
Administration, called Mr. Talbott "the best person for the job," saying the
choice reflected a desire "to have somebody of the President's generation" in
the post.

Just Can't Say No

Asked earlier in a telephone interview whether he aspired to his boss's job, Mr.
Talbott (who pronounces his name TALL-but) answered in appropriate diplomatese.

"I had no ambition to go into Government service at all," he said. "I'm finding
this a wonderful combination of an adventure, which is very daunting and
exciting, and I know will come to an end at some point."

He did not say no.

Nor does he deny reports that he was reluctant to accept the new job, saying: "I
couldn't imagine a better job than the one I now have, and it is with a certain
amount of trepidation that I move into another job."

As the Administration's chief Russia strategist, Mr. Talbott has demonstrated an
astonishing ability to dominate the internal policy debates.

Standing by His Man

Even before he was confirmed, he firmly established the Administration's
strategy: a strong defense of Mr. Yeltsin as the elected leader of Russia, even
if he acted in undemocratic ways. Some critics dubbed it the "Yeltsin-only"
approach.

Last fall, when Mr. Christopher was leaning toward offering early NATO
membership to Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic, Mr. Talbott held lengthy
meetings and drafted memos and argued that a new military division of Europe
would both alarm and enrage Russia and Ukraine. His view prevailed.

In recent weeks, Mr. Talbott has come under fire by critics who question his
optimistic analysis of Russia, which assumes that Moscow is committed to
capitalism and democracy. He has also been faulted for failing to predict the
strong showing of the nationalists in the Dec. 12 elections.

From Rabbits to Russian

Michael R. Beschloss, the Russia historian who wrote a book with Mr. Talbott on
the last years of the cold war, disagrees with this assessment, saying: "I think
he's been tremendously effective. He's a very good strategic thinker with a
large sense of history who is very good making his ideas clear in a way that
allows the public to understand them."

The son of an investment banker, Mr. Talbott was born Nelson Strobridge Talbott
3d in Dayton, Ohio. His parents nicknamed him Strobie until he persuaded them to
call him Strobe.

His mother, Josephine Talbott, says that in his youth, her son wanted to be a
doctor; he even performed experimental skin grafts on live rabbits in a
makeshift laboratory in the basement. But his trouble with chemistry and his
proficiency in Russian in high school pulled him toward Russian studies and
journalism.

Mr. Talbott, the third generation of his family to attend the Hotchkiss School
and Yale University, wrote his thesis on the 19th-century Russian lyric poet
Fyodor I. Tyutchev. While at Yale, he became an outspoken critic of the war in
Vietnam, writing anti-war editorials as chairman of The Yale Daily News. His
first editorial in his senior year called for the decriminalization of
marijuana.

A Family of Journalists

Still, Mr. Talbott fit the Hotchkiss-Yale tradition at Time magazine. He started
as a summer intern in the Moscow bureau during graduate school, and later rose
to become diplomatic correspondent, White House correspondent, Washington bureau
chief and editor at large.

Although he was well positioned to become a senior editor at Time, he never
embraced the administrative tasks that came with management and resisted
suggestions that he, his wife and their two sons move to New York.

Mr. Talbott is married to Brooke Shearer, a former journalist and private
investigator who also became a close friend of Mr. Clinton at Oxford. She worked
closely with Hillary Rodham Clinton during the campaign, traveling with her and
fending off unwanted interview requests, and now heads the White House Fellows
program.

Mr. Talbott's brother-in-law, Derek Shearer, another friend of Mr. Clinton, left
the Administration after a few months as a Deputy Under Secretary of Commerce,
and was recently named Ambassador to Finland.

Friends insist Mr. Talbott never aspired to do anything but write, but his
mother said the move into government was not difficult. "There's not too great a
jump, writing about government and thinking about what policy should be," she
said.

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Strobe Talbott (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              272 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Preferring the Cold Shelter of the Streets

BYLINE: By DON TERRY,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 24; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1351 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Dec. 28


In the gloomy underworld of pavement and loading docks that is Lower Wacker
Drive, Carmelo Vargas was cruising through the frigid winter darkness early
today on what he knew in his heart was likely to be a failed mission of mercy.

It was 12:15 A.M. on one of the coldest and most dangerous nights of the young
winter here and across much of the Midwest. Mr. Vargas, director of emergency
services for the Chicago Department of Human Services, had been driving around
for hours. He was trying with sweet talk and a dwindling supply of cigarettes to
get the homeless out of their cardboard homes and potential coffins and into
shelters already nearly filled to capacity with men, women, children and
despair.

The forecaster on the radio said the temperature was 8 degrees and would plunge
toward zero before the sun would bring a wisp of relief with dawn. Be careful,
the smooth, warm voice warned. The wind was making the temperature seem like 10
to 20 degrees below zero. On a night like this, the weather can injure like a
blow from a club.

Shelter Under Streets

Despite the danger, Mr. Vargas knew that most of the homeless who were still
outside at that late hour would refuse a ride to a shelter in one of the four or
five city vans prowling the night.

And he knew it would be especially hard to persuade the 40 or so men he would
probably find living on the docks, behind trash bins and under the ramps of
Lower Wacker Drive, a street running beneath the edge of the downtown business
district.

The men go to the area because its concrete and steel pillars supporting
elevated streets help block the wind and because they can find a thread of
privacy and protection in its shadows. They also go because they are too proud,
too foolish, too afraid or too independent to go to a shelter, even when the
cold can freeze their tears.

"We don't need no more shelter," said one man, 28-year-old Curtis Williams. "We
need jobs. If we had some jobs, then we could get our own apartments. Shelters
ain't doing nothing but putting us in a warehouse."

'Let Us Die in Peace'

Earlier, Mr. Vargas had stopped his car and approached a half-dozen men. While
some huddled under blankets, others stood as close as they could to the overhead
light on a loading dock.

"How you guys doing?" Mr. Vargas asked, handing out a few cigarettes.

"Leave us alone, Carmelo," one said. "Let us die in peace."

Another man reluctantly stepped away from the circle of light and faint warmth.
He pointed to a thin man, swallowed by a gray blanket.

"He ain't got up in five days," the man told Mr. Vargas. "I ain't seen him get
up to eat or go to the bathroom."

The man under the blanket was from Cuba. He spoke no English, and the other men
knew no Spanish, but using gestures and common sense they realized that he was
suffering more than they were. He had been living around the corner with a thin
sheet. The other men took him into their camp and gave him a couple of blankets
and what concern they could spare.

20 Years of Experience

The Cuban told Mr. Vargas that he was fine, even though it seemed he could
barely lift a cigarette to his trembling lips. He pulled the blanket over his
head and said he did not want to go to a shelter. Mr. Vargas, who learned
Spanish in his native Puerto Rico, said that he could not force him to go but
that he would check on him later.

"You might get robbed in them shelters," another man explained. "They make you
get up at 5 o'clock and put you out in the street. At least out here, we try to
take care of each other."

Mr. Vargas got back into his car and headed for the next group. He sighed and
said it was going to be a long winter. A 49-year-old veteran of Vietnam, he
began working with the homeless in 1973, starting out by counseling homeless
veterans.

In his early days on the job, most of the homeless were drifters and drunks.
They liked being on the street, cold but free, he said. And they are still
there, like Old Man John, who lives with a younger woman named Sandy in a
homemade shack along the bank of the Chicago River, a couple of miles from Lower
Wacker Drive. John, whose beard is as white as the carpet of snow near his
shanty, has been on the street for 36 of his 72 years. Mr. Vargas has an
apartment waiting for John and Sandy in a public housing development, but they
refuse to move. They say their love would not be accepted in the housing project
because they are an interracial couple.

These days the homeless are usually younger than John and more bitter about
being left out in the cold, Mr. Vargas said, and they jump at a chance for an
apartment. They feel that they have been cheated and do not feel free, he said.
They know all about the cutbacks in Federal housing programs, the crowded
detoxification and drug treatment centers and the blue-collar jobs that seemed
to vanish overnight.

"A lot of them are real mad," Mr. Vargas said. "But most of them are nice guys."


'Everything They Need'

He said that if he were homeless like the young American Indian in the Cubs cap
or the elderly woman with her belongings in a plastic bag from the "Let Them Eat
Cake" bakery, he, too, would head for Lower Wacker. There is no snow there, and
the church groups and private citizens hand out sandwiches and blankets like
relief workers going in after a flood.

"Why should the guys really try to get off the street if people give them
everything they need to survive on the street?" Mr. Vargas asked, even as he
handed out cigarettes to anyone who asked and gave one man car fare so he could
spend the freezing night with a relative across town.

Nowadays, the problems of homelessness indeed seem like a flood, ebbing and
rising, depending on who is counting. Mr. Vargas has heard it all, from 50,000
homeless in Chicago to 40,000 to 20,000. Whatever it is, he said, it is too
many.

Last year, Mr. Vargas said, he persuaded 27 people to leave Lower Wacker and
move into public housing.

Just One Acceptance

"But for every one I take out, two come in," he said with a sigh.

Before the night was over, Mr. Vargas had asked at least 20 men and women to
accept shelter, but only a 51-year-old woman named Mary reluctantly agreed.

Thirty minutes later, two of Mr. Vargas's workers called him on the radio. The
shelter where Mary had been taken forced her out because she was drunk, they
said, but before they could come to take her elsewhere she disappeared.

"That happens a lot," Mr. Vargas said. "At least she got to warm up in the van."

Daniel Alvarez Sr., the commissioner of human services, said Mary and most of
the men living below Wacker Drive "don't want our help." He added, "With them,
we know we are wasting our time."

Huddling Around Fire

Mr. Vargas reached into the glove compartment, pulled out a chemical heating pad
for his hands and steered toward three men who were stoking a fire in a metal
milk crate under a street ramp. The men were putting their hands almost all the
way into the flames. The bottom of one man's long, tattered brown coat was
smoldering as he fed the fire with pieces of a wooden packing crate.

The wind blew a flurry of sparks into the night that skipped past a puny
Christmas tree that the men had rescued from the trash and decorated with toilet
tissue and a plastic sandwich bag. The men had eaten a Christmas dinner, they
said, thanks to a church group.

"It wasn't too bad of a Christmas," one said.

One man, Jimmy Martin, a 40-year-old veteran, said his biggest fear was
"freezing to death." He said he had been on the street for about nine months
since losing his job at an electrical parts plant.

Mr. Vargas said he was trying to get Mr. Martin into a public housing apartment
but conceded that that was no guarantee the streets would not pull him back
under.

The three men by the fire talked with Mr. Vargas for 20 minutes, but all refused
to go to a shelter. Nothing personal, Mr. Martin said, adding that they knew
that sooner or later Carmelo would show up and ask.

"Whenever it gets this cold, he'll be out here with us," Mr. Martin said.

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Why should the guys really try to get off the street if people
give them everything they need to survive on the street?" asked Carmelo Vargas
of Chicago's Department of Human Services. He tried to persuade a homeless man
in a subway under the Richard J. Daley Center to go to a shelter. (Todd Buchanan
for The New York Times); The frigid temperatures that have gripped many parts of
the country are more a part of the routine of work for lobster fishermen in Cape
Porpoise. Me. They prepared to break through the ice to go to work. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              273 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Is Offered Regrets, Barbed

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 244 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., Dec. 29


In a letter to President Clinton, a lawyer for two Arkansas state troopers who
said they had helped arrange sexual trysts for Mr. Clinton when he was Governor
has said he regrets the "public pain" the assertions have caused the Clinton
family.

But while couched in the language of an apology, the letter made clear that the
lawyer, Cliff Jackson of Little Rock, believed his clients' assertions.

In his letter, which was distributed to reporters today, Mr. Jackson wrote,
"Forgive my role as an attorney for the troopers (A role which I did not seek
and undertook only with great trepidation when the truth of their allegations
became apparent.) in inflicting such public pain upon you and yours."

He said he hoped the public airing of the troopers' accounts would bring about
the "best possible future for you and our country."

Mr. Clinton has denied the accusations by the troopers, Roger Perry and Larry
Patterson, that he misused his security detail while Governor and while still
living in the Governor's Mansion here after being elected President.

In Hilton Head, S.C., where the President is vacationing, a White House
spokesman, Jeff Eller, said Mr. Clinton knew of the letter but would have no
comment on it.

The White House has characterized Mr. Jackson as a political enemy; he and Mr.
Clinton attended Oxford University together in the late 1960's. Mr. Jackson
raised questions about Mr. Clinton and the draft in the Vietnam War.


LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              274 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-Fugitive Questions a Ruling

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 210 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Dec. 30


Lawyers for a former fugitive, Katherine Ann Power, told a state appeals court
on Wednesday that a judge's order prohibiting her and her relatives from selling
her story was unconstitutionally vague.

Ms. Power's lawyers and the Civil Liberties Union of Massachusetts asked for a
clarification of an order by Judge Robert Banks of Suffolk County Superior Court
prohibiting Ms. Power from profiting from her crime.

Ms. Power, a member of a anti-Vietnam War revolutionary group, drove a getaway
car during a 1970 bank robbery in which a Boston police officer, Walter A.
Schroeder, was killed. She surrendered in September after more than two decades
as a fugitive.

Judge Banks previously refused to clarify or reconsider the special probation
conditions, which restrict Ms. Power and her representatives from profiting from
her story.

"The special conditions, when coupled with the risk of imprisonment for
violation of the conditions, constitute an unconstitutional prior restraint on
First Amendment-protected activity," the lawyers wrote in their brief to the
appeals court.

Ms. Power's lawyer, Rikki Klieman, has said that the conditions prohibit
relatives and friends "from engaging in activities or speech related to the
defendant's life."

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              275 of 275 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Pentagon Memo;
Quickly the Pentagon Is Becoming Inman's Camp

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 892 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 30


With Defense Secretary Les Aspin on the way out, the race is on among some top
Pentagon officials to show, one, that they never thought much of him anyway,
and, two, that they deeply respect the genius of one Bobby Ray Inman, who has
been nominated to be Mr. Aspin's successor.

Mr. Inman has not set foot in the Pentagon since he was picked by Mr. Clinton,
and he has sworn to keep quiet about issues like Bosnia, Somalia and homosexuals
in the military until his Senate confirmation hearing next month.

"It's mostly kibitzing from the sidelines because the Wizard of Oz isn't even
here yet," said one junior Defense Department official.

But some top Pentagon officials are already waxing eloquent about the retired
admiral's organizational skills and articulate speaking style, two traits Mr.
Aspin lacked.

Larry K. Smith, special counselor to the Defense Secretary and a long-time aide
to Mr. Aspin, has boasted to associates that he will become "operations
director" for Deputy Defense Secretary William J. Perry.

A Quick Convert

Mr. Smith has told associates that Mr. Aspin liked to "chew over" problems at
length, but that the new "Inman-Perry" team will operate more decisively and
efficiently.

Some Pentagon officials say Mr. Smith's job switch has been in the works for
months, but many Aspin loyalists grumble that Mr. Smith's pronouncements about
Mr. Inman mark a fast conversion for someone who just two weeks ago was
heralding the accomplishments of Mr. Aspin's first year in office at a Pentagon
news conference.

"He's very demanding of himself and other people who support him," Mr. Smith
said.

Most other Defense Department officials are nervously waiting for their new boss
to arrive. "No one's rushed out to the library to look up the Inman record, but
that may just be because everyone's on vacation this week," said one Aspin aide,
suggesting that such a flurry could occur next week.

Lower-ranking aides are quick to distance themselves from Mr. Aspin and brandish
their long service to the Democratic Party or, even better, their ties to the
White House. "Look, I'm a Clinton guy, not an Aspin guy," one Pentagon official
said smugly and anonymously, just to be safe. "I came over here on a different
trajectory."

The consensus view is that most of the senior and middle-level political
appointees, many of whom followed Mr. Aspin from the House Armed Services
Committee, will survive the transition to the Inman regime, at least for a
while. As for the submerged iceberg of career bureaucrats, it is not changing --
never has, never will.

Mr. Inman is likely to bring in a few close advisers of the sort afforded every
Cabinet secretary. But the Pentagon is only now filling its long roster of empty
positions throughout the department, so wholesale changes are not likely.

Nonetheless, there is a slight undercurrent of anxiety in the drab corridors of
the Pentagon. "What have you heard?" one senior Pentagon planner asked a
reporter who called to ask about the aide's future.

The Handicapping Sheet

The Pentagon handicapping sheet has three main categories: Likely to Stay, Up in
the Air and Goners.

Leading the list of Likely to Stay is Mr. Perry, an old friend and former
associate of Mr. Inman who visited the Secretary-designate in Austin, Tex., last
week for informal briefings.

The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, John M. Deutch, another longtime
associate of Mr. Inman, is also likely to stay, but the departure of Mr. Aspin,
one of Mr. Deutch's closest friends, makes the decision a little harder.

Two number-crunching experts appear safe: the comptroller, John J. Hamre, and
the director of program analysis and evaluation, William Lynn. The same goes for
Jamie S. Gorelick, the Pentagon's general counsel, who will be one of the
Administration lawyers guiding Mr. Inman through the Senate confirmation
process.

Rudy de Leon, one of Mr. Aspin's top personal aides, is mulling over several new
job possibilities in the Administration, including the No. 2 post in the Air
Force hierarchy.

In the category of Up in the Air is the Pentagon's entire policy section, headed
by Under Secretary Frank G. Wisner. Mr. Aspin revamped the policy branch early
in his tenure, but infighting and poor coordination doomed what Pentagon aides
called their "mini-State Department." As a result, Mr. Wisner's job may be on
the line.

New defense secretaries customarily install their own public affairs aides, but
Mr. Aspin's spokeswoman, Kathleen deLaski, has told friends she will fight to
keep her job.

A Noteworthy Goner

Among those seen as likely Goners is Vernon Guidry Jr., a top Aspin aide and
speechwriter. But the biggest casualty is likely to be Morton H.  Halperin,
President Clinton's nominee to be Assistant Secretary of Defense for Democracy
and Peacekeeping.

Senate Republicans have criticized Mr. Halperin's past views on the Vietnam War
and covert intelligence operations and vowed to block his nomination.

A month before he was nominated, Mr. Inman praised Mr. Halperin in an interview,
but suggested he did not believe the post was necessary. Mr. Halperin's friends
in and out of Government are now lobbying to have him named as the next head of
the State Department's policy planning bureau, which does not require Senate
confirmation.

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bobby Ray Inman, who has been picked as the new Defense
Secretary, in his Austin, Tex., office last week. In Washington, the rush is on
by Pentagon officials to align themselves with the nominee. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
