



Download Request: All Documents: 1-297
Time Of Request: Thursday, November 23, 2017  13:04:05 EST
Send To:

MEGADEAL, ACADEMIC UNIVERSE
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
LIBRARY
CHICAGO, IL


Terms: ((Vietnam OR Viet Nam) and Date(geq(01/01/1994) and leq(03/31/1994)))


Source: The New York Times
Project ID:



                               1 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 1, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE WHITE HOUSE IS MOVING TO EASE EMBARGO ON HANOI

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 31


Citing progress on Vietnam's efforts to determine the fate of missing Americans,
the Clinton Administration is moving toward easing the economic embargo against
Hanoi and plans to consult Congress about it early in the new year,
Administration officials said today.

A senior Administration official said that President Clinton's top foreign
policy advisers would meet "very soon" to decide whether to recommend the
lifting of the embargo, which was imposed after the end of the Vietnam War in
1975. The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the advisers were
"clearly moving toward an easing of the embargo."

The advisers last week discussed a range of options, from partial abandonment of
the embargo -- including allowing some American companies to enter into
contracts with the Vietnamese for a trial period -- to a total lifting of the
ban.

A 'Reciprocal Gesture'

The advisers met after Winston Lord, the Assistant Secretary of State for Asia,
returned from a trip to Southeast Asia in mid-December with an upbeat
assessment.

Mr. Lord argued in favor of taking some immediate action to ease the embargo to
reward Hanoi for its help in finding out what happened to the more than 2,000
American servicemen who did not return from the Vietnam War.

"Lord felt there had been significant progress made and had argued that the
Vietnamese were now expecting to see some kind of reciprocal gesture that would
be aimed at easing the embargo," one official said. He added that the Vietnamese
were not expecting full normalization of relations between Washington and Hanoi
at this time.

Mr. Lord is on a skiing vacation and could not be reached for comment.

A Nettlesome Issue

The trade sanctions against Hanoi have been a nettlesome issue for the Clinton
Administration. As a candidate, Mr. Clinton pledged there would be no easing of
the embargo until Hanoi made a "full accounting" of missing Americans. Yet that
position is at odds with the Administration's emphasis on expanding overseas
trade to improve the American economy.

With its well-educated, highly disciplined and motivated people and its natural
resources, including offshore deposits of oil and natural gas, Vietnam is
considered to have great economic potential. American businesses and a number of
members of Congress, both Democratic and Republican, have been pressing for an
end to the trade embargo lest American companies lose out to European and
Japanese competitors in exploiting the growing Vietnamese market.

Some veterans groups like the Veterans of Foreign Wars have also supported the
idea of closer ties with Vietnam so long as progress is made on the prisoner of
war issue.

But vocal opposition by organizations representing families of missing Americans
and by other veterans groups, including the American Legion, has placed a
political roadblock in the way of better relations between Hanoi and Washington.


The Pace Quickens

Because Mr. Clinton's avoidance of military service during the Vietnam War has
been a hot political potato, he has tried not to offend opponents of liberalized
relations. There are a few members of Congress who are fiercely opposed to
widened ties, but their numbers are dropping and in any event the President does
not need the approval of Congress to widen diplomatic or trade relations with
Vietnam.

While the officials said that no decision has been made on whether to lift the
embargo, the pace towards normalization appears to be quickening.

Last week's meeting of foreign policy advisers, reported in The Washington Post
today, was the first time they had gathered to consider the next steps to take
since Mr. Clinton eased the trade embargo in September. At that time, Mr.
Clinton permitted American companies to bid for projects in Vietnam financed by
international lending institutions.

The decision in September followed a policy shift in July, when President
Clinton said the United States would no longer try to block loans to Vietnam
from institutions like the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank. At that
time, Mr. Clinton's advisers said that the lifting of the economic embargo would
be conditioned on solid progress in learning the fate of the servicemen.

Mr. Clinton specifically said he would require tangible progress by Vietnam is
four areas: repatriating the remains of Americans known to have died in
Southeast Asia; supplying documents that could help in the search; assisting in
cases in which downed American airmen were suspected of being alive but were not
returned in the large-scale prisoner release in 1973, and working with the
Government of Laos to determine what happened to American airmen who were downed
in that country.

Virtually all those listed as missing are presumed dead, but the failure to find
remains has fueled speculation over the years that some might be alive and held
captive by the Vietnamese. For its part, Hanoi lists more than 300,000
Vietnamese soldiers, sailors and airmen as missing from the Indochina war.

Search Team Meets

During his three-day trip, Mr. Lord received the remains of what the Vietnamese
said were eight dead Americans at a ceremony in Hanoi. The repatriation brings
to 67 the number of remains the Vietnamese have returned this year. Mr. Lord
also traveled to Lao Bao, a village on the Vietnam-Laos border, for the first
meeting of the United States-Vietnam-Lao search team.

Mr. Lord, whose trip to Vietnam was his second in five months, praised the
Vietnamese cooperation on the issue of missing Americans as "absolutely superb."
At another point during his trip he told reporters, "If you look over the whole
year, we've made very good progress, indeed, tangible progress."

For his part, Mr. Lord gave the Vietnamese three million microfiche pages of
captured wartime documents to aid Hanoi in the search for its missing troops.
And he announced that Washington was giving Hanoi $2 million help it reintegrate
returning Vietnamese boat people.

In their meetings with Mr. Lord, Vietnamese officials told the American envoy
that Hanoi wanted to "proceed toward normalization as soon as possible."

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 1, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 862 words



International 2-5

U.S. MAY EASE VIETNAM EMBARGO

The Clinton Administration is moving toward ending the economic embargo against
Vietnam because of its cooperation in helping determine the fate of missing
Americans. 1


TRADE BARRIERS VANISH

Trade restrictions on thousands of products shipped between Mexico, the United
States and Canada disappeared with the New Year, as the North American Free
Trade Agreement went into effect. 1

PRAISE FROM U.S. FOR CHINA

The United States Ambassador to China, J. Stapleton Roy, said the United States
should take into account China's progress in improving the lives of its citizens
in reviewing American policy toward China. 5

ISRAELI SETTLERS SEEK AID TO MOVE

Many Israeli settlers in the West Bank are now seeking compensation from the
Government so that they can move back within Israel's boundaries before the area
comes under Palestinian rule. 3

FRENCH PREMIER'S GOLDEN TOUCH

The Prime Minister of France, Edouard Balladur, seems to be able to do no wrong
in the eyes of the public and is favored in the polls for the presidency despite
France's glum economic mood. 4

EGYPT CHARGES MURDER PLOT

The Egyptian Government said it arrested scores of Muslim fundamentalists in a
raid and that it foiled a plot to kill 12 prominent Government officials and to
bomb eight Government buildings. 2

Militants claim responsibility for South Africa attack. 2

Cornwall Journal: A Canadian border town fights smugglers. 4

National 6-8

DEBATE ON RADIATION TESTS

The disclosures that 800 human subjects were exposed to radiation experiments
during the cold war has provoked debate among scientists. Some have expressed
shock, but others have delayed judgment.  1

FACE TO FACE WITH HATE

In Los Angeles, a group of skinheads were brought face to face with objects of
their hate -- Jews, blacks, teen-agers of other ethnic groups -- in a counseling
program intended to foster understanding.  1

A FAMILY QUEST FOR WINDFALL

Generations and branches of the Robert Edwards clan continue to press for
ownership of 77 acres of prime Manhattan real estate they say belonged to their
ancestor.  6

FLYING TOO CLOSE FOR COMFORT

An increasing number of aircraft are flying too close to other planes because of
errors made by air traffic controllers, according to a new Federal report.6

COMPETING ADOPTION PLANS

A woman who gave up parental rights to her son is trying to get him back after
learning that two gay men plan to adopt him.8

Religion Notes: The latest battle over religious language.  8

Metro Digest 27

GIULIANI BECOMES MAYOR

Rudolph W. Giuliani becomes Mayor of New York, capping a five-year quest to be
the first Republican to lead the nation's largest city in a generation. To mark
the occasion he took an oath of office, for the second time, in the East Side
apartment of Judge Michael B. Mukasey.  1

DOCTOR IN MEDICAL SINKHOLE

The isolated community of 14,000 that Dr. Yvette Walker serves is a sinkhole of
medical problems: When she gets her patients, 25 percent have syphilis, 25
percent are mentally ill and more than 75 percent are drug users. Of the women,
27 percent are H.I.V.-positive, 30 percent have sexually transmitted diseases
and 10 percent are pregnant. Dr. Walker is the medical director of health
services for Rikers Island, the city's largest jail.  1

Business Digest 43

Obituaries 9

EX-LEADER OF I.B.M. DIES

Thomas J. Watson Jr., who led I.B.M. and America into the computer age, died at
the age of 79. Mr. Watson, who retired as chairman in 1971, took over the
company from his father and transformed it into a technological giant.  1

Irving Paul "Swifty" Lazar, literary and entertainment agent.  9

Arts/Entertainment 11-23

Book of Kells: History repeats.  11

Music: "Ruddigore." 11

Sinatra's "Duets" album: music or technology?  11

Flo and Eddie at the Bottom Line.  23

ruins at the Knitting Factory.  23

Your Money 40-41

Sports 33-38

Basketball: Knicks' Blackman seizing opportunity.  37

Columns: Rhoden on the Sugar Bowl.  33

Football: Nebraska and Florida State vie for title. 33

Brooks and Elliott to start for Giants.  33

Vikings beat Redskins and make playoffs.  33

Jets' kicker ready for Oilers.  35

Defining time West Virginia.  35

Notre Dame still hoping to be No. 1.  34

Wisconsin and U.C.L.A. are opposites in Rose Bowl.  34

Penn State ready for Tennessee. 34

Hockey: Rangers lose to Sabres. 36

Sports People 37

Editorials/Op-Ed 24-25

Editorials

A new look at Crown Heights.

Promises, promises.

Housing a family on $286 a month.

The sanctions weapon, blunted.

Letters

Jack Gilbert: Beyond beginnings.

John Ashbery: Sometimes in places.

Margaret Gibson: Resolutions.

Linda Bierds: Care -- Emma Wedgwood Darwin, 1874.

James Merrill: More or less.

Deborah Digges: Apples.

Neediest Cases 28

Chronicle 26

Bridge 23

Crossword 18

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 1, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

The Sanctions Weapon, Blunted

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 408 words


Under the Trading With the Enemy Act, it has been illegal since 1963 for any
U.S. company to do business with Cuba. Yet Cargill Inc., a giant agricultural
trader, is accused of arranging for the sale of Cuban sugar to Venezuela in 1988
through its Swiss subsidiary, Cargill International. But, as The Times's Dean
Baquet reports, at only one point is Cargill vulnerable to U.S. laws -- the
Swiss subsidiary obtained its dollar-denominated financing from the Atlanta
branch of the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, presumptively violating embargo laws.

This is the same Atlanta bank whose chief officer, Christopher Drogoul, was
indicted in 1991 on charges of granting multi-billion dollar loans to Saddam
Hussein's Iraq. The Cuban sugar sale was cited in the Justice Department
charges, and Cargill executives in Minnesota and Switzerland were named as
co-conspirators but not indicted.

It stretches belief that the company's Geneva subsidiary acted primarily on its
own, as Cargill's attorneys claim. Still, from what is known, this is less a
scandal than a commentary on the difficulty of proving collusion in sanctions
cases. Enforcement is especially difficult when an embargo is imposed by the
United States alone, which it does against Cuba, Vietnam, Libya and North Korea.
In a global economy, foreign subsidiaries of multinational companies are subject
to laws of host countries, beyond the reach of the Justice Department or the
U.S. Congress. This limitation is essential to the orderly functioning of a
global economy. Imagine the indignation in America if foreign subsidiaries were
ordered by another government to refuse all sales to Israel.

But the legal autonomy of foreign subsidiaries enormously complicates
enforcement of any unilateral embargo. That applies doubly when other countries
perceive U.S. trade restrictions as unreasonable or unfair. Cuba is a case in
point. Evasions became so widespread that in 1992 Congress tightened existing
sanctions and expressly barred foreign subsidiaries of U.S.-based corporations
from doing business with the Castro regime. Though this has cut some trade,
Britain, Canada and other major trading countries have protested the law's
extraterritorial reach and decline to enforce it.

Sanctions can be an effective means of expressing a collective judgment against
an outcast regime. But to be truly effective in a world of multinationals, an
embargo needs to be multilateral.

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 297 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 2, 1994 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Blue Helmets, Empty Guns

BYLINE: By BRIAN HALL.

Brian Hall is the author of ''The Impossible Country: A Journey Through the Last
Days of Yugoslavia,'' to be published this spring.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 0; Magazine Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 9976 words


On a hazy October day, the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, steps off a chartered jet at the airport of Maputo, the capital
of Mozambique. He moves patiently down the weathered red carpet, shaking hands
with the assembled ambassadors and dignitaries. A phalanx of Mozambican soldiers
snaps to attention and a band harrumphs through a martial tune. Beyond the
ambassadors, a dozen singing groups wait their turn to perform. Mozambique,
which gained its independence from Portugal in 1975, has never before been
visited by a United Nations Secretary General.

As I watch Boutros-Ghali, I can only wonder at his thoughts. He is stone-faced
much of the time, especially in public. He walks stiffly, with his head pushed
forward, which makes him look shorter than he is. He will laugh when a laugh is
called for. It's a charming, lit-up laugh, often accompanied by a friendly grab
at the arm of his interlocutor. But then he quickly folds the laugh up and
returns to impassivity.

His agenda for this 10-day African tour is extraordinarily full -- and packed
with potential catastrophes. On the way to Mozambique, he held meetings in Egypt
and Djibouti to discuss regional support for a political settlement in Somalia.
In Maputo, he hopes to jump-start negotiations between the Government and
Renamo, an insurgency group, that have stalled for a year.

He is also scheduled to meet with his special representatives from South Africa,
which is looking increasingly unstable, and Angola, which is a bloody nightmare.
Then he is heading for Nairobi, which has had an influx of refugees from
Somalia. After that, he goes on to Somalia itself, where Gen. Mohammed Farah
Aidid is planning to demonstrate against him and presumably, if the opportunity
arises, shoot him.

Worse, someone in the United States Government has chosen this moment to
undercut him publicly. The day before his arrival in Maputo, The Washington Post
reported in a front-page article: ''The Clinton Administration, increasingly
unhappy with U.N. Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, is pressing him to
cancel a visit to Mogadishu on the grounds that his unpopularity among Somalis
could provoke demonstrations or even a breakdown in the current truce between
U.N. forces and militia leader Mohammed Farah Aidid.''

For the past several years, Washington has seemed increasingly plagued by leaks,
but this one is particularly stinging. One wonders what its purpose is, since
anyone who knows Boutros-Ghali even slightly knows it will only harden his
resolve. ''It automatically puts him in an impossible situation,'' notes Sir
Brian Urquhart, a 41-year veteran of the United Nations who is a scholar in
residence at the Ford Foundation. ''If he doesn't go, people would think he's
some kind of poodle.''

''Poodle'' is not a word that would normally occur to anyone who has had
dealings with Boutros-Ghali. Bull terrier, maybe. Friends of his, like Nabil
Elaraby, the Egyptian Ambassador to the United Nations, call him
''independent-minded,'' ''straightforward'' and ''self-confident.'' Others offer
up ''abrasive,'' ''stubborn'' and ''thin-skinned.''

Certainly, in his two years of office, Boutros-Ghali has become the most
high-profile Secretary General since Dag Hammarskjold, who died in a plane crash
in 1961. Partly, this is because the United Nations is under more scrutiny, now
that the end of the cold war has unleashed an epidemic of regional conflicts and
the world is groping for some institution that might tend to them. But partly it
stems from Boutros-Ghali's ambitious vision of the U.N.'s potential. ''Never
before in its history has the United Nations been so action-oriented, so
actively engaged and so widely expected to respond to needs both immediate and
pervasive,'' he wrote in a 1992 report. ''Clearly, it is in our power to bring
about a renaissance -- to create a new United Nations for a new international
era.''

Since that report, Cambodia has negotiated a mine field of an election under
United Nations auspices with encouraging success, despite a violent boycott by
the Khmer Rouge. But during the same period, horrific civil wars have erupted
that defy all U.N. peacekeeping efforts.

In Angola, elections for a new Government failed to prevent a return to the
worst fighting of its long civil war. In Bosnia, proponents of ''ethnic
cleansing'' have maimed, raped and killed at will. And in Somalia, a highly
publicized peacekeeping operation widely viewed as Boutros-Ghali's pet project
has claimed the lives of 30 American soldiers and 91 U.N. forces -- the most
casualties since 195 peacekeepers were killed in the Congo in the 60's -- not to
mention hundreds of Somali civilians.

Fairly or not, when an institution comes under a cloud, the lightning strikes
the man perched on top.

The Secretary General should not have taken a prominent role in the Somali
conflict to begin with, some critics contend. As Egypt's Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs between 1977 and 1991, he had extensive dealings with Mohammed
Siad Barre, the dictator whom Aidid helped overthrow. No one is calling for
Boutros-Ghali's removal, but some United Nations watchers are saying, off the
record, that they are glad he intends to serve only one five-year term.

With his performance and even his character under fire, on this bright Sunday
afternoon in Maputo Boutros-Ghali probably feels in need of a tangible victory.
By now he has reached the singing groups. One by one they spring to life,
clapping and dancing. Boutros-Ghali and his small entourage step off the end of
the carpet, fold themselves into black Volvos and Mercedeses and speed away.

Everyone I have spoken to in Maputo has discounted the possibility of future
ethnic clashes in Mozambique. I am not an expert on the country, but I know that
the Government leaders are mainly from a southern people called Shangaan and
their military men are Makonde from the north, while much of the Renamo
leadership derives from the Ndau people in between. I also know that President
Banda of Malawi, some of whose people belong to the same tribes as those across
the border, has fished for a while in northern Mozambique, hoping to pry loose a
huge province with the newly minted name of Rombezia. Perhaps I think this is
important because I have spent a lot of time in Yugoslavia, and I remember my
first visit in 1989, when every Yugoslav told me the country's nationalist
problem was a thing of the past.

In Maputo, the negotiations that the Secretary General is to help nudge along
concern the 1994 elections. I have become wary of multiparty elections in
countries with little national awareness -- and Mozambique has less than
Yugoslavia did. Often, they turn into clarion calls for nations or tribes to
coalesce around their parties and fight an electoral battle that is merely a
dress rehearsal for the kind with guns.

ROMBEZIA. THE WORD IS A portmanteau of Rovuma and Zambezi, the two rivers that
would define the northern and southern borders of the Malawian President's new
province. I suppose the people living there would be encouraged to think of
themselves as Rombezians.

Abkhazians are trying to break away from Georgia and Ossetians are hoping to
follow. Burundi has no Burundians, only Hutus and Tutsis, who remind the world
of this by slaughtering each other by the tens of thousands. Now that we know
about Tajiks, it's time to learn that there are Tajiks called Garmis and the
non-Garmi Tajiks are killing them. If South Africa breaks up, are we going to
have to start talking about Bophuthatswanans?

Once, in Bosnia, in a hill town of Serbs and Muslims, I met a man running a
sweet shop who I thought was Albanian because he told me he was from Kosovo. But
no, he was a Goranac. His people lived on a mountain ridge in the south of
Kosovo and spoke their own language, which was not officially recognized because
Macedonian hegemonists said it was a dialect of Macedonian. Meanwhile,
Bulgarians insist that Macedonian is only a dialect of Bulgarian. The proud
Goranac showed me his country on a map. It comprised eight villages.

Welcome to . . . the New World Order? Please. It was bad enough that the phrase
seems like a warmed-over Nazi locution and it has grown more offensively
inappropriate with each new civil war, each new horde of starving refugees, each
new failure of the international community to acknowledge reality. Even
Boutros-Ghali uses the phrase on occasion, although he should know better, as he
runs around the globe trying to stamp out the fires that rekindle behind him
like trick birthday candles.

The United Nations used to have a mechanism for handling the intractable
conflicts that were dumped on it. It was called ''peacekeeping'' and sometimes
it worked. It was based on a few simple rules: peacekeeping forces were not
introduced unless there was a peace to keep and unless all the parties to the
conflict consented to their presence. They were to maintain strict neutrality
and they were never to use force, except in self-defense.

Unfortunately, the classic approach is no longer viable. At the beginning of
1992, there were 11,500 U.N. peacekeepers worldwide; today there are 72,000. The
classic approach was an improvisation of the cold war. When there was a Soviet
Union, the Security Council could rarely agree on U.N. involvement in a
conflict, since the Soviet Union and the United States inevitably saw almost any
regional crisis as one impinging on their vital interests.

For decades, everyone said that if only the cold war ever came to an end, the
Security Council could begin to function properly. Well, here we are, and the
Security Council is meeting every day and often twice a day, instead of once a
month. It now agrees on the tougher issues, so forces can be sent where the
bullets are still flying and where some of the parties don't want them. This is
the kind of engagement the charter foresaw, under its chapter dealing with
threats to international peace and security. But the charter also foresaw a U.N.
army and a U.N. command, neither of which ever came into existence. Member
states simply do not want a U.N. army. Boutros-Ghali raised the idea of one --
or, at least, designated standby forces in the various national armies -- in his
1992 Agenda for Peace and was greeted with a mixture of inaction and alarm.

Brian Urquhart questions the usefulness of the Security Council's unanimity. ''I
think that what has happened in the past year or two is partly because the
Security Council can easily agree on almost everything. That I think is a major
change and not necessarily a change for the better. The Security Council now in
the most facile way can agree on resolutions and consensuses and chairman's
statements about virtually any subject in the book. And then the various
ambassadors will come out and look the cameras in the eye and say, We have
decided so and so. This tends to be Wizard of Oz stuff. There are 28 resolutions
now on Bosnia. Well, you would certainly never know it, if you wandered around
Sarajevo.''

BOUTROS-GHALI campaigned hard to be the sixth Secretary General of the United
Nations. The first U.N. chief, Trygve Lie, dubbed his post ''the most impossible
job in the world.'' It may be that, although Boutros-Ghali and his predecessor,
Javier Perez de Cuellar, insist that it is not. However, it is surely one of the
most ill-defined: a combination of chief administrative officer of the United
Nations and global diplomat with a fat portfolio whose pages are blank. When I
ask Boutros-Ghali why he wanted the job, he replies: ''I believe that I came at
a very interesting period. I would not have been interested to obtain this job
five years ago.'' During his term, he says, he wants to turn the world body into
''a new instrument in the public opinion, a new instrument for the member
states.''

No one doubts Boutros-Ghali's intelligence or the breadth and depth of his
knowledge of political affairs. It is probably broader and deeper than that of
any Secretary General before him. Born in 1922 into a wealthy Coptic family of
Cairo, he has degrees in law, economics and political science at the
Universities of Cairo and Paris. He taught international law at Cairo University
for 30 years and wrote 31 books on international law and political science. His
grandfather was Boutros Ghali, modern Egypt's only Christian Prime Minister, who
was killed by a Muslim assassin in 1910 (to honor him, the family adopted his
entire name). In 1977, Boutros Boutros-Ghali was appointed Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs, just in time for the upheaval caused by Anwar Sadat's visit to
Jerusalem, and he was instrumental in negotiating both the Camp David peace
accords in 1978 and the Israel-Egypt peace treaty in 1979.

But soon after he arrived at the Secretariat, in January 1992, the murmurings
began: about arrogance, a high-handed manner, a certain unhelpful volatility.
His snappish comment to the people of Sarajevo during his visit there a year ago
-- to the effect that he could name 10 places in the world that were worse off
-- is still referred to with shocked awe. When a dust-up with the Security
Council, and with Britain in particular, caused Fleet Street to go after him
with its usual cheekiness, he blew the quarrel sky high by saying, ''Maybe
because I'm a wog.''

You would think reporters would love him for saying things like that, the way
they loved Ed Koch. But I find the atmosphere in the press section of the United
Nations headquarters in New York to be positively poisonous. The reporters there
call him Boo Boo and Peter Peter. (Boutros is Coptic for Peter.) Some surmise
that, coming as he does from Egypt, Boutros-Ghali is not accustomed to a
critical press.

In private, Boutros-Ghali can be quite charming. People who have seen him only
in public find this hard to believe. He is not a good public speaker. He keeps
his eyes rooted to the text in front of him. He lumbers along in heavily
stressed cadences, his head bobbing and his finger jabbing, so that he seems to
be hectoring his audience. The effect is even worse in news conferences. He
tends to answer questions with a Gallic expression of raised eyebrows and
drawn-down mouth, which in French just looks French, while in English it looks
like a suppressed sneer.

In any event, in January 1992 Boutros-Ghali had a tough act to follow. He
assumed the Secretary Generalship at a time of unprecedented euphoria over the
United Nations. During the last few years of Perez de Cuellar's tenure, says
Edward Luck, president of the United Nations Association of the U.S.A., ''there
was a series of successes: Afghanistan, Iran-Iraq, Namibia, Nicaragua, the
accords in El Salvador. The U.N. just seemed to have one thing after another
going its way. People went from thinking the U.N. could do nothing to thinking
it could do everything.'' In 1988, United Nations peacekeepers won the Nobel
Peace Prize.

This euphoria coalesced around Perez de Cuellar, a veteran United Nations
diplomat from Peru who is often described as the opposite of Boutros-Ghali --
smooth, soothing and self-effacing or, as Assistant Secretary General Alvaro de
Soto calls him, ''a diplomat from the embryo.'' Perez de Cuellar also has a
useful mumble that allows him to trail off into unintelligibility whenever he
gets to the tricky heart of a matter, so that his listeners can interpret his
remarks to their several satisfactions. He was the unsung, unassuming man from
South America who rose to the historical occasion and became a dragon slayer
with a disarming dullness.

Boutros-Ghali himself tends to discount the importance of the personality of the
Secretary General. ''Very often people like to compare, 'Ah, you are more active
than Perez de Cuellar or than Waldheim.' I say: 'No, let us speak very justly.
If I would have been of the period of Waldheim or the period of Perez de
Cuellar, I would have done exactly the same. And if Waldheim would have been now
at my period, he would have been compelled, even if he did not want to do it, to
be more active. So, very often it is the period that creates the man.''

In Paris, where he now lives, Perez de Cuellar declines to support that
sentiment. In fact, he has misgivings about United Nations policy in Somalia:
''To turn the mandate into the hunting of a man -- I immediately have some
doubts about the wisdom of this issue. It's easy to pass judgment when you're
out of the house. But as a man who worked in the U.N. for many years, I really
suffered when I learned that so many people were killed. The image of the U.N.,
which needs so much improvement, has suffered.''

Still, Perez de Cuellar shows a clear sympathy for the difficulties
Boutros-Ghali is in. When I ask if he is glad not to be Secretary General today,
he answers before I even finish the sentence: ''Oh yes, oh yes. I am not a
masochist.''

BEFORE BOUTROS-GHALI'S arrival in Maputo, I went to see his special
representative, Aldo Ajello, in his office in the headquarters for Onumoz, a
French acronym for United Nations Operation in Mozambique. U.N. operation
acronyms sound like brand names for cold remedies (Unifil, Untac) or creatures
fighting Godzilla (Unrwa, Onumoz).

Ajello clearly enjoys his job and has an impressive grasp of those details of
negotiations in which, as people say, the devil lies. On a table in his office
was a computer printout of a magnificent multitiered time line in which all the
interlocking institutional and logistical developments necessary for national
elections in Mozambique were represented by boxes and arrows in three different
colors. Everything dovetailed prettily: the setting up of commissions and
assembly points, the arrival of troops for demobilization, the selection and
training of 30,000 men for the new unified army, the resettling of civilians
with hoes and clothes and packets of seeds.

The problem was, none of it was actually happening. The General Peace Accord
signed in Rome in 1992 had called for elections no later than Oct. 15, 1993,
which happened to be the day I was sitting in Ajello's office, admiring his time
line. The time line itself called for elections a year hence. Ajello insisted to
me that this was still possible, but a lot of people were privately saying June
1995.

Most observers principally blamed Renamo for the delay. They were soldiers,
people liked to say, not politicians. They had no idea how to negotiate or
compromise, which inevitably made one wonder if they had any idea how to
campaign or govern. The Renamo leader, Afonso Dhlakama, is intelligent but
deeply unworldly. Later, in New York, Boutros-Ghali tells me that part of his
bargaining strength with Dhlakama came from this unworldliness, from the fact
that Dhlakama was so thrilled ''the Secretary General of the United Nations
spent one hour with him and had a tete-a-tete with him.''

One of Dhlakama's early demands in the negotiations had been for $100 million to
transform his guerrilla army into a political party. The United Nations had
responded with a trust fund of $5.8 million for that purpose. Dhlakama said he
needed some of that money for ''political consultants,'' because the Renamo
leadership needed to be guided through the democratic process, but U.N. rules
wouldn't allow payments to consultants.

Since one of the main obstacles in the negotiations involved the timing for
demobilizing the soldiers and guerrillas, Dhlakama had recently been floating
the idea that perhaps they could hold the elections first and demobilize
afterward. Ajello's response to that was brief: ''No way!''

Onumoz had only to consider the horrifying example of Angola, where elections
had been held without demobilization. When Jonas Savimbi lost, he simply went
back to war. The United Nations is sometimes blamed for this failure, but the
election accord was worked out without input from the U.N.

Holding an election in a country that has never had one, especially after 16
years of war, as is the case in Mozambique, is a delicate and complex process.
Since neither side trusts the other, the composition of the electoral commission
is both crucial and inevitably problematic. This, indeed, has been a major
stumbling block. There are other questions. If demobilization does occur, how
will a devastated economy absorb a large officers corps accustomed to a
bourgeois life style? How do you prepare a largely illiterate population for
national elections when many people can't name their current President --
Joaquim Chissano? How do you get them to the polls when there are hardly any
roads? How can the United Nations, or anyone, possibly determine whether the two
sides are really disarming?

To the last question, Ajello had a much more sensible answer than any that the
European Community monitors in the former Yugoslavia ever gave me. ''I don't
even try,'' he said. ''I know very well that they will give us old and obsolete
material, and they will have here and there something hidden. I don't care. What
I do is create the political situation in which the use of those guns is not the
question. So that they stay where they are.''

Even assuming you successfully reach the big day, there remains the question of
whether a multiparty election is always a wise prescription in the first place.
I suggested this to Ajello and he concurred: ''You get out from 16 years of war.
Then you finally sign a peace agreement. What do you need? You need the highest
level of national unity, of national reconciliation. What do we give them? An
election, which is another conflict.''

Ajello conceded that it might have been better for Mozambique to try five years
of a government of national unity before any elections. But this was not the
option chosen in the Rome accord. There, too, the U.N. was only an observer.

Americans tend to equate elections with democracy and their observers go home
trumpeting a success as soon as the votes are counted. But elections can be
meaningless if a country has no tradition of a legal opposition, or an
independent judiciary, or a free press. Renamo, however, Ajello said, ''is not
like Savimbi. Savimbi never considered the possibility of losing the elections.
These people, they understand they could lose the election, and that's why they
want to make sure that, No. 1, they will survive this election, and No. 2, that
there will be another election, after a certain time, in which they can run
again.''

ONCE BOUTROS-GHALI arrives in Maputo, negotiations shift into high gear. Waiting
to talk to him, I wander around Maputo. Under the flowering jacaranda trees,
girls are pounding maize in wooden hollows and other children are playing with
cars -- constructed ingeniously out of wire cages -- that rattle along on
aluminum-can wheels. The pastel villas of this former Portuguese colony are
crumbling. The cement high-rises are crumbling. Everywhere is the sweet, dizzy
stench of garbage piled high in the hot sun.

Even if the negotiations are going nowhere, Mozambique has at least enjoyed a
year of peace, and the 6,000 Onumoz peacekeepers from Bangladesh, Brazil,
Botswana, Italy, Japan, Uruguay and Zambia patrolling the roads and supply
corridors can take part of the credit. Only part, because it has taken several
months to get the troops in place, and during those months the peace held
anyway.

The discipline Renamo's guerrillas have shown in holding to the peace accord has
surprised everyone. People now routinely say they are far more disciplined than
the Government troops. The suburbs of Maputo are no longer being raided and the
Central Hospital has far fewer recent amputees. It still has some, because more
than a million mines were strewn throughout Mozambique and dislocated people
returning home have been stepping on them.

Among Onumoz personnel there are two theories about this year of astonishing
peace. The first is that it is a solid achievement in itself, because it is
getting Mozambicans accustomed to peace. Even if the negotiations go nowhere,
people will be less likely to return to war. The second theory is that it is a
problem in disguise, because it removes any need for the parties to negotiate
seriously. Meanwhile, Onumoz is costing the United Nations about $850,000 a day.

On the last day of his visit, Boutros-Ghali calls a news conference and
announces a breakthrough. President Chissano and Dhlakama have agreed on the
composition of the electoral commission. They have also agreed to maintain
continuous direct negotiations in Maputo until a date for the beginning of
demobilization is agreed on.

After the news conference, Boutros-Ghali boards a plane for Nairobi. On the
plane, he looks tired. ''I believe that I've provoked a kind of awareness of the
possibility that the United Nations will not participate seriously in the
operation in the case that they continue to create mutual difficulties,'' he
says. ''The stick is, Look, there is a competition all over the world. We are
trying to obtain money now for Gaza and West Bank. We are trying to obtain money
for Yugoslavia. And because there is no progress, you will be completely
marginalized.''

Yes, he is pleased, but he is also perfectly aware that the whole thing can fall
apart tomorrow. Or it can make great strides for three months and then suddenly
collapse. Or the Mozambicans might have their election and then go back to war.
Recalling the Egyptian-Israeli negotiations of 1978, he says: ''I learned the
Sisyphus myth, that you have to work, work, work, and you can return to square
zero, and you must have the patience, the courage to begin again. This is
essential. Otherwise you are not a good negotiator. Never give up!''

IT IS ON THIS AFRICAN TRIP that I begin to get my own sense of Boutros-Ghali.

He gives an impression of nervousness in interviews. He fidgets with pieces of
paper, folding and unfolding them dozens of times. On the plane, a narrow
crevice between his fold-down table and the wall often proves irresistible.
While explaining to me some element of policy, he will be intently trying to jam
a paper into that crack. It crosses my mind that his famous aloofness may spring
from shyness. Another factor may be his imperfect English. He occasionally gets
lost in the thicket of a sentence and has to hack his way out. ''He gets
frustrated in English and tends to raise his voice,'' says Rolf Knuttson, a
member of his office. ''It makes him seem angry, when he's not. He never raises
his voice in French.''

He has the deep intellectual pride of a man who spent decades studying and
teaching in the bosom of a European culture that views intellectuals as a
distinct and honored class. Once he feels he knows a subject, his confidence in
his opinions seems unshakable. And he is particularly proud of his knowledge of
Africa.

''The origin is one very personal emotion,'' he says. ''My grandfather signed
the famous agreement of 1899, creating the condominium, the
Anglo-Egyptian-Sudan. And when I was a small kid, the kids were saying, 'Your
grandfather has sold the Sudan to the British!' For me, what did 'Sudan' mean?
O.K., you can sell a car, but to sell a country? So when I was a student, there
was an excursion to Khartoum in 1942, 1943 and I asked to participate. That was
my first contact.

''In Paris, I chose the studies on colonial law. Later, I published many essays
on African problems, and even created a sub-department on African affairs. I
followed with great attention the creation of the Organization of African Unity.
I wrote many books in English, French and Arabic on this organization. I created
the African Society for Political Science. I created the African Society for
Political Law. And when I was appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs in November
'77, in spite of the huge crisis of the Middle East, which was the visit of
Sadat, I always find time to pay attention to Africa. At the time I was accused,
the media was saying, 'Because Egypt has been excluded from the Arab world, she
is trying to find another backyard, and Boutros-Ghali is paying attention to
Africa.' So when I come to Africa, I know the leaders, I know the background, I
know the mentality and I am at ease with them.''

Boutros-Ghali's relentlessly formal view of the United Nations and his role in
it is problematic. This Cartesian approach can result in inflexibility. For
example, he will defend some action he has taken not on moral or practical
grounds but on the grounds that he was given a mandate by the Security Council,
and a decision by the Security Council represents ''the will of the
international community.'' Therefore, he is executing the will of the
international community. Q.E.D. There is, as well, a certain contradiction
between his two views of himself: as the impersonal executor of the Security
Council's will and as a forward-looking agent of change.

You rarely forget, in talking to him, that he was a professor for 30 years. He
pursues questions down the various possible logical pathways and rarely agrees
with what you say, not necessarily because he believes you are wrong but because
the argument, like a mountain, is there and he must climb it.

Madeleine Albright, the United States representative at the United Nations,
calls this his ''dialectical'' streak and she doesn't seem to appreciate it
much. His famous ''wog'' comment is probably attributable to this tendency. He
tells me he did not personally believe his ethnicity was an element in the
British press's treatment of him. But he does not regret the comment because he
said ''maybe,'' and you cannot rule out the possibility, since surely I would
agree there is such a thing as national prejudices.

In short, he is an academic, not a diplomat. In fact, he tends to look on the
word ''diplomat'' as pejorative. ''If you stick to principles,'' he tells me,
''you are not a diplomat'' -- a startling comment from the world's top diplomat.

A PHENOMENON OF THE post-cold-war world, says Shashi Tharoor, a United Nations
peacekeeping official, is ''a new transcendence'' of the global news media.
''The media now shows us a situation in a manner that clamors for international
response. So as the world says: 'Don't just stand there. Do something!' the
Council is obliged to consider what it can do. In the cases of the former
Yugoslavia and Somalia, it has used the one available institution that has
existed, has worked -- peacekeeping. But this has meant sending peacekeepers
where there was no peace to keep. It's particularly ironic that peacekeeping has
been taken and put into this 'Don't just stand there. Do something' syndrome,
because peacekeeping has often worked best when it's 'Don't do something. Just
stand there!' ''

In October, television and magazines drilled home the image of a man dancing in
front of the burning wreckage of a helicopter on a street in Mogadishu. He was
holding a twig, at the end of which dangled a twisted lump -- a torn scrap of an
American soldier's uniform. The ghastly thin dancing man looked like Death and
the sinewy scrap of uniform he was dangling before his laughing, gaping mouth
might have been roasted flesh. ''Don't just stand there. Do something!'' became
''Don't just stand there. Run!'' Washington was in full scramble. Congress was
threatening to force Clinton to withdraw the troops immediately.

On Oct. 22, Boutros-Ghali flies to Mogadishu to show support, he says, for the
staff in the field. Returning to Nairobi the same afternoon, he gives a news
conference. A reporter asks him whether the United Nations is still trying to
capture Aidid and he gives his stock answer. He has a mandate and his job as
Secretary General is to implement the mandate.

On the flight out of Nairobi to Addis Ababa, Boutros-Ghali tells me that Aidid
has captured all the attention because he is ''Zorro against Superman, David
against Goliath. The press talked to Aidid and took photos of Aidid, but not a
word was given to Ali Mahdi'' -- Aidid's rival. ''We said to Ali Mahdi, 'Why
don't you talk?' and he said, 'I give four interviews to CNN but they never
produced them.' So the image very often doesn't correspond to the reality.''

The following day, after he has seen the news reports on his own visit, he has
more to say. ''It was exaggerated, what was said everywhere. In Mogadishu, I
have my report, because I have a whole team of Egyptians there and they would
not lie. It was 200 small kids, making a manifestation. It was just less than
200 small kids who received money and burned a few tires in the middle of the
road. And they make out of it a big fuss.''

Like most public figures, Boutros-Ghali is sensitive to bad press and, like most
of them, he insists it doesn't bother him. He says it is an inevitable
consequence of negotiating. ''Once you are involved in any kind of mediation,
you must accept in advance that you will be accused of partiality. . . . This is
the rule of the game -- that you have been created to serve as a scapegoat. In
the case you are successful, you must disappear, to let the other people say,
'We have done this on our own.' And in the case you fail you must accept that
you will be accused of all the failures.''

This is perfectly true, and yet it can be carried too far. If you are too aware
that you will always be criticized no matter what you do, how do you recognize
those times when you are being criticized fairly? I am never reassured that
Boutros-Ghali acknowledges there are such times.

Aidid's dislike of Boutros-Ghali is well known. People at the United Nations say
that when the American-led forces were in charge in Mogadishu from December 1992
through April 1993, The United States special envoy, Robert Oakley, was under
strict orders from Washington not to incur any American casualties. So he was
careful to stay on good terms with Aidid, the warlord who controlled the port
and the area around the American headquarters. But, some American diplomats say,
Boutros-Ghali entertained a grand vision of the U.N. rebuilding Somalia as a
nation.

He kept calling on the Americans to disarm the clans. They declined (no
casualties, remember) and handed the operation over to the much weaker United
Nations forces, which had a Security Council mandate to oversee a March 1993
accord reached in Addis Ababa that dictated disarmament. The U.N. command made
it clear they expected disarming to go forward and they also began to set up
district councils that were supposed to be the fundaments of a new political
structure. Naturally, because Aidid wanted to be the next dictator of Somalia,
he felt threatened by this and started attacking U.N. forces.

Boutros-Ghali seems not to have realized that his background would also be a
major problem in Somalia. ''I think he made a bad mistake in not saying that
because of his background and experience and the part of the world he's from, he
should step away from Somalia,'' says a long-time observer of the United Nations
who spoke only on the condition of anonymity. He cites a U.N. tradition of not
putting peacekeepers or negotiators in a situation where there would be
conflicting national interests. ''You had Perez de Cuellar and Giandomenico
Picco running between Iran and Iraq. Well, that's not a bad combination -- Peru
and Italy. If you've run foreign affairs in Egypt, if you have strong opinions
about the Horn of Africa, you should step away.''

Instead, when the first U.N. envoy to Somalia, the Algerian diplomat Mohamed
Sahnoun, differed with his boss publicly on U.N. peacekeeping policy, he was
unceremoniously ousted. And rather than staying in the background, Boutros-Ghali
has gone to Somalia not once but twice.

When he arrives at an African country, Boutros-Ghali likes to open his public
comments with a reference to his long association, as Egypt's Minister of State
for Foreign Affairs, with the country and its leaders and how pleased he is to
be visiting now as Secretary General. In the case of Somalia, the warning bells
should have been clanging. But this problem hits Boutros Ghali right in his
blind spot: he is the African expert. Being an intellectual, and not a diplomat,
he finds the suggestion that he might know more than is good for his job absurd.

Nonetheless, everyone I speak with, both inside and outside the United Nations,
agrees that the Clinton Administration and Congress have unfairly and rather
shamelessly scapegoated Boutros-Ghali when they pinned the blame on him and his
representative, Adm. Jonathan Howe, for the heavy-handed manhunt for Aidid that
led to the Oct. 3 disaster in Mogadishu.

''The Oct. 3 operation was totally an American operation,'' says Edward Luck, of
the United Nations Association of the U.S.A. ''I mean, not even the U.N.
commanders knew anything about it. Howe apparently learned about it at the very
last moment. There was no effort to coordinate it with the U.N.'' He remembers
Senator Alfonse D'Amato of New York getting up on the Senate floor and saying
something like: ''It's those U.N. dummies. We can't put our forces under U.N.
dummies. Look what they do.'' Well, says Luck, ''those U.N. dummies happen to be
Americans. The Rangers are very aggressive guys and they go off and do the
things that are dangerous and high risk.''

Asked about Washington's treatment of him, Boutros-Ghali is determinedly
low-keyed. ''I have to take into consideration the contradictions of the member
states. This is my job. You know when you are beginning to work in a shop, the
customer is always right. You are selling a suit and I don't like it. You will
not say, 'No, but the suit is good!' No, no! You will say'' -- here he makes a
gesture of submission and infinite patience, the bright minion endeavoring to
calm his dim lord -- ''Yes, sir! We will change it if you want.''

The Americans, he admits, ''complicate my job. The only consolation is that they
are not the only ones who complicate my job. In August, it was the Italians. You
see, if you don't have a philosophical attitude, you will not be able to do this
kind of job.''

Helping him turn the other cheek was a formulation one might call the Useful
Scapegoat Principle. ''The U.N. was created for whom? To help the member states.
If member states are in difficulties and they can just put the blame on the
U.N., in a certain way you are helping. I can give you an example related to my
country. One year after the creation of the U.N., the Government of Prime
Minister Noukrachi wanted the abolition of the treaty which was concluded
between Egypt and Great Britain. Great Britain was not ready at all. It had
other things to do in 1946 than pay attention to a treaty that was concluded in
Egypt. The Government was in a very difficult position. Noukrachi decided to go
to the U.N. And the Security Council adopted a resolution saying the two parties
had to talk directly to each other, which means nothing. He returned to Egypt
and it was considered the biggest victory. The fact that we were able to
complain against Great Britain to the U.N. and that the delegate of Egypt was
insulting the delegate of Great Britain in the Security Council, in New York,
was a great victory. In other words, if the U.N. helps to diffuse the tension
existing between two countries -- why not?''

IN NEW YORK, THE SECURITY Council seems locked perpetually in session, and on
the 38th floor of the Secretariat Boutros-Ghali keeps a busy schedule of
consultations with ambassadors, envoys and heads of state. Often, he doesn't
return to his official residence until 8 or 9 P.M. and frequently goes to his
office for more work on Saturdays.

Meanwhile, in the austere halls outside the delegates' lounge and the Security
Council chambers, the agonies of the former Yugoslavia are a heavy, intermittent
presence. Now and then, the President of Bosnia, Alija Izetbegovic, comes
through New York and consults with the Security Council. Each time, he seems to
be retreating further into an irreal world of principle. And each time he looks
older and more tired.

The Croats threatened in September that they would not renew the mandate for the
United Nations forces arrayed between them and the Serbs of Krajina, a region in
Croatia, because the U.N. was not disarming the Serbs or helping restore
Croatian authority in Serb-held areas. But then they allow themselves to be
talked out of it, because if the forces left they would have to start fighting
the Croatian Serbs again, at a time when they are getting along well with the
Bosnian Serbs in their joint project of carving up Bosnia.

The Serbs representing the new Yugoslavia wander like ghosts through the halls
and hang around the delegates' lounge, because they have been denied the old
Yugoslavia seat in the General Assembly pending a formal reapplication. They
have failed to submit one, telling anyone who will listen that they have no
control over the Bosnian Serbs or the Croatian Serbs.

The United Nations has gotten pushed and pulled into Yugoslavia by the familiar
forces of a public demanding action and governments' efforts to satisfy these
demands by resolutions in the Security Council. Initially baby steps down the
slippery slope, these resolutions have degenerated into empty promises of
intervention. Kofi Annan, Under Secretary General for Peacekeeping Operations,
has a flexible and sensible attitude about this problem. In describing the
difficulties of peacekeeping in Bosnia, he stresses that Security Council
resolutions more often than not get in the way. They tend to polarize the sides,
as one group or another becomes obsessed with the perceived unfairness of a
certain resolution. ''Forget the resolutions,'' Annan tells them. ''We know
where we want to go. Let's figure out how to get there.''

Boutros-Ghali's reluctance to get the U.N. involved in Bosnia is well known. He
is often quoted as having said that Bosnia was a ''rich man's war,'' but he
insists he was misunderstood. He was, he says, referring to the amount of
attention Bosnia was getting compared with other areas of conflict. He argues
that since the European Community was already involved in the former Yugoslavia,
he saw dangers in bringing in the United Nations because the parties to the
conflict would then be able to play one organization off against the other.

The United Nations Charter directs it to rely on regional organizations when
possible. Since the European Community is one of the richest regional
organizations in the world, it might make sense for the community to deal with
Yugoslavia and free U.N. funds for operations in areas where such groups are
poor. The European Community, however, has declared itself incapable of acting
without the U.N. umbrella.

Then there is Haiti.

In early October, some Haitians yelled on the dock of Port-au-Prince that they
would turn Haiti into another Somalia. They sent an American ship, the Harlan
County, with 200 American and Canadian engineers and advisers packing. After the
Harlan County left, the U.N. withdrew its observers from Haiti, the Security
Council reimposed trade sanctions and the debate turned to how many Haitian
children were dying each month as a result of the embargo.

Some editorialists scoffed at the United States and the United Nations running
from a few ''thugs.'' But haven't we been assured before that an operation, like
the manhunt for Aidid, is only a matter of cowing a few ''thugs''? Why are thugs
easier to fight than soldiers? One can argue that thugs are harder to fight.
Since they are not answerable to anyone, you can't pressure them politically.
You can only try to find them and kill them, and in doing so you kill a lot of
bystanders. The thugs, not being stupid, help you do this. You begin to lose
support among the very people you set out to help, who start to look on the
thugs as their defenders. And there you are, talking about your ''credibility,''
hip-deep in the muck and morally lost.

The withdrawal of the U.N. forces from Haiti, Boutros-Ghali tells me, was
necessitated by Washington's decision not to dock the Harlan County. He shrugs
and says: ''I return to my old theory. If the member states do not want to
implement a resolution, we can do nothing.''

IF PEOPLE ARE GOING TO TALK about fulfilling the potential of the United Nations
Charter, they ought to recognize that the charter was written by war-making
countries. These were countries accustomed to the deliberate firebombing of
major cities, whose millions of soldiers occupied Europe, North Africa and much
of Asia. The Churchillian words of article 42 came easily to them: the Security
Council ''may take such action by air, sea or land forces as may be necessary to
maintain or restore international peace and security.''

The framers of the charter were victors, with a clear and unembarrassed
conviction that they had the right to dictate to other people what was good for
them. One of the U.N.'s first major acts -- a model of cooperation between the
Soviet Union and the United States -- had nothing to do with repelling
aggression against one of its members or relieving a humanitarian crisis. It was
the partition of Palestine, against the repeated protests of the Arab countries,
member states all.

Now, 45 years later, the Security Council has reactivated article 42, and the
world seems to be surprised that it is a war-making mechanism. In April, the
Secretary General established a Situation Center to keep tabs on the many
peacekeeping missions around the world (see map on page 22). Temporarily set up
in a building across the street from the Secretariat, the Situation Center
itself is a large windowless room with desks and computer monitors. The military
personnel from member nations are on 24-hour duty and are paid for by their own
countries.

The problem these days when man-made disasters strike with increasing frequency
is that not only do Americans have no apparent desire to fight wars for the sake
of security in the Horn of Africa or humanitarianism in general, but they are no
longer convinced of the inherent rightness of any project they undertake. And
Americans are not the only ones who think this way.

However, if the 184 members of the United Nations are serious about their world
organization, they need to decide under what circumstances and in pursuit of
what goals they are willing to suffer casualties. They need to acknowledge to
their citizens that if they participate in U.N. peacekeeping or
''peace-enforcing'' operations, they will suffer casualties. They have to define
what sorts of things affect their national security in that circle beyond the
innermost one of direct attack and interruption of vital trade. They have to
discuss what they are willing to do to protect those interests. And they have
wrestle with a question raised by Margaret Thatcher in May: If Bosnia is not in
our sphere of interest, should it be in our sphere of conscience?

In the United States, we have to invoke a more subtle range of lessons from the
past than Vietnam (quagmire; do not engage) and Hitler (can't appease; engage).
The Clinton Administration is currently trying to thrash out some of these
ideas. A classified document recently making the rounds in Washington proposed
that the United States support the use of force by the Security Council in cases
of ''international aggression, a humanitarian disaster requiring urgent action
coupled with violence, a sudden and unexpected interruption of established
democracy or gross violation of human rights coupled with violence.'' If a U.N.
operation is to include American troops, the document continued, more
requirements must be met: most notably, American national interest must be
directly affected and Congress must support the deployment.

In a recent speech to the Council of Foreign Relations, the national security
adviser, Anthony Lake, set out to define the Administration's plan to replace
the cold war doctrine of containment with a strategy of ''enlargement.'' It
consists of four components: strengthening ''major market democracies'';
''consolidating democracy and markets in states of special significance or
opportunity''; countering the aggression ''of states hostile to democracy and
markets'' and ''pursuing humanitarian goals and limiting sectarian conflict in
regions of greatest concern.''

''American efforts to foster freedom must be tightly targeted and
demand-driven,'' he added. ''CNN is not a compass for American interests. We
cannot act on the urge, rooted as it is in good intentions, to respond to every
crisis.''

As discussions continue on what constitutes ''national interest,'' people also
need to agree on what they mean by ''the United Nations,'' since in different
contexts they mean different things. When the public reads about something the
Security Council has decided, it thinks ''U.N.'' But people in the Secretariat
look at the decisions by the Security Council and think ''member states.'' When
President Clinton said in his address to the General Assembly in September, ''If
the American people are to say yes to U.N. peacekeeping, the United Nations must
know when to say no,'' he was speaking to the Security Council, which authorizes
those operations. But the United States is a permanent member with vetoing power
in the Security Council, so the President was really talking to his own
Administration.

When critics charge that ''the U.N.'' takes six months to get troops into place
after a peacekeeping operation is authorized, they seem to be referring to the
Secretariat. But member states are slow to send their troops. The Secretariat
would not have to wait for members to contribute troops if it had its own army,
or designated standby units, as both the charter and Boutros-Ghali envision, but
the member states refuse to authorize either of these things.

Member states complain about the budget, but member states pass the budget. And
the United States, with the largest assessment (it's based primarily on gross
national product), can't complain it is outvoted by a bunch of little countries
whose assessments are practically nothing because for years now the budget has
been set by consensus.

In the case of Somalia, the confusion over ''the U.N.'' especially points up the
dangers of not having worked out an agreement for American troops to serve under
United Nations command. The Force Commander in Somalia, the Turkish Lieut. Gen.
Cevik Bir, is United Nations. His deputy commander is Maj. Gen. Thomas
Montgomery, an American. As Deputy Force Commander, Montgomery is United
Nations. But as field commander of the American Quick Reaction Force, he reports
to the United States Central Command in Tampa, Fla., so he is United States.
Then there is Admiral Howe. He is Boutros-Ghali's special representative, but he
is also an American with extensive connections in Washington, which he used to
garner support for his manhunt for Aidid. Is he United Nations or United States?
The question cannot really be answered, and that is a problem. In its reluctance
to put its troops under United Nations command, the United States cobbled
together a compromise of confused responsibility that probably put its troops in
more danger.

As for the Secretary General and his role, Boutros-Ghali not only carries out
the Security Council's vague and sometimes tortured directives but he writes the
reports on which the Council partly bases some of those directives. But to talk
about ''Boutros-Ghali's U.N.,'' as many do, is misleading. It is Boutros-Ghali's
Secretariat, not his U.N. And the personality traits that many complain about
have more of an effect on morale in the Secretariat than they do on security in
the world. His retreat over the policy in Somalia shows that it is just as much,
if not more, Bill Clinton's U.N. -- which may explain why the U.N. seems adrift
at the moment, since Bill Clinton isn't paying much attention.

In its role as guarantor of international peace and security, ''the U.N.'' is
much more the Security Council than it is the Secretariat. But how coherent an
entity is the Security Council? As a body with an intention and a will, does it
exist any more than ''Europe'' does? The permanent five are all preoccupied with
their own problems. Russia is busy rewriting its Constitution, electing its
Parliament and fighting hyperinflation. President Clinton has had his hands full
trying to pass his budget, the North American Free Trade Agreement, the Brady
Bill, a health care program. . . . China is the phantom of the Council. The
three pillars of its policy seem to be negative: don't discuss human rights,
don't mention Tibet and don't let Taiwan into the U.N. France and Britain are
the most committed multilaterists. Unfortunately, they often disagree with each
other. In any event, both countries have been preoccupied with serious downturns
in their economy.

Then there is the question of the Security Council's legitimacy as a
representative of ''the international community.'' World War II was won quite a
while ago. Germany and Japan both indicate that they wouldn't mind being
permanent members, and the prospect of getting more money out of them for the
cash-starved United Nations is inviting, although -- for the time being -- both
are trying to pull out of their economic doldrums. But admitting them would only
tilt the Council further toward the developed world.

There are proposals to include other powers in the Council, but who would they
be and who would choose them? India seems an obvious choice, unless you happen
to be from Pakistan. Nigeria is the most populous nation in Africa, but it is
currently in turmoil. And do you give these new permanent members vetoes or
would that hobble the Council again? These are probably insoluble political
problems. The only way to come up with a more up-to-date Council might be to
fight another world war and hand it once more to the victors.

With its haziness of outline, ''the U.N.'' becomes an irresistible target for
blame when something goes wrong. Since the organization is, in a sense,
everybody, it is also always somebody else. This feeds into, and off, a certain
knee-jerk anti-U.N. attitude in some quarters in the United States that is a
combination of simple nativism, a cultural distrust of government and a visceral
hatred of bureaucracy.

There is a danger here. The United Nations is dependent on good will and good
press. Countries are only too happy to have an excuse to withhold their
assessments. And the U.N. not only has no army and no treasury, but it also has
no constituency. If the end of the 20th century is teaching us anything, it is
that nationalism is stronger than ever. The U.N. has no anthem to sing and
although it does have a flag -- a map of the world -- at its center lies the
North Pole, where no one lives.

MY LAST MEETING WITH Boutros-Ghali is at 3 Sutton Place, the handsome Georgian
manor near the East River that was built for J. P. Morgan's daughter and was
donated to the U.N. Association in 1972 for use as the Secretary General's
residence.

Boutros-Ghali is at his most charming. He is more relaxed than I have yet seen
him, either because it is Sunday and he is at home or because, after six
meetings, he is getting used to me.

''The last time I saw you, in the London airport, you looked like this!'' he
says delightedly, stretching stiffly back in his chair like a corpse, mouth
open. (I had gotten sick in Africa, before proceeding to London.) He tells me a
couple of amusing anecdotes about his negotiations for the Egyptian-Israeli
peace treaty and takes me on a tour of the residence.

In every room, there are ancient bronze birds from Egypt and Persia, which he
has been collecting for years. He directs a light on them, so that I can see the
intricate shadow-lines left behind by the long-vanished gold. He points out the
Matisse and the Leger and the Bonnard that are on loan from the Metropolitan
Museum of Art and the Museum of Modern Art. He waves at the Utrillo, which Leia,
his wife, has picked out and which he does not like. He and his wife have a
whole routine, which they seem to enjoy. He complains about her nagging or some
wrongheaded decision she has made. But when she appears, a quite imposing tall
blonde, he steps away, meekly draws in his head and says, ''She's the boss!''

Boutros-Ghali and I settle down for a few questions. Is the role that he
frequently sees for himself as Secretary General -- that of the humble servant
patiently taking knocks from an imperious master -- modeled on his experiences
as a Copt in Egypt, as someone who, though wealthy and from a proud family, has
had to accept that he will never quite belong?

He will have none of it. ''I never felt this during all the 68 years I spent of
my life in Egypt. I never felt this at all, maybe because I belonged to the
haute bourgeoisie. I have always had Muslim friends, Jewish friends.'' He
attributes his ability to be self-effacing to the fact that he has been trained
to do this kind of work.

When I ask if he had difficulty adjusting to this role, for the only time in our
talks he acknowledges that the humble servant occasionally blows up at the
master who is not as bright.

''Even now, I am not good at this. The fact that I have so many troubles is that
very often rather than keep quiet, I just say loudly what I think. I had trouble
with the Israelis, during my negotiations with them, and I have trouble with
many people, because on the contrary I am not enough trained to do this kind of
thing. If you want a kind of auto-criticism.''

And is the United Nations going through a crisis of confidence right now, after
the problems of the last three months?

''No, for me the U.N. has not changed. I am just saying that the U.S. as a major
actor is passing by a crisis of less support for the U.N., period. What I am
saying is, in my own interpretation, that this is tactical and not strategic.
That they will return back to the U.N. and give the same support, after the
crisis will get over.''

I bring up Mozambique. Have the negotiations continued to make progress after
his departure? He is surprised by the question and brightens. ''Oh yes, yes! It
is a success story! Which don't appear in the press! The press likes the return
of Zorro!''

A few days later I call Aldo Ajello, Boutros-Ghali's special representative in
Maputo. He says that the Secretary General's visit has made great progress
possible. The electoral law has been approved and 20 troop assembly areas have
been opened, with the first groups of Government and Renamo fighters arriving
just a few days previously, for disarmament and demobilization. Ajello thinks
they might make the October 1994 deadline for elections.

''The fundamental decision made by Renamo since Boutros-Ghali's visit is to give
up the military option,'' he says. ''The only problem now -- but it is a big
problem -- is the financial problem. Renamo still wants money.'' Ajello is
asking for a new trust fund of $4 million, to be set up under more flexible
rules than the U.N.-administered fund they already have. ''But the money is just
not coming. I am afraid to say, the international community is much more willing
to fund war than peace. If this money doesn't come through, the whole thing will
collapse.''

I hang up with the impresssion that Ajello and Onumoz have a tough, complicated
job to do and that they seem to be tackling it as well as anyone can. And if it
all fails for lack of a trust fund, who will be responsible? The United
Nations-as-Secretariat, for the bureaucratic rigidity of the first trust fund
for Mozambique? Or the United Nations-as-member-states, for the unwillingness to
cough up a paltry $4 million for the stabilization of Mozambique?

Impossible to answer. The only sure thing is, if Mozambique fails, fingers will
be pointing, all around the circle.




URL:

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2016

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: United Nations peacekeeping troops from Canada arriving at the
airport in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, in October. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TONY
BELIZAIRE/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)(pg. 38)
Indian contingent of U.N. peacekeepers in Mogadishu (Steve Lehman/Saba), where a
peacekeeping effort has become a nightmare for for the Secretary General (BURK
UZZLE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. 18-19)
Boutros-Ghali insists he was misunderstood when he called it a "rich man's war."
(pg. 20)(PHOTOGRAPH BY TOMAS MUSCIONICO/CONTACT PRESS IMAGES)
Somalia: A United Nations soldier from the Belgian contingent arresting a
Somali. (DJILB-KISMAYO/GAMMA LIAISON)
BOSNIA Armored U.N. vehicles passing a woman killed by sniper fire in Sarajevo.
(NOEL QUIDU/GAMMA LIAISON)
Kenya: Boutros-Ghali sharing a toast with several Kenyan dignitaries in Nairobi.
(STEVE LEHMAN/SABA, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
BOSNIA: A French U.N. soldier killed during shelling of the Sarajevo airport.
(ANDREW REID/GAMMA LIAISON)(pg. 22)
CAMBODIA: A helicopter lifts off in Kompong Thom. Civil wars have defied all
U.N. peacekeeping efforts. (PETER CHARLESWORTH/J.B. PICTURES)(pg. 24)
 MOZAMBIQUE: Aldo Ajello addressing U.N. troops from Bangladesh, right. (pg.
25)(GRANT NEUENBURG) Map: "UNITED NATIONS TROOPS THE WORLD OVER" shows locations
and numbers of U.N. troops around the world. (pg. 22)(Julia Gorton)

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 2, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: January 2, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1440 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   9   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 2      2  73   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 3      4  19   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 4      3  12   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                and a poem.

 5      6  42   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 6      8  38   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 7      9  14   LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues
                the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour."

 8      5   4   THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of
                Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.

 9      7   3   THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A
                collection of stories about American men and the strains of
                contemporary life.

 10    10   8   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery
                writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined
                to kill him and take his place.

 11         2   A CUP OF CHRISTMAS TEA, by Tom Hegg. (Waldman House, $10.95.)
                Verses, illustrated by Warren Hanson.

 12    11  11   A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A
                young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in
                Victorian England's high society.

 13    12   5   THE TRUCE AT BAKURA, by Kathy Tyers. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.)
                The "Star Wars" Rebel Alliance responds to a call for help from
                a threatened outpost.

 14    14  16   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction
                of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and
                woman and for the woman's first lover.

 15*       45   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                illustrated cards and letters.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   7   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More
                comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 2      2  11   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 3      3  17   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals.

 4      4  19   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 5      5  13   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 6      9   4   LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The
                country singer's memoirs.

 7      8  13   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by
                Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Thoughts on 43 years of
                marriage.

 8      6   5   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                100, reflect on their lives.

 9      7  34   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 10    13   2   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 11         2   I TOOK A LICKIN' AND KEPT ON TICKIN', by Lewis Grizzard.
                (Villard, $19.) The humorist describes his near-death
                experience following heart surgery.

 12    10   5   THE BEST CAT EVER, by Cleveland Amory. (Little, Brown, $19.95.)
                Feline trials and tribulations.

 13    11  13   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 14    15   8   THE DOWNING STREET YEARS, by Margaret Thatcher. (HarperCollins,
                $30.) Memoir.

 15    14  73   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 16*   12  11   STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski.
                (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  23   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 2      2   7   AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with
                Bud Shrake. (Simon & Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes
                from the golf instructor.

 3      3  56   HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud
                Shrake. (Simon & Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about
                playing golf.

 4         32   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 18, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.

And Bear In Mind
(Editor's choices of books of particular interest)

THE COLUMBIA HISTORY OF AMERICAN POETRY, edited by Jay Parini. (Columbia
University, $59.95.) Essays by 31 scholars, many of them quirky, opinionated and
authoritative; revaluations and reverberations abound.

THE COMPLETE LYRICS OF IRA GERSHWIN, edited by Robert Kimball. (Knopf, $45.)
More than 700 lyrics displaying the fresh and inventive rhymes, supple phrasing,
intelligence and wit that made Gershwin a lyricist nobody can read for one
minute without humming.

THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER, edited by Mark Tucker. (Oxford University, $30.) A
fascinating anthology of 70 years' worth of writing about (and occasionally by)
Ellington, who clearly inspired powerful emotions in even the most sober minds.

GARBAGE, by A.R. Ammons. (Norton, $17.95.) A long poem of rueful grandeur and
splendid oddity in which what's left over is transmuted; winner of this year's
National Book Award.

IN EUROPE'S NAME: Germany and the Divided Continent, by Timothy Garton Ash.
(Random House, $27.50.) This sober major study in recent international history
examines West Germany's conciliatory Ostpolitik: did it help or hinder the
collapse of Communism? A hard question, approached with respect for its
ambiguity.

JAMES BEARD: A Biography, by Robert Clark. (HarperCollins, $27.50.) A
painstaking, admirably unvarnished life of the great cooking teacher and food
writer whose career, occasionally embarrassed by tinges of greed and cynicism,
spanned the postwar era of American infatuation with food as an art form.

MARK ROTHKO: A Biography, by James E.B. Breslin. (University of Chicago,
$39.95.) This account of the tormented artist's life, by a professor of English,
is well researched, well written and carefully thought out.

SARAJEVO: A War Journal, by Zlatko Dizdarevic. (Fromm, $19.95.) A lament for
Bosnia and for civilization, by a newspaper editor who celebrates the endurance
and heroism of ordinary people caught in an insane conflict.

SISTERS OF FORTUNE, by Nancy Coffey Heffernan and Ann Page Stecker. (University
Press of New England, cloth, $40; paper, $15.95.) The letters of three New
Hampshire girls over 11 years to their father, who left them for the gold of
California in 1850, testify to the status of women and the dominance of hope
over experience.

SPLENDOURS AND MISERIES: A Life of Sacheverell Sitwell, by Sarah Bradford.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) Ms. Bradford, an expert biographer, illuminates
the Sitwell era and the remarkable success of Osbert, Edith and Sachie at being
taken at their own valuation.

W.E.B. DU BOIS: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919, by David Levering Lewis. (John
Macrae/Holt, $35.) The first half of the epical life (it lasted till 1963) of
the man who by World War I had become the most outspoken, eloquent and
influential black American.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 2, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
Those Sob Sisters, Death and Loss, Arrive

BYLINE: By Chris Chase;   Chris Chase is a former movie columnist for The New
York Times. A biography of Josephine Baker, "Josephine: The Hungry Heart,"
written by her and Jean-Claude Baker, will be published next month.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1177 words


This winter, 'tis the season to be melancholy, what with a flood of feature
films that render viewers inconsolable.

"It's a three-handkerchief movie," brags an ad for "My Life," in which Michael
Keaton discovers he has inoperable cancer. A competing ad ups the ante,
referring to "The Joy Luck Club" as a "four-hankie classic." It is, too, as it
depicts the lives of four Chinese women who endure suffering in the country of
their birth and, on top of that, cannot communicate with their American
daughters.

There's "Schindler's List," which is being hailed as Steven Spielberg's
masterpiece but a masterpiece that takes you through a harrowing 3 hours and 15
minutes of the Holocaust. Variety notes that the closing scene "will have many
viewers crying their eyes out."

There's "Philadelphia," in which Tom Hanks's character dies of AIDS. According
to The New Yorker, the director Jonathan Demme "has reinvented the weepie; he
probably thought it was his duty to do so, having the misfortune to be working
in an age when we have so much to weep about."

And there's "Shadowlands," in which Debra Winger shuffles off this mortal coil.
"I'm going to die," she tells her husband, played by Anthony Hopkins. "The pain
then is part of the happiness now. That's the deal." (Mr. Hopkins, who sported
the stiffest lip in history in "The Remains of the Day," actually breaks down
and wails in this one. Twice.)

We also have "A Perfect World," in which Kevin Costner leaves entire audiences
snuffling, even though he plays a sociopath. (When a little boy asks, "Are you
going to shoot me?" the irresistible Mr. Costner answers: "You and me are
friends. Both of us is handsome devils, we both like RC Cola, and neither one of
us got an old man that's worth a damn.")

"Heaven and Earth" takes us back to the miseries of Vietnam; in "In the Name of
the Father" a father dies, and even "Mrs. Doubtfire" (to which most people go
expecting laughs from Robin Williams) has an ending that causes small children
and their divorced parents to mewl.

What is fascinating is that none of these movies -- except for "The Joy Luck
Club" and perhaps "Shadowlands" -- is a conventional women's picture where tears
are shed over lost love. Nor even over love regained. Instead, this season's
weepers deal with death and loss -- subjects that make even some men lose it.

Since I cry at Hallmark commercials, I'm not a dependable bellwether. Unlike,
say, my friend Pauline Kael, for many years the film critic of the New Yorker. A
woman of intellectual rigor, she does not sympathize with indiscriminate
sniveling. Once, at "Terms of Endearment," the lights came up and I was caught
all smeary-faced in front of her. "Excuse me," I said. "I'm undone."

"Oh, no, you're not!" she replied.

Many people considered "Terms of Endearment" (it dealt with a mother and
daughter) a movie for women.  "A Perfect World," bout failed father-son
relationships, makes men cry. Which raises the question: If a man cries at the
movies, does he mind being caught in the act?

I was watching television one morning when Regis Philbin, the co-host of "Live
With Regis and Kathie Lee," told of having attended a screening of
"Shadowlands," which he designated "the tear-jerker of all time." Most men had
cried, Mr. Philbin said, but he had not. He added gleefully that Joel Siegel,
the ABC film critic, was among those who had fallen apart. "Joel Siegel was
weeping," he crowed. "I had to slap him. I said, 'Pull yourself together, Joel.'
"

Dr. Ellyn Kaschak, the psychologist who wrote "Engendered Lives," about
male-female psychology, says woe-filled movies may be "a kind of vicarious
therapy," especially in a time when so many lives have been touched by AIDS and
other diseases. "It's like they can go into the movies and cry for a couple of
hours instead of doing it in their real life."

STILL, IF MEN ARE crying more at movies these days, Dr. Kaschak says drily, "I
imagine it's about relationships between men." "Schindler's List" makes us cry
for humanity, but the primary relationships in the film are between Schindler
and his accountant Itzhak Stern, and between Schindler and the Nazi Amon Goeth.
In "A Perfect World" it's Kevin Costner playing out the role of father to a
child. In "Philadelphia" it's Tom Hanks as a man with AIDS and Denzel Washington
as his lawyer. In "My Life," it's the notion of the Michael Keaton character
talking to the son he fears he will never meet.

Marion Gindes, a psychologist practicing in Larchmont, N.Y., who has written
about the effects of gender stereotyping, described the new weepers as movies
where "strong men, empowered men, are the central characters."

"They're male themes, male stories," she says. "Tom Hanks is an attorney.
Michael Keaton is a nice yuppie, and they are experiencing tragedy. It's not
romanticized, it's not Elizabeth Taylor dying in Paris. In a sense, it's hard
tragedy.

"Somebody should stand outside of these movies and see how many men come out
crying," she added.

Inspired by this suggestion, I embarked on a survey. First I phoned my best
friend and asked if her husband cried at movies. "He sobbed at Zeffirelli's
'Romeo and Juliet,' " she reported. "Then he said, 'Why didn't you tell me it
was sad?' I said, 'You never heard of star-crossed lovers?' And he said, 'I
should have figured it out. I knew it had something to do with "West Side
Story." ' "

Then I inquired if my nephew had ever sobbed at a movie.

"At Clint Eastwood movies," he said. "The good part about crying in the movies
is, nobody can see. Anyway, it's not fair to call it sobbing; it's just my eyes
are kind of watering."

A few other results of my survey.

Meryl Gitter, a freelance television producer said her producer boyfriend, Chris
Michon, cried at "My Life." "He's an emotional guy," she explained. "When he was
at NBC, he did a piece called 'Blue Christmas,' and he showed the poor and the
homeless and people in mental institutions, and ultimately, they didn't let him
air it because they said it was too depressing."

I asked Holden Kepecs, an editor at Lucky Duck Productions, if he'd be
embarrassed if someone caught him bawling at a movie. Indeed he would. "At the
end of 'A Perfect World,' a tear came out of my left eye," he said, "and I put
my hand up to the back of my head, like I was stretching, and I quickly wiped
the tear off. The worst is, if you've been crying, and after the movie you walk
out and there's a big crowd waiting to come in, and your eyes are all red. You
have to just hang your head down low and walk directly to the bathroom."

One of my subjects, Suzanne Stahl, said her boyfriend John cried at "Dances With
Wolves," when Kevin Costner's wolf got shot. I told her to wait until he sees "A
Perfect World," in which Kevin Costner himself gets shot.

My husband cried at "Philadelphia." And when Bambi's mother was killed and at
"Old Yeller," but mostly he's like my nephew. Crass, insensitive and loudly
opposed to being dragged to a foreign film.

Some women like that kind of man.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 2, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Exceptional Warfare

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 23;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 245 words


To the Editor:

In his insightful review of John Keegan's "History of Warfare" (Nov. 14), Sir
Michael Howard makes a point that is subject to at least one significant
exception.

Since 1945, he writes, "the concern of military commanders, and even more of the
political leaders to whom they are responsible, has been to spare the lives of
their own troops at whatever expense to enemy forces, civilians, infrastructure
or, indeed, the global environment."

The exception is the war in Vietnam. There, very detailed and highly restrictive
"rules of engagement" imposed on United States forces caused them to undergo
greatly increased risks in order to minimize what was called "collateral
damage," meaning harm to noncombatants and civilian structures.

Those involved in the air war, in particular, suffered increased casualties due
to these restrictions, as for example when American pilots were forbidden to
attack enemy air defense systems except in retaliation, thereby surrendering the
initiative to enemy missile gunners.

These rules were imposed by the civilian leadership, but were nevertheless
scrupulously observed by military leaders even as they deplored the effects on
their forces. An exception proves the case: Gen. John Lavelle, who falsified
reports of enemy action so as to justify "protective reaction" strikes, was
relieved of command of the Seventh Air Force, reduced in grade and summarily
retired.

LEWIS SORLEY
Potomac, Md.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 2, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In Defense of an Old Warrior

BYLINE: By David Haward Bain;    David Haward Bain is the author of
"Aftershocks," about the Vietnam War, and "Sitting in Darkness: Americans in the
Philippines."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 9;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1045 words



RECONCILIATION ROAD
A Family Odyssey of War and Honor.
By John Douglas Marshall.
Illustrated. 296 pp. Syracuse:
Syracuse University Press.
$24.95.

THE estimable S. L. A. Marshall, who died in 1977, was a renowned military
historian and the author of "Men Against Fire," an important study of World War
II combat. His reputation as a researcher and warrior, however, was prominently
assailed by several critics in 1989. In "Reconciliation Road" his grandson, a
Seattle journalist, sets out to determine the truth, producing a modest and
searching memoir of self-discovery.

When he was a child in the 1950's in the suburbs of Detroit, John Douglas
Marshall quietly built a significant part of his identity on the fact that he
was the grandson of a famous man, a military journalist and historian who worked
for The Detroit News and was the author of a shelf full of books on World War II
and the Korean War. Reputedly the youngest lieutenant in the Army during World
War I, Slam Marshall had been a leading combat analyst in the 1940's. He had
been with Ernest Hemingway during the liberation of Paris, and later he was a
brigadier general in the Army Reserve. Marshall had survived combat and plane
crashes, he knew prominent political and military figures, he appeared
frequently on television. All during his youth, John Marshall was assured he was
going to be just like his famous grandfather.

As if there were no choice, the grandson tended toward the writing life, and
also -- at first -- toward the military perspective S. L. A. Marshall's whole
career represented. As a college English major and student journalist at the
University of Virginia, John Marshall joined the Reserve Officer Training Corps
and prepared himself for an Army hitch. But this was the 1960's, and the
conflict in Vietnam had none of the clarity of the war against Germany and
Japan. By the time of Mr. Marshall's graduation and his commission as a second
lieutenant in 1969, he had become a pacifist. Before being shipped to the war
zone, he was granted conscientious objector status and honorably discharged.
Soon after, his fiercely hawkish grandfather -- by now the author of a number of
books on Vietnam combat and a man who had the confidence of military leaders
like Gen. William Westmoreland -- angrily disowned him. They never saw each
other again, and when the elder Marshall died, as John Marshall recounts, he
stayed away from his grandfather's funeral, his grieving put on hold. His
relations with other family members remained uneasy for years.

As is abundantly plain in "Reconciliation Road," part of the grandson's life was
held in check for years -- some crucial part having to do with his identity as a
member of a family gone sour during the 60's, as a husband and as a father. In
1989, Mr. Marshall, who works for The Seattle Post-Intelligencer, decided to use
his journalist's tools to get to the bottom of the controversy about his
grandfather, despite a lingering ambivalence. He planned, he writes, to employ
careful, balanced research, interviews and a reporter's concern for fairness.

Despite the elder Marshall's elaborate accomplishments, meeting critics' charges
was a head-on uphill battle. The most troubling accusations were to be found in
a 1989 article in American Heritage magazine by Frederick Smoler. The article
suggested that Marshall had lied about his own combat experience and service
rank in World War I, and that he had not conducted the "postcombat mass
interviews" with infantrymen during World War II that formed the basis for his
1947 book, "Men Against Fire." That work, which influenced both military
scholarship and infantry training, said that never more than 25 percent of
American infantrymen in battle during World War II (and usually only about 15
percent) fired their weapons. Mr. Smoler called the theory "a peculiar hoax."

IN attempting to maintain a reporter's dispassion in the face of such a personal
matter, Mr. Marshall set too high a goal for himself. His automobile odyssey
would be more than 10,000 miles long -- from Seattle to Texas, Georgia, the
Carolinas, Virginia, Washington and New York, from the East all the way to the
Pacific Northwest -- and, as he consulted S. L. A. Marshall's private papers and
public governmental documents, and interviewed friends, associates, historians
and critics (both mild and harsh), his questions were frequently posed as his
grandfather's vociferous advocate. Interviews, recounted here at length,
doggedly led his sources, which included General Westmoreland, Mike Wallace and
Lucian K. Truscott 3d, among others, over contested factual terrain that
sometimes seemed more important to interviewer than interviewee. But with each
passing day, Mr. Marshall drew closer to a more comprehensive appreciation of
his grandfather than had been possible when he was alive.

The author found that while there was little doubt that his grandfather had
never shied from stepping into
a war zone, whether as a young man in France or as an older researcher in the
South Pacific, Europe, Korea and Vietnam, he had in fact fabricated critical
parts of his own service record; moreover, while it was true that his
grandfather had many times conducted his pioneering postcombat group interviews,
his controversial assertion in "Men Against Fire" about the percentage of
soldiers who actually fired their weapons in combat was apparently not backed by
hard research. The most that the author can show is that his grandfather had
tried to quantify what should have remained conjecture, and had claimed more
supportive data than would ever be yielded to subsequent researchers.

By the end of his quest, Mr. Marshall was able to acknowledge his grandfather's
basic humanity -- his gifts as well as his flaws -- and come to terms with the
hardened, bellicose, ideological old warrior that S. L. A. Marshall had
apparently become by the 60's, when his Vietnam-era wrath devastated the
relationships in his own family.

This is an earnest memoir. Though it is awkwardly written in the present tense
and lacks a transformative personal vision, it is often moving, aiming
unerringly for political and personal reconciliation in the still-unsettled
aftermath of the war in Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 3, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE NEW MAYOR: Man in the News;
Spiritual Reform Mayor: Rudolph William Giuliani

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1332 words


One day last spring, as Rudolph W. Giuliani ended a visit to Bishop Loughlin
Memorial High School in Brooklyn, the crucible of discipline that shaped his
world view and helped propel him into public life more than 30 years ago, he
reflected on the changes in manners, mores and standards that have transformed
the New York he once knew.

Surveying a city in which the consuming educational debates centered on
multiculturalism and condoms, the pressing public fear was collapse of order in
the streets, and a million residents swelled the welfare rolls, he said, "I
think one of the things that happened to us is we became so arrogant that we
believed we could reconstruct everything."

Now as he takes office, the victor in a campaign to restore municipal services,
teach the basics, punish the bad guys and honor the verities that he believes
are eternal, Mr. Giuliani's words on the past failures of social policy ring
differently. He has set such an ambitious agenda for himself, and approached it
so aggressively, that questions linger on whether he is intent on reinventing
the wheel.

The questions have particular currency because public perceptions of the Mayor's
emerging public personality remain so sharply split.

Used to Contradictions

Is this former prosecutor, who has never held elective office, an apolitical
Everyman, voicing the pent-up frustrations of middle-class New Yorkers of all
races and backgrounds, and committed to helping the poor with "hands on"
leadership? Or is he partisan and intemperate, comfortable with only a smallish
circle of acolytes, and insensitive to differing opinions?

Mr. Giuliani has grown used to confronting such contradictions. The notion of
him as hot-tempered became so ingrained that he apologized for having tried to
quiet supporters who booed David N. Dinkins after Mr. Giuliani lost to him in
1989 by shouting "Shut up," only to learn much later that he never used such
words. He and his backers complain that the crusading, hard-nosed image he built
and burnished as the most prominent Federal prosecutor of his generation is
accurate, but incomplete.

"What I'm sure New Yorkers know is that he's very smart," said Raymond B.
Harding, the leader of the state Liberal Party and one of Mr. Giuliani's crucial
political backers since 1989. "What they've learned, I think, since the election
is that he's a very well-functioning executive. What they may not know yet, but
will learn, is that he's deeply caring about the city and all its people."

What Mr. Giuliani has shown so far, in both his public career and the slices of
his private life that he has revealed, is an enigmatic mix of soft and hard
qualities, depending on the circumstances and the audience.

He is the 49-year-old man who says that the nuns and brothers who struck him to
teach him were right to do so because he often deserved it, but confesses that
he cannot touch his own rambunctious 7-year-old son, Andrew, the elder of two
children from his marriage to Donna Hanover, the television journalist.

In Andrew's Pocket

"Have you seen him with his son?" Michael J. Petrides, one of the mayor's newly
named special advisers, asked with a mix of fondness and shock. "You want to
smack him sometimes, because there's no discipline at all. That kid owns him."

He is at once the self-confessed square who avoided the convulsive debates of
his Vietnam generation, and the student leader who persuaded a cadre of crew-cut
sports fans to join him in forming an opera club in an all-boys high school.

"I remember him coming over to me one day as a sophomore, and saying, 'I'm
starting an opera club,' " said Peter J. Powers, his classmate, campaign manager
and, now, Deputy Mayor. "I didn't know anything about opera, and still know very
little, but the next thing you know, he had 10 or 12 of us in a room reading
librettos and listening to records."

To his critics he is the zealous lawyer who trampled the civil liberties of
defendants and stopped at nothing to advance his own fame. To his admirers he is
the bold innovator who took on Wall Street, political corruption and the mob
with tactics and vision that his predecessors and competitors failed to match.

'A Multidimensional Man'

"I don't think the media has portrayed him as he truly is," said Ron Silver, the
actor, a supporter and master of ceremonies for the inauguration. "Anybody who
spends any time with him realizes that this is not a very one-dimensional
fascistic personality. There's a multidimensional man, with a tremendous amount
of compassion, very vital, that likes living, feels very strongly about his
family and has a tremendous amount of sensitivity to other peoples less
fortunate than himself.

"What has been selected to be shown is a kind of Savonarola-ish quality that he
may exhibit at times," Mr. Silver continued, referring to the dour 15th-century
Florentine reformer who was burned at the stake. "But it is also job-related,
running that office, and being a prosecutor."

Mr. Giuliani acknowledges that he helped create his own image, but last year he
repeatedly endured the frustration of addressing audiences on 10 or 12 topics,
only to have a listener complain that he had spent all his time on what he
invariably refers to as "lore enforcement."

"That's the stereotype of me," he said, explaining one woman's reaction to a
speech. "That probably gets a lot more emphasis in her mind than the five other
things I talk about, even if I spend more time on the five other things. Once I
gave a speech and didn't mention crime at all, and at the end of it, several
people accused me of trying to run away from it."

A Yankee Fan in Flatbush

Rudolph William Giuliani has not run away from much of anything since he was
born nine days before D-Day in 1944, the only child of Harold Giuliani, a tavern
owner, and his wife, Helen, whom the Mayor refers to as the best teacher he ever
had and who in recent years has lived in the same Upper East Side apartment
building as his own nuclear family.

His childhood as a lone Yankee fan in the Dodger territory of Flatbush was
memorialized last year in an early campaign advertisement, but his family moved
to the Long Island suburbs when was 7. He returned to Brooklyn on a diocesan
scholarship at Bishop Loughlin, taking the Long Island Rail Road to the Atlantic
Avenue terminal, burying his nose in the newspaper, he once recalled, to seem
grown up and keep bigger kids from pestering him.

He went on to Manhattan College in the Bronx, pondered becoming a missionary
priest, but ultimately enrolled at New York University Law School, where he
embarked on the path he has followed steadily upward since, starting as a
self-styled "J.F.K. Democrat," then an independent and finally a Republican and
the No. 3 official in the Reagan Justice Department and United States Attorney
in Manhattan for six years.

Mr. Giuliani says that he has always been a flexible political figure whose aim
is to blend the best of the past with the present.

Accepting the Right Change

"The society that's going to emerge, that's a better society than the one we
have today, is one that takes the improvements that have been created -- more
civil rights, more equal rights, though not yet a fully equal role for women --
I mean, those things are going to be part of our future," he said in one of
several long interviews last year. "But it doesn't mean that because that's the
case that we give up on lessons like honesty, and integrity, hard work as the
key to success, education as the key to improving yourself."

Last year he overcame the missteps, lack of money and confusion that dogged his
first race for Mayor and defeated Mr. Dinkins. Now he has to transfer those
skills to governing.

"I make mistakes," he explained last year. "But I try very hard to learn. It's a
lesson from my mother. She always said everyone makes mistakes, but it's the
sign of intelligence not to make the same mistake twice."

NAME: Rudolph William Giuliani

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: George Birne, second from left, Barry Rosen, center, and Hod
Hellman, second from right, campaign volunteers, before the inauguration began.
(Edward Keating/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 3, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 169 words


When TRAN THI HUYEN stepped onto American soil in San Francisco for the first
time, the 84-year-old Vietnamese mother received a celebrity's welcome -- dozens
of news photographers snapping pictures.

Ms. Huyen seemed to take it in stride, walking hand-in-hand with three
daughters, including LE LY HAYSLIP , whose life is portrayed in the movie
"Heaven and Earth."

The family wanted to arrive for the movie's premiere but had trouble obtaining a
visitor's visa from the United States. On Friday, Ms. Huyen arrived at San
Francisco International Airport after waiting more than a year to get approval
for the trip.

"I wanted to come to pay a visit to America before I die because my time on the
Earth is very short," The Associated Press reported that Ms. Huyen said through
an interpreter.

She also came to view the movie, which is based on her daughter's book "When
Heaven and Earth Changed Places." The movie is directed by Vietnam war veteran
and Oscar winner Oliver Stone.
   KATHLEEN TELTSCH

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 3, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Whether It's Bluejeans or Mini-Motors or Power Plants . . .: Caterpillar;
Worldwide Watch For Opportunities

BYLINE: By ALISON LEIGH COWAN

SECTION: Section C; Part 1; Page 4; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 733 words


Think globally . . . Think globally . . . Think globally. This is the corporate
executive's mantra for the new year. With the North American Free Trade
Agreement in place and a new world trade agreement moving smartly forward,
companies are aggressively expanding beyond national borders and innovating at
every turn to snare new business. Caterpillar, for example, elbowed Japanese
companies aside in China's coal fields by agreeing to establish a parts
warehouse and fly in mechanics. In Silicon Valley, Applied Materials came from
behind by spending 15 percent of sales each year on research and development.
ABB Asea Brown Boveri is consolidating manufacturing and shifting production of
components to take advantage of the free trade accord. In Latin America, Bunge &
Born is betting that the region's rate of consumption will grow faster than its
overall economies. Levi Strauss, long a global visionary, sounds a sobering
note. It continues to turn its back on China's vast market for bluejeans because
of human rights concerns. Here, then, six companies and their global strategies:

 To Siegfried R. Ramseyer, crossing borders is second nature. Growing up in
Geneva, he never thought twice about choosing say, a French restaurant for
dinner -- in France. "They were the best restaurants," said Mr. Ramseyer, who
lived half an hour from the French border.

Caterpillar Inc., based in Peoria, Ill., is equally adept at going where
opportunity beckons. "Wherever we're allowed to do business, we like to do
business," said Mr. Ramseyer, vice president of Caterpillar's Asia-Pacific and
Latin American division. That included South Africa when such investments were
highly unpopular at home, and, Mr. Ramseyer hopes, Vietnam, as the United States
eases limits on trading there.

As a result of such perseverance, the roster of competitors has changed
markedly. In the 1960's and 1970's, the companies to beat were International
Harvester, Euclid and Allis-Chalmers. Today, those American names have been
displaced by Komatsu, Hitachi and Kobelco of Japan. "We survived because we
always had an international approach," Mr. Ramseyer said.

Doing so much business overseas, means, of course, responding to the
vicissitudes of foreign markets with a flexibility that many American managers
cannot muster.

Mr. Ramseyer, for example, was expected to toast his new friendship with a Saudi
sheik by eating the choicest part of a lamb-and-rice banquet: the sheep's eyes.
"You just swallow hard and do it," he said.

The results seem worth the effort. In 1992, Caterpillar exported $3.3 billion --
one-third of its sales -- and imported only $1.4 billion of components and other
materials. That trade surplus of $1.9 billion kept 17,000 Caterpillar employees
and another 34,000 people who work for Caterpillar's suppliers employed, the
company estimates.

These days, Caterpillar sees its biggest opportunities in the Pacific Rim.
Growth in that part of the world is expected to increase 6 percent to 14 percent
a year, compared with 2.5 percent in the United States, spurring investment in
the types of construction equipment that Caterpillar sells.

Even without a dealer network acting as its emissary in China, Caterpillar
recently won a $20 million contract to supply 18 190-ton trucks to China's coal
fields. It elbowed aside Wabco, a unit of Komatsu, essentially by offering to
open a parts warehouse near the coal fields and to fly in enough mechanics to
keep the machines humming.

"When you have a new customer like this, they just don't buy the product, they
buy the company," Mr. Ramseyer said.

The North American Free Trade Agreement and the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade mean that Caterpillar may reassess its strategy of locating plants all
over to be near customers and to scale trade barriers. For instance, it still
sells enough medium-size, D6 tractors to justify making them in the United
States, France and Japan. But a drop in volume and the fall of trade barriers
could lead the company to think harder about consolidating production in its two
most efficient plants.

Until then, Mr. Ramseyer will urge policy makers to do more for free trade. And
he will continue to carry two passports -- a trick he learned while heading
Caterpillar's Middle East business -- just in case he finds himself shuttling
between hostile countries.   ALISON LEIGH COWAN

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 3, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

...While a Sluggish Japan Sighs Amid Asia's Roaring Tigers: Southeast Asia;
Dynamic Markets But Growing Pains

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section C; Part 1; Page 9; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 383 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


Among the dazzling economies of Southeast Asia, what has gone up seems likely to
keep going up in 1994.

Southeast Asia remains the most economically dynamic region on earth, and
regional forecasts suggest that economic growth will continue to hum along at up
to 7 percent next year, much more than double the pace expected in the United
States.

Even laggards like the Philippines and long-time basket cases like Cambodia and
Laos are poised for better growth.

Not only are Southeast Asian nations producing what the industrialized world
buys in good times and bad -- shoes, clothes and small electronics -- but they
are also creating vast consumer markets.

More than a third of all the goods exported in Southeast Asia finish up in other
countries in the region, and the portion keeps growing. Street markets are being
replaced by shopping malls.

The key problems of the past generation -- hunger and grinding poverty -- are
being replaced in some countries with the problems that come with economic
success: pollution and urban congestion. Some of the nations of Southeast Asia
have so damaged their environments, in fact, that they risk driving away foreign
investors and tourists.

Large multinational companies say that in the last two years it has become
difficult to attract talented expatriate workers to Thailand and Indonesia,
where boom times have created filthy air and water and round-the-clock traffic
jams. Hotels in Bangkok, where tourism is the most important source of hard
currency, are empty much of the year.

The most interesting economic news in the new year may come from the nations
that have long been burdened with the most backward economies: Vietnam,
Cambodia, Laos and Myanmar, formerly known as Burma. To varying degrees, all are
giving up central economic planning in favor of free markets.

Despite its atrocious record on human rights, Myanmar, with a population of
nearly 60 million and vast natural resources, has suddenly begun to attract
significant interest from savvy investors from Singapore, who have set up a new
Myanmar airline. Despite growing corruption and a crumbling infrastructure,
Vietnam continues to stir up so much enthusiasm among investors that the
American trade embargo is increasingly seen as toothless.   PHILIP SHENON

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Policy Nears a Peril Point

BYLINE: By Brent Scowcroft and Richard Haass;   Brent Scowcroft, president of
the Forum for International Policy, a foreign affairs foundation, was national
security adviser under George Bush and Gerald R. Ford. Richard Haass, a National
Security Council staff member in the Bush Administration, is a senior associate
at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1296 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The foreign policy debate during the Clinton Administration's first year focused
almost totally on secondary issues. The country can ill afford such a luxury
this year.

The only first-magnitude issue to get large-scale public attention and sustained
Presidential focus (at the eleventh hour) was the North American Free Trade
Agreement. Other such issues -- Russia, the Middle East, North Korea, China,
Japan, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade -- drew episodic high-level
attention from an Administration preoccupied with domestic concerns.

Three of the four most debated policies were Bosnia, Somalia and Haiti -- all
areas of actual or potential military intervention where American interests were
less than vital.

Despite progress on trade and in the Middle East, the lack of focus on the big
issues has led to weakened relationships with our allies and a loss of support
at home for continued U.S. leadership in the world.

The outlook is approaching a point of peril for shaping a coherent foreign
policy. To reverse this trend, President Clinton needs to choose a few priority
issues for 1994 and act on them. Here are five candidates -- all matters where
important U.S. interests are at stake and where our actions can make a
difference.

Dealing with Russia, Ukraine and the rest of the former Soviet Union.

The Administration has established American support for Boris Yeltsin as a
leading force for political and economic reform. With the parliamentary
elections over and the new Constitution approved, we have to broaden
U.S.-Russian relations.

Besides expanding our contacts with all responsible elements of the political
spectrum and emphasizing support not for individuals but for democratic
institutions and market reforms, we should spend more time on such emerging
features of Russia's foreign policy as its more menacing positions on nuclear
weapons and the former Soviet empire.

If Russia can object to the expansion of NATO, the West should be able to make
the expansion of Russian influence no less an issue. We have to make clear that
our long-term support is not unconditional and will depend on Russia's adherence
to political and economic reforms and restraint toward its neighbors.

U.S. relations with Russia cannot be the sole avenue through which U.S.
relations with Ukraine are conducted. Our policy toward Ukraine has been
confrontational and one-dimensional, linking our willingness to provide
assistance and normalize relations to Ukraine's willingness to give up its
nuclear weapons. But the more we push this approach, the more the Ukrainians
conclude that the weapons are valuable.

Given Ukraine's collapsing economy and Russia's uncertain intentions toward an
independent Ukraine, we could end up with the worst of all worlds: an unstable
and isolated Ukraine with nuclear weapons. We should seek to promote Ukrainian
stability, with support tied only to needed economic and political reforms; with
this approach, the nuclear question can be addressed more productively.

Consolidating European security.

Too much of the U.S.-European dialogue has been consumed by squabbles over
trade, finger-pointing over Bosnia and counterproductive suggestions that Asia
is more important to us than Europe, as if the two regions were mutually
exclusive. We need to resume a serious dialogue on possible external threats to
European stability.

The issue of expanding NATO will top the agenda at the NATO summit meeting next
week. But it does not need formal expansion to deal with former Warsaw Pact
countries. Our goal in Eastern Europe should be to provide security and to
consolidate political and economic progress (on which our help has been stingy),
not to encourage governments to devote scarce resources to defense in order to
earn admission to NATO.

Nor should our goal be to make NATO so large that it becomes unwieldy. We can
promote European stability by developing less formal military ties to Eastern
Europe and making it clear that we will extend security guarantees if Moscow
threatens its neighbors' security. This approach should reassure Eastern Europe,
avoid unduly provoking Moscow and give us leverage over Russia's external
behavior.

Pacifying North Korea.

We have a clear interest in avoiding conflict on the Korean peninsula. We have
an equally clear interest in making sure North Korea does not provoke an Asian
arms race and does not add a nuclear dimension to the threat it poses to
regional stability.

The Administration said yesterday it was close to a compromise with Pyongyang.
It is making a crucial error. Any arrangements for inspections must provide for
not onetime but regular and full access to all sites -- not merely the seven
apparently agreed upon -- that are known or suspected of having nuclear-weapons
activities. If the North takes concrete steps to reduce the threat to the
peninsula and the region, we should open meaningful political and economic
relations. But whatever happens, the U.S. and South Korea should continue joint
military exercises and strengthen the defenses of the South against attack from
the North, whether nuclear or conventional.

Fostering strategic dialogue with the Asia-Pacific powers.

The North Korean issue demonstrates how important political-military relations
remain in the Pacific.

China's negative attitude on sanctions against North Korea, its aggressive and
dangerous policy on arms exports, Japan's hints about rethinking its
non-nuclear-weapons policy, the conventional military buildup among members of
the Association of Southeast Asian states -- all suggest strongly that we cannot
allow our diplomacy with the world's most vibrant economies to be dominated by
trade disputes.

Instead, we need broader consultations on national priorities and changing
national relationships in a dynamic Asia.

Strengthening the sinews of foreign policy.

Chief among the requisites for successful foreign policy is a credible military
able to give weight and support to policy. The Administration has cut the
already much reduced defense budget it inherited from George Bush. The cuts are
even larger than often realized, considering that the defense budget includes a
range of international activities that do not contribute directly to U.S.
forces.

We cannot allow the U.S. military to become a hollow instrument in which the
sizes and composition of our forces and their readiness are not supported by
necessary training, maintenance, personnel and spare parts. The Defense
Secretary-designate, Bobby Ray Inman, faces a tough job. He must convince
President Clinton to finance the Pentagon's possible budget request of $255
billion for the 1995 fiscal year and fight for it on Capitol Hill.

President Clinton, who has shown his ability to exploit the power of his office
to shape the nation's political agenda -- on the budget, health care, crime --
must do no less on issues of foreign and defense policy.

There are, of course, other national security matters deserving high-level
attention. A short list includes consolidating and where possible expanding
gains in trade liberalization, continuing Iraq's isolation, maintaining
vigilance toward Iran, promoting democratic change in Cuba, normalizing ties
with Vietnam, coping with continuing instability in the former Yugoslavia and
rethinking our relationship to peacekeeping, peacemaking and the United Nations.

These or other issues may turn out to require sustained, high-level involvement
-- say, if the Middle East peace process falters of if the war in Bosnia
spreads. But what is certain is that the big issues require special attention in
the Oval Office. They offer the areas of greatest opportunity if the U.S. takes
the lead -- and the greatest risk if we do not.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Opens Insurance

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 20; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 64 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Jan. 4


Vietnam made public today a new state decree that opens the country's business
insurance sector to overseas participants, allowing foreign joint ventures and
branch offices of foreign companies. The decree, published by the official
Vietnam News Agency, said the rule took effect on Saturday, ending the monopoly
that the state-run insurance company Baoviet had for many years.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. Dies at 81; A Power in the House for Decades

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 2634 words


Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr., an unreconstructed New Deal liberal from
Massachusetts who rose to become Speaker of the House for 10 years, died last
night at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston. He was 81 and lived in
Washington and Harwich Port, Mass.

The cause of death was cardiac arrest, said a statement released by his family.

Mr. O'Neill was an old-style politician and proud of it, a House Speaker
comfortable with power, who clung to his brand of liberalism long after it
ceased to be fashionable, even among his fellow Democrats.

An early opponent of the Vietnam War, Mr. O'Neill took strong positions on many
controversial issues. He was the Congressional leader who pushed hardest for the
impeachment of President Richard M. Nixon and later, as Speaker, put his
prestige on the line for Congressional reform.

Mr. O'Neill was the Speaker from 1977 to 1987, during the Presidencies of Jimmy
Carter and Ronald Reagan, both of whom ran against entrenched Washington
officials and considered Mr. O'Neill the ultimate insider.

But although he reached the heights of political power and mingled easily with
national and world leaders, Mr. O'Neill was perhaps best known for his advice to
colleagues to attend carefully to their constituents, because, as he put it,
"All politics is local."

He was a large, joyous, generous-spirited man with a bulbous nose, yellowed
white hair that flopped over his forehead and an ever-present cigar. He was a
rabid sports fan, frequently attending baseball games and boxing matches, a
skilled poker player and a devoted but struggling golfer.

To Mr. O'Neill, who spoke of the Democratic Party with near-religious fervor,
the party was the one of the cities, the working people, the poor, the needy,
the unemployed, the sick and the disinherited. "And no way are we ever going to
let them down," he would insist. He opposed a balanced budget because, he said,
it would "dismantle the programs that I've been working for as an old liberal."

When President Reagan persuaded Congress to curtail many of Mr. O'Neill's
favorite social programs, the Speaker lamented that the Democrats had been too
successful at their work. He said the Democratic programs had created a broad
middle class whose members had forgotten the many benefits they had received
from government -- in education and housing, for example -- and wanted to pull
up the ladder behind them.

Republicans made Mr. O'Neill a target of their 1980 and 1982 campaigns,
portraying him as a bloated old pol with outdated liberal ideas. They produced a
television commercial that featured an actor who resembled the Speaker laughing
off warnings that his car was low on fuel, until the vehicle finally ground to a
halt. The announcer then proclaimed, "The Democrats have run out of gas."

Mr. O'Neill remained steadfast. "I haven't changed my philosophy," he frequently
told reporters, with whom he met daily.

He made no apologies for the kind of politics he had mastered in Boston. As
Speaker, he rewarded friends and punished enemies with the help of a long memory
but few grudges.

Carter and O'Neill: Different Democrats

Mr. O'Neill's became Speaker the year Mr. Carter took office as President. About
all they had in common was their political party. Mr. Carter, an emotionally
taut Georgian with a scant power base among Democrats, had reached the White
House as an anti-politician, an outsider who publicly disdained Washington
insiders personified by the gregarious Speaker, who had worked his way up from
ward politics.

"Our first conversation," the Speaker recalled, "he told me how he had handled
the Georgia Legislature, by going over their heads directly to the people."

Mr. O'Neill said he responded by referring to the 289 House Democrats in the
majority. "I said: 'Hey, wait a minute. You have 289 guys up there who know
their districts pretty well. They ran against the Administration, and they
wouldn't hesitate to run against you.

"He said, 'Oh, really?' "

The two men did not speak the same language. Mr. O'Neill said he had once told
the President, "Keep your left hand high." But the Speaker found that Mr. Carter
was no boxing fan and was unfamiliar with the boxer's classic defensive posture.
"He didn't know what I was talking about," Mr. O'Neill said.

But as a loyal Democrat Mr. O'Neill felt morally bound to help Mr. Carter
whenever possible. An autographed photograph from the President was inscribed,
"To my friend Tip O'Neill, thanks for another lesson in good politics, Jimmy
Carter, June 1977."

But in 1980, when the Republicans won the White House and the Senate and cut
deeply into the House Democratic majority, the Speaker privately blamed the
President, believing him inept.

O'Neill and Reagan: Different Irishmen

Mr. O'Neill never shied from wielding power, although he frequently lamented
that the power of the Speaker had declined since the days of Sam Rayburn, the
Texas Democrat whose word became law during his 17 years in the post, ending in
1961. That was when a Speaker could get binding commitments from committee
chairmen; it was before the diffusion of power that Mr. O'Neill himself worked
to bring about.

From 1981 to 1987, Mr. O'Neill led the loyal opposition to President Reagan, a
man with whom he shared an Irish heritage, an interest in sports and an outgoing
personality. But the two men had a profound philosophical disagreement about
government: the Speaker regarded government as the solution to many social
problems, as an agent of social change; Mr. Reagan regarded it as a problem in
itself, interfering in the lives of Americans and impeding economic and social
progress.

The Speaker also found Mr. Reagan to be appallingly ignorant of the intricacies
of government; indeed, he called him the most ignorant man who had ever occupied
the White House. Publicly, Mr. O'Neill called Mr. Reagan "Herbert Hoover with a
smile" and "a cheerleader for selfishness."

Early in his time as Speaker, when his bill for a new House code of ethics was
in trouble, he lumbered to the well of the House and cut through the debate on
the key provision, a limitation on outside income. The speech was vintage
O'Neill.

Sure, he said, he knew what it was to be strapped. Wasn't he the one who had
fought for a raise of $12,900 a year in Congressional pay? But in exchange he
had promised the American people "the strongest code of ethics that this country
has ever seen." The issue, after Watergate, he thundered, was "restoring public
confidence in this Congress as an institution, restoring confidence in its
membership."

He looked out at an audience that included the 80 Democrats for whom he had
campaigned the previous fall, the scores of members he had appointed to the nine
select and special committees over which he had jurisdiction, and the more than
200 beneficiaries of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Fund, for which he
had been the chairman.

His listeners knew that the Speaker had a great voice in their committee
assignments, the scheduling of floor action on bills, the disbursing of campaign
money and the small favors that can make or break a Congressional career. Mr.
O'Neill called in his chits. The result was a foregone conclusion. The vote was
344 to 79.

Four years later, when 44 Democrats joined in voting to overturn a ruling of the
chair, the kind of parliamentary decision that is the lifeblood of the House,
Mr. O'Neill wrote them a letter that he was "extremely disappointed" and
obliquely warned that "disciplinary measures" were under consideration.

Such measures could affect a member's committee assignments. He added that he
felt that such measures were unnecessary. No future Democratic votes against the
judgment of the chair were noted.

Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. was born on Dec. 9, 1912, in working-class area of
Cambridge, Mass., which later became part of his Congressional district. His
father was a member of the Cambridge City Council. His mother died when he was a
child, and his father remarried.

He picked up the nickname "Tip" from a baseball player, James Edward O'Neill of
the old St. Louis Browns, who had the knack of hitting foul tips until the
pitcher walked him. So Mr. O'Neill's boyhood friends gave him the name. The
Speaker was an inveterate fan of the Boston Red Sox.

Educated in Roman Catholic schools, he broke into politics at 15, campaigning
for Al Smith in his 1928 Presidential campaign against Herbert C. Hoover. "All I
knew was that Al Smith was an Irish Catholic and we had been suppressed all our
lives," he said.

Four years later, he helped get out the vote for Franklin D. Roosevelt. "You'd
have Mrs. Murphy ready to get into an automobile to take her to the polls," he
recalled. "And then you'd go to the next house, Mrs. Sweeney, and you'd have the
car come for Mrs. Sweeney. We walked the streets to get the votes out."

As a senior at Boston College, Mr. O'Neill lost his first campaign, for the
Cambridge City Council, by 150 votes. But he was elected to the Massachusetts
House of Representatives in 1936, where he rose to Speaker, and where he
remained until 1952 when, he was elected to the United States House.

He won the seat vacated by John F. Kennedy on Kennedy's election to the Senate.
It was also the seat once held by James M. Curley, the Boston politician whose
career was the basis of the Edwin O'Connor novel "The Last Hurrah."


Avoiding a Move To Washington

Mr. O'Neill and his wife, Mildred, decided not to move their family to
Washington when Mr. O'Neill was first elected, and they did not go back on this
agreement until Mr. O'Neill became Speaker, a quarter century later.

Until then, Mr. O'Neill roomed with Representative Edward P. Boland, Democrat of
Massachussetts, his closest friend. Their refrigerator was said to be stocked
almost exclusively with beer.

In Washington, Mr. O'Neill became a protege of Representative John McCormack of
Massachusetts, then the Democratic whip, who introduced him to the House power
structure as part of the informal "board of education" meetings that Speaker
Rayburn held after hours for Congressional leaders and friends. By his second
term in the House, Mr. O'Neill had won a coveted seat on the Rules Committee.

War and Conscience

Mr. O'Neill's opposition to the Vietnam War in 1967, when he was a leader of the
Rules Committee, was a decision affected by the anti-war feelings of his own
children (three boys and two girls) as well as among the intellectual
communities at Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
in his own district. His blue-collar constituents, who made up the bulk of his
support, were overwhelmingly in favor of the American role in the war.

But Mr. O'Neill wrote in his autobiography, "Man of the House" (Random House,
1987), that he had come to the conclusion that the conflict was a civil war and
that American involvement in it was morally wrong. When President Lyndon B.
Johnson called him to the White House to explain his change of position, Mr.
O'Neill recalled, he told the President, "In my heart and in my conscience I
believe your policy is wrong." Johnson accepted his position, Mr. O'Neill said,
when he found out that the Congressman had not changed it for political reasons.

But his opposition to the war did eventually reap some political dividends: he
won the trust and support of younger House members who shared his position on
Vietnam, and they became important allies as Mr. O'Neill rose in power.

In 1971, having supported Hale Boggs of Louisiana as majority leader, Mr.
O'Neill was selected by Mr. Boggs to be majority whip, an appointive post. After
Mr. Boggs died in a plane crash in Alaska in 1972, Mr. O'Neill was elected
majority leader.

Mr. O'Neill, as the whip under Speaker Carl Albert of Oklahoma, was the
Democrats' strong man; he did the difficult things. He was instrumental in
bringing changes that stripped the committee chairmen of their autocratic power,
and he was the Democratic leader who pushed hardest for the investigation and
impeachment of President Richard M. Nixon, who resigned before a vote on
impeachment was held.

At 64, Speaker, by Acclamation

Mr. O'Neill was elected Speaker by acclamation in December 1976, when he was 64,
and took office the next month. "The wonder of it is that such a decent,
compassionate man could rise to the top of a place like this," said
Representative Benjamin S. Rosenthal, Democrat of Queens.

But Mr. O'Neill was not without lapses of judgment.He was among many House
members who accepted favors from Tongsun Park, the South Korean lobbyist and
intelligence agent. In 1973 and '74, Mr. O'Neill permitted Mr. Park to sponsor
two lavish birthday parties in his honor, thereby bolstering Mr. Park's
prestige.

Similarly, Some questioned Mr. O'Neill's judgment when he intervened in an
application for Federal money made by James P. Wilmot, who had been chairman of
the Democratic Party's Finance Committee.

The Speaker telephoned the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, Carla A.
Hills, asking when there would be a decision on Mr. Wilmot's request for $2.2
million in annual rent subsidies for a housing project. Such inquiries tend to
be viewed as requests for special consideration. In any event, Mr. Wilmot got
his subsidies.


Remaining Neutral As a Kennedy Ran

Although he had close ties to the Kennedy family, Mr. O'Neill remained neutral
in the party's Presidential nomination fight between Senator Edward M. Kennedy
of Massachusetts and President Carter in 1980. He played a role behind the
scenes at the Democratic National Convention, however, negotiating an agreement
that led to Mr. Kennedy's reluctant endorsement of the President.

Until his retirement, the O'Neills maintained their home in Cambridge, enabling
the Speaker to keep in touch with the city's intellectual community as well as
its neighborhoods. A Saturday morning ritual when Mr. O'Neill was in Cambridge
consisted of stops at the Chinese laundry, the Italian food store and the Star
Market in Porter Square.

In retirement, Mr. O'Neill divided his time between a house in Harwichport on
Cape Cod and an apartment in Washington and spent some holidays at a condominium
in Florida.

The Speaker's oldest son and namesake, Thomas P. O'Neill 3d, a former lieutenant
governor of Massachusetts, is in public relations. Another son, Christopher, is
a Washington lawyer, and a third, Michael, is in business in Cambridge. One
daughter, Susan, has her own business in Washington, and another, Rosemary, is a
political officer for the State Department.

After suffering colon cancer, which led to a colostomy, Mr. O'Neill made public
service advertisements in which he joined athletes and movie stars in talking
candidly about having cancer.

Unlike some politicians who amassed a fortune, Mr. O'Neill retired from the
Speakership in relatively modest circumstances. His book, "Man of the House,"
however, written with William Novak, became a best seller that made him
financially secure. Mr. O'Neill also made commercials for a credit card company
and a motel chain.

Mr. O'Neill's book was a treasure trove of stories, including some about his
political campaign for the Cambridge City Council while he was a senior at
Boston College. He finished ninth in a field of 60 candidates, of whom the top
eight were elected.

The race taught him a lifelong lesson. He had not campaigned in his own
neighborhood, which he had taken for granted and where he made a poor showing.
In a post-mortem on the campaign, Mr. O'Neill's father told him what he had
learned in a lifetime of politics: "All politics is local."

In addition to his children, he is survived by his wife, Mildred, and eight
grandchildren.

NAME: Thomas P. O'Neill Jr.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. (Bruce Hoertel, 1982) (pg. A1); House
Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., right, in January 1977 with President-elect Jimmy
Carter, Vice President-elect Walter F. Mondale and Senators Hubert H. Humphrey,
left, and Robert C. Byrd. (United Press International) (pg. D18)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 956 words



International A3-12

CLINTON'S SLOGAN FOR RUSSIA
President Clinton plans to tell Russia that it needs tougher economic reform,
not less reform, when he goes to Moscow next week, officials say. But he also
hopes to offer some ideas on how Western aid can be used to help those who lose
their jobs because of the changes.  A1



MEXICO BOMBARDS REBELS
Mexican forces intensified their counterattack on peasant guerrillas in Chiapas
State, sending planes and helicopter gunships into the hills. In one town,
residents found the bodies of at least seven men in rebel uniform who had
apparently been executed after being captured.  A1

DIARY OF A YOUNG SARAJEVAN
Trapped by a war she could not understand, a young girl kept a diary for two
years in Sarajevo. Thanks to that journal, she was evacuated to France -- and
has become a literary sensation in Paris.  A1

Serbian gunners rained mortar and artillery shells on Sarajevo.  A9
France pressed the United States to intervene in Bosnia.  A8

BHUTTO AGAINST BHUTTO
A bitter political feud that has split Pakistan's leading family erupted in
violence, with Prime Minister Bhutto's police surrounding a family mansion and
clashing with supporters of her mother.  A3

NATO removed barriers to changes in its command.  A7

MYSTERIOUS DEATH IN GEORGIA
Zviad Gamsakhurdia, a President of Georgia who was driven from office and
mounted a failed military campaign to return, was reported by his wife to have
shot himself last week in western Georgia.  A6

U.S. ADMIRAL TO VISIT HANOI
In another sign of improving ties between Hanoi and Washington, The commander of
United States forces in the Pacific will visit Hanoi this month. He is the
highest-ranking American officer on active duty to go to Vietnam since the war
in Southeast Asia ended in 1975.  A10

U.S. officials said North Korea had agreed to nuclear inspections.  A12

President Clinton expressed doubts about Haiti's leader.  A12

La Silla Journal: A space race in the Chilean desert.  A4

National A14-16, D18, D20

NEW PROMINENCE FOR O'LEARY
After vowing to investigate her department's human radiation experiments, Energy
Secretary Hazel O'Leary has transformed herself from a relative unknown into a
prominent cabinet member.  A1

Victims of nuclear tests are more hopeful about their lawsuits.  D20

NO MORE FREE PARKING
Come April, Senators and Representatives will start to pay income taxes on
parking spaces they now get for free, thanks to an energy law they passed in
1992.  D20

SEEKING A SAFER FLORIDA
Mayors and police chiefs from six of the state's largest cities met for a "safe
city summit" and called on the lawmakers to mete out harsher punishment to
habitual criminals.  A14

NEW FINDINGS ON COMMON COLD
Using a CAT scanner, medical researchers have come up with some surprising
findings that they hope will lead to better ways to fight the common cold.  A14

SHOVELING THE EAST COAST
In 16 Eastern states, from North Carolina to Maine, frozen residents spent
yesterday digging out from Tuesday's northeaster.  A14

CLINTONS' REAL ESTATE FILES
The White House has requested that the Justice Department subpoena papers
related to President Clinton's role in a failed Arkansas real estate development
and place them under Federal protection.  A16

RETHINKING AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL
The Clinton Administration plans to ask Congress to create a Government-owned
corporation like Amtrak to operate the nation's air traffic control system.  A16


FUROR OVER FETAL OVARIES
A British scientist has set off a furor by suggesting that ovaries from aborted
fetuses be transplanted into infertile women.  A16

Metro Digest B1

CUOMO PROPOSES
Sounding election-year themes for New York State, which is recovering from a
lingering recession, Governor Cuomo proposed incentives to encourage job growth,
including cutting taxes on real-estate developers, corporations and hotels.A1

VALLONE'S STAND
The New York City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, now the most powerful
Democrat at City Hall, said he would resist any attempt by Mayor Giuliani to
give more power to borough presidents or turn over city work to private
companies without proof it would save money.  A1

Neediest Cases B5

Business Digest D1

Home Section C1-11

Words on the wall and the plate.  C1

Retirement? For 11 friends it's off to camp.  C1

At home with Robert Wilson: the Clark Kent of modern theater.  C1

New law on tow-truck cheats.  C2

House Proud C4

The new Art Appreciation, Parental Division: hang it.  C6

Parent & Child C11

Arts/Entertainment C12-20

Robin Williams's serious side.  C13

Nine writers get $105,000 grants.  C12

National Endowment for the Arts to cut theater training program.  C13

Kitchen's musical mixture.  C13

Music: New "Troyens" leads.  C16

Dance: Film tribute to Herbert Ross.  C13

Romanticism at City Ballet.  C16

A showcase at the Joyce.  C18

Books: Crichton's "Disclosure." C12

Television: "Homicide" returns, on probation.  C18

Sports B11-17

Obituaries D18-19

Thomas O'Neill, former House Speaker.  A1

Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21

Editorials

Vietnam: an outdated embargo.

Dinkins's graceless parting shot.

A Vatican tie with Israel.

Topics: Midnight madness.

Letters

William Safire: Foster's ghost.

Frank Rich: David Brock's women.

John Gagnon: Losing ground against AIDS.

Flora Lewis: A bigger, better Europe.

Bridge C12

Chronicle A18

Crossword C12

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Admiral to Visit Hanoi, as Relations Improve

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 399 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 5


In another sign of improving ties between Hanoi and Washington, Adm. Charles R.
Larson, commander of United States forces in the Pacific, will visit Hanoi this
month, the highest-ranking American military officer on active duty to go to
Vietnam since the war in Southeast Asia ended in 1975.

Admiral Larson, a four-star officer based in Hawaii, is to go to Vietnam on Jan.
16 for three days to review the work of American and Vietnamese specialists
investigating the fate of missing Americans. Admiral Larson is also expected to
meet with high-ranking officials in the Foreign Ministry.

The Administration is moving toward easing the trade embargo against Hanoi, and
has conditioned a relaxation of the embargo on resolving the fate of more than
2,000 servicemen who did not return from the Vietnam War.

An upbeat assessment from a senior commander like Admiral Larson that Vietnam is
cooperating fully would provide the Administration with a defense against
complaints that could come from veterans' groups that oppose closer ties to
Hanoi.

As a candidate, Bill Clinton promised that he would not lift the embargo until
Hanoi made a "full accounting" of missing Americans. But Mr. Clinton eased the
sanctions slightly last September when he allowed American companies to bid for
projects in Vietnam financed by international lending institutions.

The admiral's visit will come a month after Winston Lord, the Assistant
Secretary of State for Asia, returned from a trip to Southeast Asia. Mr. Lord
argued in favor of immediate action to ease the embargo to reward Hanoi for its
help in resolving the M.I.A. issue.

Admiral Larson, a former submarine captain who served as President Richard M.
Nixon's naval aide during the Vietnam War, will meet with American civilian and
military investigators in Hanoi and with specialists excavating crash sites and
pouring over archives in various parts of the country.

His visit coincides with the largest field inquiry the United States and Vietnam
have conducted together since Washington began sending investigators to Vietnam
in 1988. The American team of 84 specialists, including archeologists and
linguists, intends to investigate as many as 89 cases and excavate as many as 13
sites, the Pentagon said in a statement.

There are 2,239 Americans unaccounted for in Southeast Asia. Of those, 1,648
were lost in Vietnam.


LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Robin Williams, Seriously Speaking

BYLINE: By BILL CARTER

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 576 words


It's unusual that Robin Williams, the hottest movie comedian in America, appears
as a guest star in a television series tonight. More unusual, perhaps, is that
his character, a tourist who becomes a victim of violent crime, does not have
one funny line.

"I think I've done enough different parts now that people realize quickly, after
just a few moments, that this isn't a role where I'm going to do the crazy
thing," Mr. Williams said in a telephone interview yesterday. "Obviously on a
subject like this, you're not going to do any comedy riffing."

Mr. Williams, whose "Mrs. Doubtfire" has been the top box-office movie of the
holiday season, is the special attraction in the comeback episode of the NBC
police drama "Homicide." The show, which attracted high critical praise but low
ratings last winter, is being given what amounts to a last chance at survival in
a four-week trial run, beginning tonight at 10.

NBC and the show's producers clearly hope Mr. Williams's huge appeal will bring
extra viewers to the episode, and that some of those viewers will be hooked by
the show.

Mr. Williams has a close association with the show's executive producer, Barry
Levinson, who directed him in two films, "Good Morning, Vietnam" and "Toys." But
Mr. Williams said he did not take the "Homicide" part as a favor to Mr.
Levinson.

"The script was just so powerful," he said, "and on such a powerful subject.
Barry sent it to me and said he thought I'd be right for it."

In the episode, Mr. Williams plays a tourist with a wife and two children, who
is assaulted in a robbery in which his wife is killed. The episode explores the
randomness of contemporary urban crime, and the pain and psychological
aftershocks of the victim. At the same time, the fatal shooting is not shown on
camera.

Mr. Williams said he had found the role as troubling as it was rewarding. "It
was kind of brutal," he said. "You would finish a day and still be in a kind of
state. You'd want to go back to the hotel and call home immediately to make sure
everyone was all right."

The "Homicide" role is farther from Mr. Williams's usual comic fare than
anything he has done, with the possible exception of "Seize the Day," a
television movie of the Saul Bellow novel Mr. Williams made for PBS in 1986. And
in the interview yesterday, Mr. Williams was subdued, as if still under the
influence of the somber role in "Homicide."

The series has included bursts of rueful comedy in previous episodes, often from
Richard Belzer, a cast member who is also a standup comic by trade and natural
inclination. Mr. Williams said that comedy was appropriate, "because there are
cops who need to do those kinds of jokes just to get through their day."

"Homicide," set and filmed in Baltimore, was first broadcast on NBC almost a
year ago. Mr. Williams said Mr. Levinson had sent him the pilot episode, which
he said he had found brilliant. He watched several other episodes after that.
"Visually, it was just so different from anything else on television," he said.
"It certainly deserves to be renewed. It's the kind of show you wish they would
just leave on because it's so good."

Meanwhile, "Mrs. Doubtfire" has succeeded beyond all expectations, Mr. Williams
said. It even surged back to the top of the box-office figures last week. "It's
very gratifying," he said. But don't look for a sequel. " 'Mrs. Doubtfire Saves
the World?' " Mr. Williams said. "I don't think so."

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robin Williams in a scene from tonight's episode of the NBC
police drama "Homicide." (Dennis Yeandle/NBC)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam: An Outdated Embargo

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 524 words


Put aside, for a moment, the emotional claims of a war a quarter-century ago
that nearly tore America apart. The best reason to end the U.S. economic embargo
on Vietnam is that it no longer serves American interests.

With the rest of the world trading freely with Hanoi, the embargo punishes
American businesses far more than it punishes the Vietnamese. And if the embargo
were effective, it would be perverse. Present Vietnamese economic and foreign
policies warrant encouragement, not punishment.

But as the Clinton Administration is again discovering, the emotional claims are
not easily put aside. Washington's top Asian diplomat, Winston Lord, recently
returned from Vietnam reporting that Hanoi is cooperating in the search for
information about Americans missing in action since the war, in exactly the ways
Washington has suggested could bring a relaxation of the embargo. The commander
of U.S. Pacific Forces, Adm. Charles Larson, will also be visiting this month.
But before responding to Hanoi's latest efforts, the Administration has decided
to consult its political advisers. This news has already restarted the old
debates.

Arguing against relaxation are many families of American M.I.A.'s who feel that
Hanoi's cooperation has not gone far enough. While about 2,000 Americans are
officially listed as missing in action, all but about 100 are now reasonably
presumed to have died in battle or captivity before the end of the war. The fate
of the rest is less clear. While both Hanoi and the Nixon Administration
declared that all surviving American prisoners of war had returned in April
1973, newly declassified information suggests that the Pentagon believed some
might have been left behind, especially in Laos.

That suggests duplicity, by Washington and probably by Hanoi, which promised to
return all Americans held in Indochina. But does it suggest that Hanoi still
holds American prisoners? No one has found hard evidence to support such a
claim, despite a yearlong Senate investigation and the Pentagon's own search
missions under the Reagan, Bush and Clinton Administrations.

It is understandable that M.I.A. families remain skeptical, given the evidence
that they have been lied to. But how long should American policy be driven by
suspicion of old misdeeds that no one today can do anything about?

On the other side of the argument is the reality of Vietnam today. It has
transformed its economy along capitalist lines. It has abandoned military
interventionism. And it enjoys warm relations with such anti-Communist neighbors
as Taiwan, South Korea and the Philippines. In many ways it is as if Saigon, not
Hanoi, had won the war. Today's Vietnam represents a deferred victory for some
of America's original policy goals.

More than two decades ago, when America was agonizing over how to extricate
itself honorably from Vietnam with many of those goals unmet, a Republican
Senator from Vermont, George Aiken, offered a simple suggestion: Declare victory
and get out. Today America has a much more attractive option on Vietnam, if only
it is bold enough to take it: Declare victory and get in.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Widens Search for M.I.A.'s in Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 281 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Jan. 6


United States troops with picks and shovels spread out across 600 miles of
Vietnam today, searching former battlefields for soldiers missing since the
Vietnam War.

The search, the largest since the end of the war, involves 84 Americans in eight
teams and runs three weeks.

The search was previously concentrated in northern Vietnam and in Laos, where
hundreds of airmen went down on bombing and other missions. But the new search
has turned south, to what was South Vietnam before it fell in 1975.

The battlefields being searched include Tay Ninh, northwest of Ho Chi Minh City,
the current name for Saigon. Tay Ninh was the scene of some of the fiercest
fighting and the gateway for the United States invasion of Cambodia in 1970.

Other areas being searched are Kontum and Pleiku in the central highlands and
Ban Me Thuot, the southern anchor of South Vietnam's defenses.

Officials are still identifying remains found earlier. In Washington, the
Pentagon today identified remains found last June as those of Navy Lieut. (j.g.)
Barry E. Karger, of Prather, Calif., whose plane was downed over North Vietnam
on May 14, 1968.

The new search for M.I.A.'s has added significance as Washington reviews whether
to lift its 19-year trade embargo against Vietnam. President Clinton has said
his decision is contingent on progress in getting the best possible accounting
of the 2,239 troops still listed as missing.

Five Congressional delegations are to arrive in Hanoi over the next 10 days to
assess the situation. The first is due Saturday, led by Senator J. Bennett
Johnston, Democrat of Louisiana and chairman of the Senate Energy and Natural
Resources Committee.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

O'Neill's Constituents Remember a Regular Guy, Not a Politician

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 680 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Jan. 6


Frank the barber, as Frank Minnelli is known here, was clipping sideburns this
afternoon, but it was hard to keep his mind on his work. All he could think
about, all the people who kept stopping by could talk about, was the man who had
been his customer, their friend and a regular guy from the neighborhood for more
than 40 years -- Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr.

Mr. O'Neill, 81, who was Speaker of the House from 1977 to 1987 and who
represented parts of Cambridge and Boston for four decades, died on Wednesday
night of cardiac arrest at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.

"I didn't realize he was such a big shot, Mr. Speaker, until I saw him in
Washington," Mr. Minnelli said. "It was 10 years ago. He invited my wife and I
down. He took us to lunch in the Congressional dining hall. Then afterward we
were walking around the Capitol. He's got his arm around me. A congressman came
up to him and said he had the Mayor of Philadelphia in his office. Tom -- I
always called him Tom -- said, 'Not now, I've got more important people.' "

'He Listened'

Some of the old-timers sitting around the barber shop on Massachusetts Avenue
were not even there for haircuts. They had braved the bitter cold just to talk
about Tip O'Neil, the bricklayer's son who had grown up in North Cambridge, just
a few blocks from Frank's. "There were only three politicians -- James Michael
Curley, Tip O'Neill and Al Vellucci," said Al Vellucci, a 78-year-old former
Mayor of Cambridge.

At moments, the men would fall silent, remembering, not just Mr. O'Neill,
perhaps, but the era that had gone with him. Then Mr. Vellucci would remind
them: "Like Tip O'Neill said, 'All politics is local.' "

Mr. Minnelli, 58, recalled how Mr. O'Neill had sat in his chair, talking to him
about the Vietnam War. "He changed his opinion, if you remember," he said. "At
first he was supporting the President. He told me we had to stop the aggression.
But then he went out and talked to people in his district, and he went against
the President. It was a big step for him -- a lot of soul searching."

One of Mr. Minnelli's customers, Larry Sullivan, said: "He's what politicians
aren't today. He listened to the people."

Mr. O'Neill routinely won large majorities in his district. In 1984, he was
re-elected with 92 percent of the vote.

The barber shop has three leather chairs, a sign advertising "haircuts --
$6.50," and a picture of a smiling, white-haired Mr. O'Neill. "He had great hair
to cut," Mr. Minnelli said of the former Speaker. "It was thick. You could work
with it. No blow-drying, no gel -- we don't do that here -- maybe a little
Vitalis once in awhile."

Leonard Lamkin, 80, a boyhood friend of Mr. O'Neill's, and a regular at Frank's,
could not make it to the barber shop today, but by telephone he added his voice
to the chorus. "When Tip was in town, he always went to Frank the Barber," Mr.
Lamkin said. "Even if he didn't need a haircut, he'd go and get one."

Frank's is just a few blocks from Barry's Corner, named after the family that
lived there, where Mr. Lamkin, Mr. O'Neill and their buddies congregated as
teen-agers. For the last 28 years, Mr. Lamkin recalled, Mr. O'Neill regularly
attended reunions of the Barry's Corner group at the Veterans of Foreign Wars
hall in North Cambridge. "He would address them all by their nicknames --
Potatoes Labo, Pinky Sullivan, Blubber Sheehan" said Mr. Lamkin, who was known
as Lenny. "What a memory he had."

Before returning home, Mr. Vellucci paid a visit to John the Cobbler, as John
Gimigliano is called, two doors down from Frank's. Mr. O'Neill's shoe repair man
had erected a makeshift altar -- a bouquet of artificial red roses, a candle and
a framed cover of an old New Republic magazine, with the former House Speaker on
the cover.

"He came here for 50 years -- not two years, 50 years," Mr. Gimigliano said,
fighting back tears. "I don't call him a politician. He was my favorite friend.
He invited me to Washington. He says, 'I got the red carpet here for you. When
you come, you got to walk on it.' "


LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I didn't realize he was such a big shot, Mr. Speaker, until I
saw him in Washington," said Frank Minnelli, who cut Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill
Jr.'s hair for years. He clipped Dick Montminy yesterday while talking about Mr.
O'Neill with Al Vellucci, a former mayor of Cambridge, Mass. (Evan Richman for
The New York Times)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., a Democratic Power in the House for Decades, Dies at 81

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2956 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 6


Democrats and Republicans today bade a warm farewell to Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill
Jr., the gregarious and irrepressibly liberal Bostonian who symbolized the
Democratic Party through much of the 1980's as Speaker of the House.

Mr. O'Neill, 81, died Wednesday night of cardiac arrest at Brigham and Women's
Hospital in Boston. Since his retirement from the House in 1987, he had lived in
Washington and Harwich Port, Mass., on Cape Cod.

President Clinton issued a statement today paying tribute to "a beautiful life
well lived," and ordered Government flags lowered to half-staff until Mr.
O'Neill's burial on Monday.

"Tip O'Neill was the nation's most prominent, powerful and loyal champion of
working people," the President's statement said. "He loved politics and
government because he saw politics and government could make a difference in
people's lives. And he loved people most of all."

The current Speaker of the House, Thomas S. Foley of Washington, called Mr.
O'Neill "the model of what a representative and a leader of the American people
should be."

Today, the capital's Republicans largely agreed. "Partisanship was put aside,
and we could be the best of friends," the House minority leader, Robert H.
Michel of Illinois, said of Mr. O'Neill today on the ABC-TV News program "Good
Morning America."

The Senate Republican leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, was one of Mr. O'Neill's most
biting political critics in the 1980's. But today, on the CBS News program "This
Morning," Mr. Dole called his old rival "the Congressman's Congressman."

Mr. O'Neill, he said, "certainly will go down in history as one of the great
political leaders of our time."

He was also one of the last and least reconstructed liberals from the cadre of
Roosevelt-era New Dealers who led Congress and the nation through most the
1960's and 1970's.

A Proud Liberal, Fashionable or Not

Mr. O'Neill was an old-style politician and proud of it, a House Speaker
comfortable with power, who clung to his brand of liberalism long after it
ceased to be fashionable, even among his fellow Democrats.

An early opponent of the Vietnam War, Mr. O'Neill took strong positions on many
controversial issues. He was the Congressional leader who pushed hardest for the
impeachment of President Richard M. Nixon and later, as Speaker, put his
prestige on the line for Congressional reform.

Mr. O'Neill was the Speaker from 1977 to 1987, during the Presidencies of Jimmy
Carter and Ronald Reagan, both of whom ran against entrenched Washington
officials and considered Mr. O'Neill the ultimate insider.

But although he reached the heights of political power and mingled easily with
national and world leaders, Mr. O'Neill was perhaps best known for his advice to
colleagues to attend carefully to their constituents, because, as he put it,
"All politics is local."

He was a large, joyous, generous-spirited man with a bulbous nose, yellowed
white hair that flopped over his forehead and an ever-present cigar. He was a
rabid sports fan, frequently attending baseball games and boxing matches, a
skilled poker player and a devoted but struggling golfer.

To Mr. O'Neill, who spoke of the Democratic Party with near-religious fervor,
the party was the one of the cities, the working people, the poor, the needy,
the unemployed, the sick and the disinherited. "And no way are we ever going to
let them down," he would insist. He opposed a balanced budget because, he said,
it would "dismantle the programs that I've been working for as an old liberal."

When President Reagan persuaded Congress to curtail many of Mr. O'Neill's
favorite social programs, the Speaker lamented that the Democrats had been too
successful at their work. He said the Democratic programs had created a broad
middle class whose members had forgotten the many benefits they had received
from government -- in education and housing, for example -- and wanted to pull
up the ladder behind them.

Republicans made Mr. O'Neill a target of their 1980 and 1982 campaigns,
portraying him as a bloated old pol with outdated liberal ideas. They produced a
television commercial that featured an actor who resembled the Speaker laughing
off warnings that his car was low on fuel, until the vehicle finally ground to a
halt. The announcer then proclaimed, "The Democrats have run out of gas."

Mr. O'Neill remained steadfast. "I haven't changed my philosophy," he frequently
told reporters, with whom he met daily.

He made no apologies for the kind of politics he had mastered in Boston. As
Speaker, he rewarded friends and punished enemies with the help of a long memory
but few grudges.

O'Neill and Carter: Different Democrats

Mr. O'Neill's became Speaker the year Mr. Carter took office as President. About
all they had in common was their political party. Mr. Carter, an emotionally
taut Georgian with a scant power base among Democrats, had reached the White
House as an anti-politician, an outsider who publicly disdained Washington
insiders personified by the gregarious Speaker, who had worked his way up from
ward politics.

"Our first conversation," the Speaker recalled, "he told me how he had handled
the Georgia Legislature, by going over their heads directly to the people."

Mr. O'Neill said he responded by referring to the 289 House Democrats in the
majority. "I said: 'Hey, wait a minute. You have 289 guys up there who know
their districts pretty well. They ran against the Administration, and they
wouldn't hesitate to run against you.'

"He said, 'Oh, really?' "

The two men did not speak the same language. Mr. O'Neill said he had once told
the President, "Keep your left hand high." But the Speaker found that Mr. Carter
was no boxing fan and was unfamiliar with the boxer's classic defensive posture.
"He didn't know what I was talking about," Mr. O'Neill said.

But as a loyal Democrat Mr. O'Neill felt morally bound to help Mr. Carter
whenever possible. An autographed photograph from the President was inscribed,
"To my friend Tip O'Neill, thanks for another lesson in good politics, Jimmy
Carter, June 1977."

But in 1980, when the Republicans won the White House and the Senate, and cut
deeply into the House Democratic majority, the Speaker privately blamed the
President, believing him inept.

Today, Mr. Carter said in a statement that Mr. O'Neill "personified the finest
of American politics."

"Of all the people I have known, Tip O'Neill knew best how to enjoy politics,"
he said.

O'Neill and Reagan: Different Irishmen

Mr. O'Neill never shied from wielding power, although he frequently lamented
that the power of the Speaker had declined since the days of Sam Rayburn, the
Texas Democrat whose word became law during his 17 years in the post, ending in
1961. That was when a Speaker could get binding commitments from committee
chairmen; it was before the diffusion of power that Mr. O'Neill himself worked
to bring about.

From 1981 to 1987, Mr. O'Neill led the loyal opposition to President Reagan, a
man with whom he shared an Irish heritage, an interest in sports and an outgoing
personality. But the two men had a profound philosophical disagreement about
government: the Speaker regarded government as the solution to many social
problems, as an agent of social change; Mr. Reagan regarded it as a problem in
itself, interfering in the lives of Americans and impeding economic and social
progress.

The Speaker also found Mr. Reagan to be appallingly ignorant of the intricacies
of government; indeed, he called him the most ignorant man who had ever occupied
the White House. Publicly, Mr. O'Neill called Mr. Reagan "Herbert Hoover with a
smile" and "a cheerleader for selfishness."

Early in his time as Speaker, when his bill for a new House code of ethics was
in trouble, he lumbered to the well of the House and cut through the debate on
the crucial provision, a limitation on outside income. The speech was vintage
O'Neill.

Sure, he said, he knew what it was to be strapped. Wasn't he the one who had
fought for a raise of $12,900 a year in Congressional pay? But in exchange he
had promised the American people "the strongest code of ethics that this country
has ever seen." The issue, after Watergate, he thundered, was "restoring public
confidence in this Congress as an institution, restoring confidence in its
membership."

He looked out at an audience that included the 80 Democrats for whom he had
campaigned the previous fall, the scores of members he had appointed to the nine
select and special committees over which he had jurisdiction, and the more than
200 beneficiaries of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Fund, for which he
had been the chairman.

His listeners knew that the Speaker had a great voice in their committee
assignments, the scheduling of floor action on bills, the disbursing of campaign
money and the small favors that can make or break a Congressional career. Mr.
O'Neill called in his chits. The result was a foregone conclusion. The vote was
344 to 79.

Four years later, when 44 Democrats joined in voting to overturn a ruling of the
chair, the kind of parliamentary decision that is the lifeblood of the House,
Mr. O'Neill wrote them that he was "extremely disappointed" and obliquely warned
that "disciplinary measures" were under consideration.

Such measures could affect a member's committee assignments. He added that he
felt that such measures were unnecessary. No future Democratic votes against the
judgment of the chair were noted.

Tip (as in Foul Tip) Tastes Politics at 15

Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. was born on Dec. 9, 1912, in a working-class area of
Cambridge, Mass., which later became part of his Congressional district. His
father was a member of the Cambridge City Council. His mother died when he was a
child, and his father remarried.

He picked up the nickname Tip from a baseball player, James Edward O'Neill of
the old St. Louis Browns, who had the knack of hitting foul tips until the
pitcher walked him. So Mr. O'Neill's boyhood friends gave him the name. The
Speaker was an inveterate fan of the Boston Red Sox.

Educated in Roman Catholic schools, he broke into politics at 15, campaigning
for Al Smith in his 1928 Presidential campaign against Herbert C. Hoover. "All I
knew was that Al Smith was an Irish Catholic and we had been suppressed all our
lives," he said.

Four years later, he helped get out the vote for Franklin D. Roosevelt. "You'd
have Mrs. Murphy ready to get into an automobile to take her to the polls," he
recalled. "And then you'd go to the next house, Mrs. Sweeney, and you'd have the
car come for Mrs. Sweeney. We walked the streets to get the votes out."

As a senior at Boston College, Mr. O'Neill lost his first campaign, for the
Cambridge City Council, by 150 votes. But he was elected to the Massachusetts
House of Representatives in 1936, where he rose to Speaker, and where he
remained until 1952, when he was elected to the United States House.

He won the seat vacated by John F. Kennedy on Kennedy's election to the Senate.
It was also the seat once held by James M. Curley, the Boston politician whose
career was the basis of the Edwin O'Connor novel "The Last Hurrah."

A Protege Of a Future Speaker

Mr. O'Neill and his wife, Mildred, decided not to move their family to
Washington when Mr. O'Neill was first elected, and they did not go back on this
agreement until Mr. O'Neill became Speaker, a quarter century later.

Until then, Mr. O'Neill roomed with Representative Edward P. Boland, Democrat of
Massachusetts, his closest friend. Their refrigerator was said to be stocked
almost exclusively with beer.

In Washington, Mr. O'Neill became a protege of Representative John W. McCormack
of Massachusetts, the Democratic whip who went on to become House Speaker in
1962. Mr. McCormack introduced him to the House power structure as part of the
informal "board of education" meetings that Speaker Rayburn held after hours for
Congressional leaders and friends. By his second term in the House, Mr. O'Neill
had won a coveted seat on the Rules Committee.

Mr. O'Neill's opposition to the Vietnam War in 1967, when he was a leader of the
Rules Committee, was a decision affected by the anti-war feelings of his own
children (three boys and two girls) as well as among the intellectual
communities at Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
in his own district. His blue-collar constituents, who made up the bulk of his
support, were overwhelmingly in favor of the American role in the war.

But Mr. O'Neill wrote in his autobiography, "Man of the House" (Random House,
1987), that he had come to the conclusion that the conflict was a civil war and
that American involvement in it was morally wrong. When President Lyndon B.
Johnson called him to the White House to explain his change of position, Mr.
O'Neill recalled, he told the President, "In my heart and in my conscience I
believe your policy is wrong." Johnson accepted his position, Mr. O'Neill said,
when he found out that the Congressman had not changed it for political reasons.

But his opposition to the war did eventually reap some political dividends: he
won the trust and support of younger House members who shared his position on
Vietnam, and they became important allies as Mr. O'Neill rose in power.

In 1971, having supported Hale Boggs of Louisiana as majority leader, Mr.
O'Neill was selected by Mr. Boggs to be majority whip, an appointive post. After
Mr. Boggs died in a plane crash in Alaska in 1972, Mr. O'Neill was elected
majority leader.

Mr. O'Neill, as the whip under Speaker Carl Albert of Oklahoma, was the
Democrats' strong man; he did the difficult things. He was instrumental in
bringing changes that stripped the committee chairmen of their autocratic power,
and he was the Democratic leader who pushed hardest for the investigation and
impeachment of President Nixon, who resigned before a vote on impeachment was
held.

Mr. O'Neill was elected Speaker by acclamation in December 1976, when he was 64,
and took office the next month. "The wonder of it is that such a decent,
compassionate man could rise to the top of a place like this," said
Representative Benjamin S. Rosenthal, Democrat of Queens.

But Mr. O'Neill was not without lapses of judgment. He was among many House
members who accepted favors from Tongsun Park, the South Korean lobbyist and
intelligence agent. In 1973 and '74, Mr. O'Neill permitted Mr. Park to sponsor
two lavish birthday parties in his honor, thereby bolstering Mr. Park's
prestige.

Similarly, some questioned Mr. O'Neill's judgment when he intervened in an
application for Federal money made by James P. Wilmot, who had been chairman of
the Democratic Party's Finance Committee.

The Speaker telephoned the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, Carla A.
Hills, in July 1975, asking when there would be a decision on Mr. Wilmot's
request for $2.2 million in annual rent subsidies for a housing project. Such
inquiries tend to be viewed as requests for special consideration. In any event,
Mr. Wilmot got his subsidies.

Although he had close ties to the Kennedy family, Mr. O'Neill remained neutral
in the party's Presidential nomination fight between Senator Edward M. Kennedy
of Massachusetts and President Carter in 1980. He played a role behind the
scenes at the Democratic National Convention, however, negotiating an agreement
that led to Mr. Kennedy's reluctant endorsement of the President.

Financial Security From a Book

Until his retirement, the O'Neills maintained their home in Cambridge, enabling
the Speaker to keep in touch with the city's intellectual community as well as
its neighborhoods. A Saturday morning ritual when Mr. O'Neill was in Cambridge
consisted of stops at the Chinese laundry, the Italian food store and the Star
Market in Porter Square.

In retirement, Mr. O'Neill divided his time between a house in Harwich Port on
Cape Cod and an apartment in Washington and spent some holidays at a condominium
in Florida.

The Speaker's oldest son and namesake, Thomas P. O'Neill 3d, a former lieutenant
governor of Massachusetts, is in public relations in Boston. Another son,
Christopher, is a Washington lawyer, and a third, Michael, is in business in
Cambridge. One daughter, Susan, has her own business in Washington, and another,
Rosemary, is a political officer for the State Department. Mr. O'Neill is also
survived by his wife and eight grandchildren. A family spokeswoman said the
funeral would be held next Monday at St. John's Church in Cambridge, Reuters
reported. On Saturday and Sunday, his body will lie in state in Boston's State
House.

After suffering colon cancer, which led to a colostomy, Mr. O'Neill made public
service advertisements in which he joined athletes and movie stars in talking
candidly about having cancer.

Unlike some politicians who amassed a fortune, Mr. O'Neill retired from the
Speakership in relatively modest circumstances. His book, "Man of the House,"
however, written with William Novak, became a best seller that made him
financially secure. Mr. O'Neill also made commercials for a credit card company
and a motel chain.

Mr. O'Neill's book was a treasure trove of stories, including some about his
political campaign for the Cambridge City Council while he was a senior at
Boston College. He finished ninth in a field of 60 candidates, of whom the top
eight were elected.

The race taught him a lifelong lesson. He had not campaigned in his own
neighborhood, which he had taken for granted and where he made a poor showing.
In a post-mortem on the campaign, Mr. O'Neill's father told him what he had
learned in a lifetime of politics: "All politics is local."


LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr., Speaker of the House from 1977 to
1987, clung to his brand of New Deal liberalism long after it ceased to be
fashionable, even among his fellow Democrats. (George Tames/The New York Times,
1973)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

War Protester Abandons Life In Underground

BYLINE: By DON TERRY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 944 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Jan. 6


Captured already by middle age and the weariness that comes with nearly a
quarter-century on the run, one of the country's last fugitives from the
politics and passion of the late 1960's surrendered here today.

The fugitive, Jeffrey David Powell, was a 19-year-old leader of the militant
Weather Underground student group when hundreds of Weathermen stormed through
Chicago during the "Days of Rage" in October 1969 to protest the war in Vietnam.

Dozens of people were injured, and Mr. Powell was charged with aggravated
assault for hitting a police lieutenant in the head with a lead pipe, a wound
that required about 70 stitches. In 1970, while free on bail, Mr. Powell
disappeared into the radical underground.

Today, at age 43, his body drifting toward stocky and his widowed mother sliding
into old age and illness, Mr. Powell stepped out of the shadows and a swirling
snowfall, now wearing a jacket and tie and bearing a manner of polite defiance.

At Peace With Government

"I am proud to have fought for my country against the criminal government of
Richard Nixon," Mr. Powell said before he surrendered at the Cook County
Criminal Courts building. "And I am very happy not to be at war with my
government now."

As Mr. Powell read from a prepared statement, he was surrounded by reporters and
television cameras documenting the close of a chapter on one of America's most
traumatic decades.

"Though the Vietnam War and the insurrections in America's cities have ended,"
Mr. Powell said, "the scars and social injustices are still with us, bearing
bitter fruit. One in eight American children will go to bed hungry tonight; 25
percent of our youngest children live in poverty; in far too many of our
neighborhoods and disintegrating schools, the sound of gunfire is commonplace."

In a court appearance minutes later, Mr. Powell pleaded guilty to a reduced
charge of mob action, a misdemeanor, and was sentenced to 18 months' probation,
a $500 fine and court costs of $210. Prosecutors had sought a jail term of six
months. But they said the police officer, who is retired, did not object to the
disposition of Mr. Powell's case.

24 Years on the Run

For much of his 24 years on the run, Mr. Powell said he had worked for social
service and relief agencies on behalf of poor children, most recently in Denver,
where he now lives. His lawyer, Jeffrey Haas of the People's Law Office in
Chicago, said his client's work with children was the major reason Mr. Powell
had decided to surrender.

Mr. Haas said Mr. Powell, while living underground and using false names, had
testified in Colorado before state legislative committees about children and
poverty and wanted to step up his efforts without having to worry about being
arrested.

Mr. Powell said he returned to Illinois two years ago to testify before a
legislative committee on children's issues. About the same time, he stopped at
his parents' home, which is believed to be in Ohio, to be at the bedside of his
father, Donald Powell, a farmer and veteran of World War II. His father died
while he was visiting.

Mr. Powell said that over the years he had been a salesman, picked peas, edited
textbooks and worked with such organizations as the Children's Defense Fund,
OxFam and Unicef, never making more than $10,000 and usually not much more than
$8,000.

'Don't Need Much'

"Once you're an activist," he said, "you don't own much and you don't need
much."

Mr. Powell said he is single and has no children of his own. He said that during
his time as a fugitive he had lived in several places, from the District of
Columbia to Hawaii, and had "lots of different names."

The original charge against Mr. Powell, aggravated assault, was dropped today
during a closed-door meeting between his lawyer and the Cook County State's
Attorney's Office. Mr. Haas contacted the prosecutor's office about three weeks
ago and began arranging Mr. Powell's surrender.

At one time, Mr. Powell was also wanted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation
for unlawful flight to avoid prosecution, but that charge was dropped in 1979.
Dozens of F.B.I. agents had searched the country for Mr. Powell and five other
leaders of the Weather Underground, only to abandon the hunt when it was
disclosed that agents had waged a campaign of harassment against the fugitives'
families.

Former acting F.B.I Director L. Patrick Gray and two of his aides were indicted
for conspiring to violate the civil rights of the young radicals' families. The
charges against Mr. Gray were dismissed, but his assistants, W. Mark Felt and
Edward S. Miller, were convicted; they were later pardoned by President Ronald
Reagan.

The Last Fugitive

Mr. Powell is believed to be the last of the wanted Weathermen, said Andy Knott,
a spokesman for the Cook County prosecutor's office. The rest had already
surrendered

"As far as we know," Mr. Knott said, "this closes the book on the 'Days of
Rage."'

At his court appearance today, Criminal Courts Judge Fred Suria Jr. praised Mr.
Powell for his work on behalf of children and said he had already paid a
"horrendous price" because of his years as a fugitive. The judge said, "That's a
shame," but added that violating the law was also "a shame."

Judge Suria told Mr. Powell that he, too, was worried that society was building
an "underclass" of children through neglect, abuse and cutbacks in programs to
benefit young children.

Mr. Powell smiled and asked the judge to lobby the state Legislature to protect
money earmarked for food-and-milk program for poor women and their infants.

"I appreciate you bringing it up," the judge said. "I certainly will."


NAME: Jeffrey David Powell

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jeffrey David Powell, who at 19 years old was a leader in the
Weather Underground's 1969 "Days of Rage," turned himself in yesterday in
Chicago and was sentenced to 18 months probation. (Bob Black for The New York
Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
On the Road Across the Alarming 90's Landscape

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 31; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 868 words



Going Native
 By Stephen Wright
 305 pages. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $22.

Stephen Wright's impressive first novel, "Meditations in Green," published a
decade ago, offered a hallucinatory vision of the Vietnam War as seen through
the eyes of an intelligence adviser turned heroin addict. Mr. Wright's second
novel, "M31: A Family Romance" (1988), effectively brought the war home,
creating a frightening allegory of American life through its portrait of a
ghoulish family cult.

The dark side of the American dream is Mr. Wright's subject once again in his
latest book, "Going Native," an uncompromising 1990's version of "On the Road"
that gives us an alarming picture of a country pitched on the edge of an
emotional and social abyss, a country already familiar from tabloid headlines
and confessional talk shows, a country in which too many people pack guns and
too many people come to violent, unexpected ends.

Composed from a series of tenuously linked chapters, each of which reads like a
short story, "Going Native" begins with a snapshot-bright portrait of a suburban
couple caught up in "middling middleness": the Joneses have two young children
and a house full of televisions. Rho has a susceptibility to "bad thoughts" and
scary dreams, a sense of emotional claustrophobia. Her husband, Wylie, although
he spends a lot of time watching "shoot/chase/crash" movies, seems like an
"average" sort of guy; there is "nothing immediately distinctive" about him, Rho
thinks, "no crags or crannies or funny clumps of hair for words to adhere to."
He is "a guy who looked like any other guy."

One night, Rho and Wylie invite their friends Tom and Gerri Hanna over for a
barbecue. After the nachos and daiquiris, after the steaks and potatoes, Wylie
excuses himself from the table. He never returns. And never looks back.

Wylie, it seems, has stolen his neighbors' green Ford Galaxie, an "unwashed,
unwaxed, decidedly unnew" car that will take him on a disorienting odyssey
across America, into the dark, Don DeLillo territory of lost souls and
disintegrating values, deep into the heart of darkness. Like the receding
American frontier, the road, for Wylie, means freedom, independence, the chance
to invent himself anew; it also means rootlessness, dislocation, the loss of
family and self.

As he makes his way westward to the coast, Wylie follows a path that intersects
the lives of a motley group of outlaws, outcasts and outsiders. There's Randy
Sawyers, a former medical student who abandoned his ambitions for the solitary
pleasures of driving a truck hundreds of miles a week on the interstates.
There's Jessie Horn, a dancing slave girl at a Las Vegas casino, who dumps her
abusive husband, finds a female lover and takes a job at a mass-market wedding
chapel. And there's Emory Chace, a small-town motel owner, who dreams of writing
a hit movie about a woman who falls in love with an alien from outer space.

As far as these people are concerned, lyrics from heavy-metal rock songs,
shootout sequences from movies and lurid scenes from pulp novels all bleed
together into the violence they watch every night on the news and witness daily
in their lives: the random drive-by shootings; the high-speed, highway crashes;
the unforeseen acts of God and nature and man.

What's more, many of these people seem unable or unwilling to differentiate
between dreams and reality, between the movies they have seen and the actual
lives they lead. Freya, a former pornography star turned sex entrepreneur, makes
a lot of money videotaping people's private fantasies. The Copelands, a wealthy
Hollywood couple, journey to the farthest reaches of Borneo in pursuit of a
vision of themselves as intrepid adventurers. And Mister CD and his girlfriend,
Latitia, find their cocaine-fueled paranoia turning into real-life violence, as
their lives career out of control.

None of these people have the slightest grip on who they are or what they truly
believe. In fact, all of them seem caught in a perpetual state of metamorphosis,
shedding old lives and shrugging on new ones with the ease of an actor changing
costumes for a scene. A nurse becomes a drug addict; a Vegas entrepreneur
becomes a preacher; a teen-age girl becomes a worshiper of Satan.

Wylie, Mr. Wright suggests, is perhaps the most extreme example of this protean
personality: during his cross-country drive, he assumes and discards a host of
aliases and identities, erasing his past and his responsibility for his actions
as he goes. Change your name, he thinks, "and you change your reality."

"Events," he decides, "will begin falling into new, previously unthinkable
patterns."

Using quick, expressionist prose, Mr. Wright narrates Wylie's adventures -- and
their violent, shattering consequences -- with cool aplomb, as he plunges the
reader into a nightmare world of sleazy motels and low-rent casinos,
mind-altering drugs and orgies and murder. The writing is more controlled, more
elliptical than in his earlier novels: not a single detail is wasted here, not a
single scene is superfluous. The result is a chilling and often brilliant novel,
a novel that radiates the dark, consuming energy of a black hole.


LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Stephen Wright. (Jerry Bauer/Farrar, Straus and Giroux)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 8, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

The Shrinking Speaker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 365 words


Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr., dead at 81 this week, was a well-liked
Massachusetts Democrat and competent Speaker of the House who memorably
remarked, "All politics is local." Yet it is also true that the office of
Speaker has shrunk in authority and prestige in part because so many House
Democrats have pushed the O'Neill axiom to its logical conclusion. They care
more about sentiment in their home districts, as in the Nafta vote, than about
the merits of the argument and the success or failure of a Democratic President.

Fidelity to party mattered far more a century ago, when The Washington Post
expressed a common view about the Speaker: it was an office "no less
consequential than the President." During the 1890's, Thomas Reed of Maine was
the unquestioned ruler of the House, "ambitious as Lucifer," as a rival said,
who clearly spoke for its Republican majorities. The era of the czars and bosses
continued with Joseph Cannon of Illinois, Champ Clark of Missouri, Nicholas
Longworth of Ohio and Sam Rayburn of Texas.

But after Rayburn's death in office in 1961, party loyalties have progressively
slackened as House elections have turned into sound-bite blitzes underwritten by
special-interest campaign funds. Indeed Tip O'Neill's national reputation owed
much to his own independence; he was part New Deal loyalist, part Bay State
maverick. In 1967, faithful to the views of many Cambridge voters, he was among
the few party leaders to break with Lyndon Johnson and oppose the Vietnam War.
In the Nixon years, his dissent stood him in good stead among younger, anti-war
House Democrats, who elected him chief whip.

Working with liberals, Mr. O'Neill fought successfully to strip away the
autocratic powers long enjoyed by committee chairmen; he was elected Speaker by
acclamation in January 1977. Yet in his decade at the dais Mr. O'Neill proved a
fickle and lukewarm friend to Jimmy Carter, a Democrat, and an accommodating
adversary to Ronald Reagan, a Republican.

True, compared with his successors, Jim Wright and Thomas Foley, Tip O'Neill may
seem a titan. But for Bill Clinton, the O'Neill legacy is a weakened Speaker,
and a House without a woodshed.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 9, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By Laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 910 words



SECOND FRONT: Censorship and Propaganda in the Gulf War
By John R. MacArthur. University of California, $10.
Determined not to repeat the mistakes of the Vietnam era, the United States
Government adopted a policy of control and containment of information during the
1991 war with Iraq. "Mr. MacArthur writes in fury at what he sees, correctly, as
the press's failure to respond effectively," Michael Janeway said here in 1992.
RIPLEY UNDER WATER
By Patricia Highsmith.
Black Lizard/Vintage Crime, $10.
Tom Ripley is an intelligent, cultured gentleman who dabbles in art, music and,
occasionally, murder. A popular though unlikely hero, he has appeared in several
of Patricia Highsmith's books without ever getting caught. But in this one,
Ripley's new neighbors seem to know a great deal about the skeletons in his
closet, needling him not for extortion but for pleasure. In 1992 our reviewer,
Julian Symons, said of Ms. Highsmith, "One closes most of her books -- and her
equally powerful and chilling short stories -- with a feeling that the world is
more dangerous than one had imagined." For readers unacquainted with Ripley,
this publisher has also reissued THE BOY WHO FOLLOWED RIPLEY ($10), a 1980 novel
in which he becomes the protector of a runaway teen-ager, and RIPLEY'S GAME
($10), published in 1974, in which he manipulates someone into committing
murder.
ORIGINS RECONSIDERED:
In Search of What Makes Us Human
By Richard Leakey and Roger Lewin.
Anchor/Doubleday, $14.95.
Did the human species evolve simultaneously in Africa, Asia and Europe? Did
morality originate with the emergence of human beings or can it be traced
farther back? These are among the questions discussed by Richard Leakey, the
paleoanthropologist. "It is not often that a major participant in so contentious
a field delivers such a vivid, generally evenhanded summation," John Noble
Wilford said here in 1992.
I, TITUBA, BLACK WITCH OF SALEM
By Maryse Conde. Translated by Richard Philcox.
One World/Ballantine, $10.
The author, a native of Guadeloupe, has created a rich novel from the history of
another West Indian woman, the real Tituba, who played a central role in the
Salem witch trials. In 1992 our reviewer, Howard Frank Mosher, praised Ms.
Conde's "gift for storytelling and her unswerving focus on her characters."
Ballantine has also reissued JUMPING SHIP: And Other Stories, by Kelvin
Christopher James ($10). Born in Trinidad, Mr. James focuses on the intersection
of American and Caribbean cultures in the present day. He evokes "a particular
world by virtue of his energy and generosity of spirit," Tom Piazza said here in
1992.
DAYS OF OBLIGATION:
An Argument With My Mexican Father
By Richard Rodriguez. Penguin, $11.
The author, who grew up in the United States, discovers that Mexico, the land of
his parents, holds more meaning for him than he would ever have believed. Other
assumptions about being Roman Catholic and gay are also examined in these
autobiographical essays. In 1992 our reviewer, David L. Kirp, said, "The self
remains Mr. Rodriguez's best and truest subject."
BLACK DOGS
By Ian McEwan. Bantam, $7.95.
In this novel-cum-parable, the disintegration of a marriage is related by the
couple's son-in-law, Jeremy. In writing his memoir, he keeps returning to a
mystical encounter between June (his mother-in-law) and a pair of fierce black
dogs. In 1992 our reviewer, Bette Pesetsky, praised "the richly designed weaving
of a truly sinister and very real postwar Europe into these lives."
ANATOMY OF LOVE:
The Mysteries of Mating, Marriage, and Why We Stray
By Helen Fisher. Fawcett Columbine, $12.50.
The complexities of courtship are reduced to biological imperatives in this
social and sexual analysis. For instance, couples are most likely to divorce
after four years because they've had enough time to raise a child past infancy
and can then feel free to vary the gene pool. Mary Batten, the author of SEXUAL
STRATEGIES: How Females Choose Their Mates (Jeremy P. Tarcher/Putnam, $12.95),
also sees parenting responsibilities as central. Women are more selective about
mating, she explains, because they will largely deal with the consequences. Both
books "are fun and sometimes even delightful to read," Natalie Angier said here
in 1992.
DUNSTER
By John Mortimer. Penguin, $10.95.
A British accountant in the midst of a boring middle age has one element in his
life that is all too interesting: the constant reappearances of an obnoxious
schoolmate, Dick Dunster, who remains his nemesis. Last year our reviewer, Jane
Smiley, called the novel "a delicious read, like a meal you expect to enjoy, and
do."
MATISSE, PICASSO, MIRO AS I KNEW THEM
By Rosamond Bernier. Knopf, $35.
The author, who co-founded the French art magazine L'Oeil, drew upon her many
years in Paris for the reminiscences and interviews that fueled her popular
lectures, transmuted here into essays. "They already have a period charm,
evoking a smaller, simpler and probably more agreeable art world," Michael
Peppiatt said here in 1991. Painting on the other side of the Atlantic is the
subject of AMERICAN VIEWS: Essays on American Art, by John Wilmerding (Princeton
University, $35), in which the author discusses the work of artists like Thomas
Eakins, Winslow Homer, Fitz Hugh Lane and William Bradford. In 1991 our
reviewer, John Russell, said, "On his home ground, Mr. Wilmerding never flags."
   LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 9, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SUNDAY, January 9, 1994;
Thanks for the Memories

SECTION: Section 6;   Page 12;   Column 2;   Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 272 words


It's an old chestnut that war is good for the economy. But memories of war?

For years the travel business has had a nice little specialty in World War II
nostalgia. Now, with the 50th anniversary of the Normandy invasion coming up
this June, agencies that do veterans tours are set to outdo themselves.

Tours of Historic and Important Places ("America's Most Respected WW II Tour
Specialists," as they bill themselves) is presenting the U.S. Navy Memorial
Foundation official tour, "D-Day and Victory in the Atlantic." Galaxy Tours,
describing itself as the "leader in this unique travel industry specialty" has
special tours for many of the units that took part in D-Day: the 1st Infantry
Division, 2nd Infantry Division, 7th Beach Battalion, 113th Cavalry Group, 749th
Tank Battalion and many others. Brochures blare out messages like, "The 82d
Airborne Division Association presents . . . The Invasion of Normandy 50 Years
Later!"

But of all the trips and tours this June, probably none will sell good war
memories as hard as the QE2 cruise from New York to Cherbourg to Southampton. On
board: World War II movies, big bands, newsreels and Edwin Newman of NBC News as
host. Also Dame Vera Lynn. And Bob Hope himself.

With most veterans of the Normandy invasion in their 70's and Bob Hope turning
91 this looks likethe last big anniversary for the war travel business.  World
War II is probably the last easily marketable war. It's hard to imagine Jane
Fonda and the Jefferson Airplane in April 2025 entertaining Vietnam veterans on
the airplane to Saigon in between showings of "Platoon" and "The Deer Hunter."

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 9, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Mayor Yields to a Special Interest

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 749 words


THERE was a time, and a good time it was, when someone else's kids could be
handily deplored, if only because families were larger and reproduction seemed
so much less precious an extension of individual egos. W. C. Fields could say
things like: "I like children. If they're properly cooked." No opinion-page
monographs followed from specialists in juvenilia or parents sensitized to
parenting. Just vindictive belly laughs.

Things are different nowadays as the boomers' offspring are carted aloft and in
glorious display in sedan-chair backpacks and imported, safety-steeped strollers
encased in screening like little Popemobiles. They bear the terrible burden of
being designer clones of the parents, displayed for genealogical appreciation.

Which left New York all the more marveling and analytical when its new,
discipline-minded Mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani, passively moved a half step aside
to allow performance room for his rambunctious little son, Andrew, at the New
Year's inaugural lectern on the steps of City Hall. In that first instant of
governance -- when the Mayor smiled down so blithely in mid-speech as the
moon-faced, thatch-haired nipper mimed an antic exaggeration of Dad's oratory
bordering on the satirical -- Mr. Giuliani seemed to reveal more of himself than
he ever had disclosed in five years of stern campaigning on themes of social
self-control.

Look! exclaimed the city at the executive moppet strolling uninvited to the
lectern, as uninhibited as one of Tennessee Williams's no-neck monsters. With
confidence and love, the 7-year-old aped Dad before the open-mouthed electorate,
even down to the nice-to-see-you waves of insincerity that politicians master.

The City Hall dais suddenly was as nick-revealing as the morning shaving mirror,
Daddy all caution under the chin as he rehearses his resolve to stand up to the
challenges of the day, with the little shaver fantasizing no less. And so
practiced, as the Mayor must have been in the privacy of his home, that the lad
even knew when to pipe up in duet with his father's coda, "It should be so and
it will be so!"

Humanizing Element

The Mayor, regal by now in the manner of Lear, was lucky to get out without
Andrew demonstrating the comb-over hairdo that television comics already have
been making a staple in their Giuliani shtick. Voters chortled: This is some
kid, worthy of a Fieldsian putdown, of course, but for all that a humanizing
element badly needed in the Giuliani image. Little Andrew seemed to supply a new
context for everything, from Dad's spare-the-rod, spoil-the-city Philippics, to
his targeting of the relatively harmless (i.e. handgun-less) squeegee beggars to
make a lesson of leading the city away from the permissiveness of "defining
deviancy downward" into the little things of life.

But there was Andrew, wondrous little deviant, mugging and winking like a
borough president. The risk is that he'll unfairly become a lightning rod for
dad's politics, the way Lyndon Johnson bottomed out in the Vietnam War with one
comedian referring to his "semi-beautiful daughters" and getting a big laugh.

David Letterman, the comedian who has made a gnarled, hip virtue of staying in
New York, leapt at the rise of Andrew, hiring a look-alike child actor to do a
walk-on of beaming brattishness. "At City Hall," the comedian announced, "they
put up a brand new sign that says, 'You must be this tall to attend an
inauguration.' " He held his hand just above the height of the Mayor's son.

More threatening was the fact that other politicians began japing at Mr.
Giuliani's laissez-faire parenting. "That's O.K. -- I can do this myself,"
declared the City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, milking laughter in his own
inaugural address as his three adult sons rushed forward on cue.

For a Mayor given to quarreling on Day One with the press's estimate of his
inaugural crowd, Andrew seems a double godsend. Mr. Giuliani is getting
unexpected credit as a fallible mortal in the early psychobabble handicapping of
the Upper West Side, where he enjoys less support than in the large-family
neighborhoods of the outer boroughs. He set aides to privately fuming about some
of the coverage. Then again, he brought it up as a light distraction in his
first days when hard questions were put to him. As for young Andrew, he is no
longer in sight at City Hall, as if in fulfillment of W. C. Fields's dictum:
"Children should neither be seen nor heard from -- ever again."

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Andrew Giuliani one-ups his father at last Sunday's
inauguration. (Nancy Siesel/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 9, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Include Russia, Too

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 20;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 738 words


The strong showing by right-wing nationalists in Russia's recent elections has
intensified Eastern Europeans' fears of a resurgent Russia and increased their
desire to ally with NATO. Such an alliance would commit the U.S. to their
defense. But as Bosnia showed, neither the U.S. nor its allies seem eager to
assume such commitments.

Moreover, the military threat that frightens Eastern Europe is, at worst, years
away. One way to keep that threat from ever becoming a reality is to begin
treating both Russia and the Eastern Europeans as partners -- cultivating habits
of military cooperation throughout the region.

For starters, NATO could help Russia's reform-minded politicians shrink and
reorganize Russia's armed forces, keeping the military engaged in professional
tasks and out of politics. Russia would have to begin behaving like an ally by
bringing its interests into closer harmony with NATO's -- curbing weapons
proliferation, for example, and participating in peacekeeping operations.

And if NATO opens its doors to new members, Russia should be in line along with
Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary. The prospect of NATO membership could
encourage the Russian Army to become a force for peace; that alone would justify
reshaping an anti-Russian alliance into an altogether different security
structure.

The U.S. Army needed at least 10 years to recover from the Vietnam War. The
Russian remnant of the Red Army has endured greater trauma, losing not only a
war in Afghanistan but also an empire. Many of its finest officers left for
another country, Ukraine. Its weapons are rusting away. And officers are
returning home without housing or jobs. Little wonder that a third of the
military voting in the election backed candidates who rabble-roused about
restoring the empire.

Little wonder, too, that the people of Eastern Europe fret about a Russian
military resurgence. But it would take years for Russia to build a fighting
force anything like the Red Army, and many more years before the
military-industrial complex could equip it with state-of-the-art weapons.

What should the West do in the meantime? Right now, it is mainly trying to move
Russia's politics and economy in the right direction, without doing much about
the military. Some urge an updated version of containment, inviting Eastern
Europeans into NATO while leaving Russia in not-so-splendid isolation. Others
would revive old spheres of influence, shifting Russia's toward Central Asia.

These policies would be prudent if Russia reverted to vengeful nationalism and
began to revive its military. To adopt them now would only embolden the
Zhirinovskys at the fringes of Russian politics. The better way is to begin
treating Russia like a potential ally. That worked in Germany and Spain, where
NATO membership helped tame militarism.

The Clinton Administration has already taken some astute steps in this
direction. It has encouraged more military-to-military contacts. And it has
joined Russia in cutting nuclear forces and taking the remainder off
hair-trigger alert.

But cooperation must embrace non-nuclear forces. A U.S.-Russian study group,
including John Galvin and Edward Meyer, two retired generals, Fred Ikle and Paul
Wolfowitz, Pentagon officials in the Reagan years, offers useful suggestions.

The group recommends a joint military planning staff to deal with issues of
common concern, like proliferation. It proposes joint peacekeeping missions. It
would increase aid to relocate the Russian forces that are leaving the Baltic
republics. It urges shared understandings about the operating practices of U.S.
stealth aircraft and other forces that Russia sees as threatening. And it would
separate the U.S. and Russian Navies, which have a nasty habit of bumping into
each other.

In like manner, NATO should also encourage Eastern Europe's armed forces to
cooperate with NATO, Russia and -- not least -- one another, through joint
exercises and peacekeeping. And it can cultivate civilian control and other
democratic practices in Eastern Europe's armies.

But in the end, Eastern Europeans won't rest easy until the Russian Army is
transformed through an active partnership with its onetime enemies. It will not
be easy for either side to abandon the hostile reflexes of 50 years and nurture
a new, inclusive spirit of cooperation. But that needs to be done, starting at
this week's summit meetings.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 9, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: January 9, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1453 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  10   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 2      2  74   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 3      4  13   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                and a poem.

 4      3  20   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 5      5  43   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 6      6  39   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 7      7  15   LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues
                the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour."

 8      9   4   THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A
                collection of stories about American men and the strains of
                contemporary life.

 9     10   9   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery
                writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined
                to kill him and take his place.

 10     8   5   THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of
                Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.

 11    12  12   A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A
                young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in
                Victorian England's high society.

 12    14  17   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction
                of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and
                woman and for the woman's first lover.

 13    11   3   A CUP OF CHRISTMAS TEA, by Tom Hegg. (Waldman House, $10.95.)
                Verses, illustrated by Warren Hanson.

 14    15  46   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                illustrated cards and letters.

 15    13   6   THE TRUCE AT BAKURA, by Kathy Tyers. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.)
                The "Star Wars" Rebel Alliance responds to a call for help from
                a threatened outpost.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   8   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More
                comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 2      2  12   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 3      3  18   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 4      4  20   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 5      5  14   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 6      6   5   LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The
                country singer's memoirs, with an account of her relations with
                daughters Wynonna and Ashley.

 7     10   3   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 8      8   6   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                100, reflect on their lives.

 9      9  35   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 10     7  14   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by
                Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Thoughts on 43 years of
                marriage.

 11         4   RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $50.) Photographs by
                Walter Iooss Jr. and observations by the retired basketball
                superstar.

 12    15  74   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 13    13  14   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 14    11   3   I TOOK A LICKIN' AND KEPT ON TICKIN', by Lewis Grizzard.
                (Villard, $19.) The humorist describes his near-death
                experience following heart surgery.

 15    12   6   THE BEST CAT EVER, by Cleveland Amory. (Little, Brown, $19.95.)
                A third volume about the trials and tribulations of the feline
                Polar Bear and his owner.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  24   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 2      2   8   AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with
                Bud Shrake. (Simon & Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes
                from the golf instructor.

 3      3  57   HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud
                Shrake. (Simon & Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about
                playing golf.

 4      4  33   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 25, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE COMPLETE LYRICS OF IRA GERSHWIN, edited by Robert Kimball. (Knopf, $45.)
More than 700 lyrics displaying the fresh and inventive rhymes, supple phrasing,
intelligence and wit that made Gershwin a lyricist nobody can read for one
minute without humming.

THE DUKE ELLINGTON READER, edited by Mark Tucker. (Oxford University, $30.) A
fascinating anthology of 70 years' worth of writing about (and occasionally by)
Ellington, who clearly inspired powerful emotions in even the most sober minds.

GARBAGE, by A.R. Ammons. (Norton, $17.95.) A long poem of rueful grandeur and
splendid oddity in which what's left over is transmuted; winner of the 1993
National Book Award.

IN EUROPE'S NAME: Germany and the Divided Continent, by Timothy Garton Ash.
(Random House, $27.50.) This sober major study in recent international history
examines West Germany's conciliatory Ostpolitik: did it help or hinder the
collapse of Communism? A hard question, approached with respect for its
ambiguity.

JAMES BEARD: A Biography, by Robert Clark. (HarperCollins, $27.50.) A
painstaking, admirably unvarnished life of the great cooking teacher and food
writer whose career, occasionally embarrassed by tinges of greed and cynicism,
spanned the postwar era of American infatuation with food as an art form.

MAKE ME WORK, by Ralph Lombreglia. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) Short stories
that fizz with humor and hipness explore the lives of happy underachievers and
the women patiently waiting for them to grow up.

MARK ROTHKO: A Biography, by James E.B. Breslin. (University of Chicago,
$39.95.) This account of the tormented artist's life, by a professor of English,
is well researched, well written and carefully thought out.

PADDY CLARKE HA HA HA, by Roddy Doyle. (Viking, $20.95.) This luminously written
Irish novel, winner of the 1993 Booker Prize in Britain, is about the life force
incarnate in its narrator, an unforgettable 10-year-old boy in the brilliantly
realized world of 1960's Dublin.

SARAJEVO: A War Journal, by Zlatko Dizdarevic. (Fromm, $19.95.) A lament for
Bosnia and for civilization, by a newspaper editor who celebrates the endurance
and heroism of ordinary people caught in an insane conflict.

VERDI: A Biography, by Mary Jane Phillips-Matz. (Oxford University, $45.) This
portrait of the composer, an important account that alters accepted
understanding on matters large and small, portrays him as a brutal and
self-indulgent man with a remarkable capacity for lust, love, anger and
compassion.

W.E.B. DU BOIS: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919, by David Levering Lewis. (John
Macrae/Holt, $35.) The first half of the epical life (it lasted till 1963) of
the man who by World War I had become the most outspoken, eloquent and
influential black American.

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 10, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 924 words



International   A2-7

AGREEMENT REVIVES B.C.C.I. CASE

Federal prosecutors said that a top executive of the Bank of Credit and Commerce
International would be extradited to the United States to stand trial, reopening
the stalled investigation of one of the largest financial frauds in history.  A1


CLINTON REASSURES EUROPE

President Clinton, in his first hours in Europe, sought to reassure the
continent that the United States is committed to a rebuilt North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.  A1

The President and his entourage do not travel light.  A6

LOW-KEY PREPARATION IN RUSSIA

Russian newspapers have carried only staid reports on President Clinton's
upcoming summit meeting in Moscow, unlike the old days, when the Soviet
propaganda machine would go into overdrive.  A7

WATER FOR SARAJEVO

After more than a year without water service after Serbs cut off the source,
Sarajevo is about to get a new water supply with the opening of a purification
plant constructed by an American aid agency.A1

PALESTINIAN LEADERS FAULTED

An Israeli human rights group, in a rare criticism of Palestinians, said their
political leaders bear responsibility for killings by militants of hundreds of
people accused of collaborating with Israel.  A2

OPTIMISM IN MIDEAST TALKS

A senior Palestinian official said in Cairo that an agreement could be reached
with Israel within three weeks for limited withdrawal of its troops from the
Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.  A2

SOUTH AFRICA JOURNALIST KILLED

Shots fired at African National Congress officials in a black township that has
had many factional battles killed a photographer and wounded several other
people.  A3

Soweto Journal: From partisans to party workers in South Africa.  A4

CONCERN OVER SOMALIA'S FUTURE

The rearming of factions and increasing violence in Somalia are creating concern
over whether the United Nations will be able to maintain its control role after
the United States withdraws its troops.  A3

Mexico named a commission to promote dialogue with the rebels.  A3

National   A8-15

HALPERIN TO WITHDRAW

Morton H. Halperin, President Clinton's embattled choice to head a new Pentagon
position for peacekeeping policy, will withdraw his name from consideration,
Administration officials said.  A1

POWER AND PITFALLS OF GAMING

From Biloxi to Bay St. Louis, the Mississippi Gulf Coast reveals the economic
power of legalized gambling and raises two questions: how many communities can
expect to make money on gambling -- and at what cost?  A1

CALL FOR A SPECIAL PROSECUTOR

Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York urged the Attorney General to
appoint a special prosecutor to investigate President Clinton's involvement in
an Arkansas real estate venture.  A8

OIL SPILL TIES TO NEW JERSEY

The company that owns the barge that is leaking heavy oil off Puerto Rico is
linked to marine hauling businesses that has repeatedly been accused of
polluting waterways in New York and New Jersey.  A8

BRANCH DAVIDIANS TO GO ON TRIAL

In Houston, 11 surviving Branch Davidians are to go on trial to face murder
charges, accused of being part of a conspiracy to kill Federal agents during a
raid last year.  A10

PUSH FOR MORE RESEARCH INQUIRY

The Clinton Administration is being pressed to delve yet deeper into the record
of Federal experiments using human subjects, perhaps opening a review of the
nation's research ethics during the past 50 years.  A12

COMPETING VISIONS FOR PARK

Environmentalists are battling a university that is seeking to develop in the
heart of the Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area.  A12

Metro Digest   B1

FIGHTING DRUGS WITH ROTARY DIALS

In an effort to stop drug dealers from using public phones to do business, Nynex
has brought back rotary dialing at about 250 outdoor pay phones in New York
City.  A1

Arts/Entertainment   C11-18

What happened to "A Perfect World"?  C11

Programs for the 1994 Schubertiade.  C13

Music: Gruppen II, avant-garde sounds.  C11

Zusaan Kali Fasteau and Julia Heyward.  C13

Ruth Gerson.  C15

Four alternative-rock bands.  C18

Dance: City Ballet in "Jazz." C11

Onafhankelijk Toneel from Rotterdam.  C15

Grand ballets by Balanchine.  C15

Doug Varone and Dancers.  C15

Books: "A Drinking Life," by Pete Hamill.  C18

Television: "Armistead Maupin's Tales of the City." C11

"Day One" and Vietnam.  C16

Business Digest   D1

Obituaries   B8

Harvey Haddix, baseball pitcher.

Neediest Cases   B4

Sports   C1-10

Baseball: Clemente's greatest legacy may be his son.  C2

Basketball: Knicks beat Trail Blazers.  C5

Column: Anderson on Giants game.  C1

Figure Skating: Harding envisions gold medal.  C4

Football: Giants beat Vikings.  C1

Raiders defeat Broncos.  C8

Golf: Nicklaus and Mickelson win.  C2

Hockey: Capitals shut out Devils.  C3

Hockey: Rivals closing in on Rangers.  C3

Olympics: Speed skater puts Games in perspective.  C4

Editorials/Op-Ed   A16-17

Editorials

Mideast talks: What happened?

Horse sense.

Condom gains and losses.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: What might have been.

William Safire: Absent at the creation.

Peter Reddaway: Visit to a maelstrom.

David Spiegel: Compassion is the best medicine.

Bridge   C18

Chronicle   B6

Crossword   C16

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 10, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Healing on Parole;
Doctor and Ex-Prisoner, He Treats Others on Probation

BYLINE: By JAN HOFFMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1962 words


Leaning forward across the metal desk in his windowless, closet-sized office,
Dr. Alan Berkman is trying to ferret out the medical history of his next
patient, a 23-year-old addict named Pedro R.

"Were you ever in the hospital for something else?" he gently probes.

"Yeah. Gunshot. Left leg. Right arm," mumbles Pedro, who didn't want his last
name used.

"Sounds like a busy period for you," replies Dr. Berkman, nodding and stroking
his salt-and-pepper beard. "Sexually transmitted diseases, guns, drugs."

Pedro's shoulders stiffen, anticipating the lecture.

It never comes.

More than 20 years after Alan Berkman, then a young, fervently idealistic
Columbia medical student, turned to community medicine and began treating prison
inmates and poor patients in the South Bronx, he has returned. Now, he is
working at El Rio, a South Bronx clinic for drug-addicted parolees and
probationers.

But now he brings an unusual qualification to the job. Dr. Berkman himself is on
parole.

In the early 1980's, Dr. Berkman spent two years as a fugitive and eventually
served nearly eight years -- much of it in solitary confinement -- for crimes
stemming from his involvement with militant underground groups, including the
armed robbery of a Connecticut supermarket and possession of more than 100
pounds of dynamite and pipe bombs. He left Federal prison 18 months ago.

Dr. Berkman is among a handful of militant radicals who persevered beyond the
wrenching and violent days of the 1960's, becoming increasingly insular and
desperate in the 1980's as the mood of the country under President Reagan turned
to the right.

While many of his associates are still in prison, many have made their way back
into society, trying to make sense of what they did and how the world has
changed while they were gone. Dr. Berkman is one of the most recent to be
paroled.

Making Adjustments

Life on the outside still takes some adjustment, he said, one recent morning
between patients. His daughter was 6 years old when he was jailed the first
time, for civil contempt; now she is a high school senior.

An uninterrupted view of the sky is a novelty. So is a Democratic Administration
in Washington.

The emotional adjustment has been particularly difficult. "I'm still trying to
rid myself of some defenses that kept me alive in prison," said the 48-year-old
doctor. "You build up layers and layers to make sure that people can't get in.
You say, 'Yes, I'll follow your rules and allow your strip searches, but I'll
always keep something back.' "

"And after you've gone through that for years, it can be very threatening to let
the people you love get close again."

Yet the youthful passion for social justice that shaped Dr. Berkman's political
past is still intact, much as it was for Jeffrey David Powell, the former
Weatherman leader who surrendered last week after 24 years on the run, spent
working in relief agencies for poor children.

But now experience as well as political conviction informs Dr. Berkman's work in
the South Bronx, where he brings not only his background as a prisoner and a
prison doctor, but a prison patient: He suffered two bouts of Hodgkin's disease,
a cancer of the lymph nodes. It is once again in remission.

His obvious pleasure in delivering care only makes his turbulent past seem all
the more perplexing: How could a man so dedicated to preserving life have done
things that threatened to snuff it out?

"We made some really bad decisions and I don't want to justify them," Dr.
Berkman said. "And if you remove the context of the times, then we were crazed
people."

Dr. Berkman, as he freely admits, was the quintessential middle-class white
radical of the 1960's. His father, a plumbing supplies distributor from
Middletown, N.Y., hoped "that I would be a big doctor." And he was well on his
way: Eagle Scout. High school salutatorian. National Merit Scholar. Honor
student at Cornell, Class of '67. Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Class of '71.

But the protests against the Vietnam War that raged across campuses also swept
up Dr. Berkman, who joined the radical Students for a Democratic Society. He
became known as a doctor whom leftists could call on. He treated prisoners at
Attica after the 1971 uprising and in 1973, he and his wife, Dr. Barbara Zeller,
sneaked behind Government blockade lines that surrounded the village of Wounded
Knee, S.D., which was occupied for 71 days by members of the American Indian
Movement. He spent the 1970's working in clinics in the South Bronx, the Lower
East Side, and rural Alabama.

As Ronald Reagan took office and United States support for the Nicaraguan
contras and the Salvadoran army increased, the few militant radicals remaining
from the 60's and 70's became more heated.

"I had seen pain in the communities I worked in," he said. "And the increasing
indifference to them, a belief that it had all gotten solved in the 60's. We
were trying to make radical change in a non-radical time. We became desperate
and kept going further out on the limb."

In 1981, a leftist group attempted to rob an armored Brink's truck in Nyack,
N.Y. In the shootout, two police officers and a guard died.

In 1982, a Federal grand jury investigating the Brink's case subpoenaed Dr.
Berkman, who, a witness said, had treated one of the defendants for a gunshot
wound. He refused to talk and was jailed for civil contempt.

A Fateful Decision

When he was released nearly a year later, he was indicted as an accessory after
the fact in the Brink's robbery for giving medical care to a fugitive. His
lawyers say he has been the only American doctor charged with such a crime since
Dr. Samuel Mudd treated John Wilkes Booth in 1865. He was to be tried with six
other Brink's robbery defendants.

But instead, he fled, leaving behind his wife and daughter.

"There was such hysteria about the case and I thought I would be swept into it,"
he said, believing that jurors would not distinguish his actions from the other
defendants.

The decision turned out to be a spectacular mistake. Many Brink's defendants
were either convicted on lesser charges or acquitted outright. Moreover, when he
was arrested for other crimes two years later, the Government decided to drop
the accessory charges.

But Dr. Berkman, now a fugitive, had crossed a line and kept on going.

Dr. Berkman won't discuss the particulars of his years underground, but
according to court papers, he was associated with groups that took credit for
seven bombings of military bases and Government buildings between 1983 and 1985.
Charges were brought against him in those bombings, but they were dismissed.

While underground in 1984, Dr. Berkman and a friend, disguised as Federal
agents, entered a suburban Connecticut supermarket, brandished revolvers, tied
up the manager, and stole $21,480. Prosecutors speculate the money was for
explosives and to aid radical groups.

On May 23, 1985, he and a companion, Elizabeth Ann Duke, were arrested outside
Doylestown, Pa. In their car, agents found a pistol and a shotgun and keys to a
garage with 100 pounds of dynamite, false identity cards for Federal agents and
more than 275 counterfeit Social Security cards. The garage had been rented by
Ms. Duke. Released on bail, she has been a fugitive ever since.

The Government charged Dr. Berkman with possession of explosives. He was
convicted in 1987.

Federal Judge Louis H. Pollak sentenced Dr. Berkman to 10 years, plus two for
jumping bail; a five-year term for the Connecticut robbery would be served
concurrently.

"I had such mixed feelings about him," recalled Judge Pollak. "A sense of being
furious at a person of such obvious talent, and, at some level, social good
will, who was pursuing such a wrong-headed way of making the world better. Much
of what he says is so moving. But why did he behave so idiotically, with the
potential for damage to people?"

Considered a high security risk, Dr. Berkman was shuttled from one maximum
security prison to another, serving much of his sentence locked in his cell 23
hours a day. His health collapsed. In 1985, while he awaited trial, doctors
found he had Hodgkin's disease. Eventually, after surgery, then hepatitis and
pneumonia, the cancer went into remission.

Testimony on Prison Care

In 1990, Dr. Berkman suffered a relapse. He would later submit testimony to a
Congressional subcommittee on abuse in the prison health-care system and appear
on a "60 Minutes" report on the topic, emaciated and temporarily paralyzed.
During abdominal surgery, he said, Federal marshals were in the operating room
and he was shackled to the bed.

After a two-month, life-threatening standoff that year about his treatment, Dr.
Berkman served out his sentence at the Federal medical center in Rochester,
Minn. He was released in July 1992.

Because of his prison term, Dr. Berkman's registration to practice medicine in
New York State lapsed. And as a condition of renewing it, his charts are
scrutinized every three months by the New York State Board of Professional
Medical Conduct. This semester he taught in a physician's-assistant training
program at Harlem Hospital, in addition to his work at the South Bronx clinic.

These days, he seems like a man caught between two time periods. His despair
about the prevalence of H.I.V. among his impoverished patients is very much of
the 1990's. But his Greenwich Village railroad sublet, with political posters
and Indian throw pillows, looks like a snapshot from the 1970's.

On a shelf next to a volume of "This Is Cornell," stands a framed card decorated
with calligraphy, which the inmates gave him on his last night in prison. A drug
dealer wrote a poem about friendship, and a counterfeiter illustrated it on the
card.

'Power Is Corrupting'

He is less interested in renouncing his past than in trying to come to terms
with it and move on. Mindful of his friends in prison, he tried not to say
anything that would seem as if he was turning his back on them.

"There is plenty to learn from all the mistakes we made," he said he said
referring to his radical colleagues. "Power is corrupting. And the use of
violence is a form of power. People motivated to stop the suffering of others
have to be careful not be caught up in the same dynamics."

But mostly he is still becoming adjusted to his new life, and sampling small
daily intimacies. "Between going to prison and having cancer two times and
knowing that death sits on my shoulder, I try to make every day matter," he
said. "I look down my street in the morning and up at the sky and am grateful."
Though he is separated from Dr. Zeller, who runs a clinic for drug-addicted AIDS
patients in the Bronx, they remain friendly. The center of his life is his
daughter, Sarah, a senior at a Manhattan public high school, whom he came to
know through Plexiglass.

While he has stepped away from the violence that scarred his life, he is still a
man who, as he says, "lives more by my heart than my head." Indeed, given that
more than half his patients at El Rio have tuberculosis, his decision to work
there could be seen as foolish. As Dr. Berkman puts it, "My immune system is not
significantly different than my patients'."

One morning at the clinic, a patient named Carolyn B., a scrawny 41-year-old
grandmother and crack addict who is H.I.V. positive, took the seat next to his
desk. Sensing his concern, she tried to reassure him that she was doing just
fine.

"I just don't stress about it, Doc," she said. "I go on living my life. I don't
sit around feeling sorry for myself. It's as if I had any other disease they
don't have a cure for."

With a smile, Dr. Berkman nodded, looking her in the eye. "I know what you mean,
Carolyn," he said.


LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "I'm still trying to rid myself of some defenses that kept me
alive in prison," said Dr. Alan Berkman. He served nearly eight years for crimes
stemming from his involvement with militant underground groups. "You build up
layers and layers to make sure that people can't get in." (Sara Krulwich/The New
York Times); Dr. Berkman in 1984, when he was wanted in connection with a 1981
attempt to rob an armored Brink's truck in Nyack, N.Y. (Associated Press)(pg.
B2); Dr. Alan Berkman speaking with a patient at El Rio, a South Bronx clinic
for drug-addicted parolees and probationers. (Sara Krulwich/The New York
Times)(pg. B1)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 10, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Pentagon Nominee Withdraws Name

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 992 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 9


Morton H. Halperin, President Clinton's embattled choice to head a new Pentagon
position for peacekeeping policy, has withdrawn his name for the job,
Administration officials said today.

The nomination of Mr. Halperin, a 55-year-old former director of the Washington
office of the American Civil Liberties Union, stirred a level of passions
unusual for a mid-level position, as conservatives attacked the liberal
positions he had staked out through three decades. Mr. Halperin reversed his
initial support of the Vietnam War, fought with the Nixon Administration during
the Watergate scandals and criticized many American spying operations abroad.

But Mr. Halperin's chances to be Assistant Secretary of Defense for Democracy
and Peacekeeping fell victim not only to resistance on the Senate Armed Services
Committee last November but also to the reshaping of the President's
much-criticized foreign policy team. The nomination also promised to complicate
the Senate confirmation hearings of Bobby Ray Inman, Mr. Clinton's choice to
succeed Defense Secretary Les Aspin, who is resigning.

Mr. Halperin's nomination formally expired in November, when the Senate did not
act on it before adjourning. At the time, the White House expressed confidence
in his qualifications and said it would resubmit his nomination when Congress
reconvened later this month. Administration officials said they had anticipated
a tough fight but believed they would prevail.

Then in December, Mr. Aspin, Mr. Halperin's patron and biggest supporter in the
Administration, announced he would resign effective Jan. 20. Mr. Aspin had hoped
to use unconventional new positions like the peacekeeping one to reshape the
United States' international relations in the post-cold-war world.

Mr. Aspin's designated successor, Mr. Inman, has praised Mr. Halperin personally
but has also raised serious doubts about whether the job he was to hold was
necessary, and it now appears likely that the position will be dropped with Mr.
Halperin's bowing out.

"Mort wanted to serve with Secretary Aspin," a senior Defense Department
official said, "but with the other changes coming, he has decided to not move
forward."

'A Special Relationship'

Another senior Pentagon official said that Mr. Halperin had "a special
relationship" with Mr. Aspin and that he had decided he would not have the same
influence with Mr. Inman.

Associates said Mr. Halperin, who has been working as a Pentagon consultant
pending his Senate hearings, had discussed his decision with Frank G. Wisner,
the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, and with White House officials over
the last several days. They said he was expected to give the President a formal
letter outlining his intentions as early as Monday.

Administration officials said today they were still considering another job in
the Government for Mr. Halperin, but probably one that would not require Senate
confirmation. One post that has been mentioned is that of head of the State
Department's policy-planning bureau. In the meantime, Mr. Halperin will continue
acting as a Pentagon consultant, they said.

Mr. Halperin's decision cleared a potentially troublesome hurdle for Mr. Inman's
Senate confirmation hearing, which is scheduled for Jan. 25 or Jan. 26.

Republican Opposition

Republicans on the Armed Services Committee had told senior Pentagon aides that
they intended to grill Mr. Inman about Mr. Halperin, possibly jeopardizing the
retired admiral's own chances for Senate approval.

Administration officials have expressed concern that such a strategy could
undermine their plans to have Mr. Inman quickly help improve relations between
the White House and the armed forces and to give a boost to the Administration's
flagging national security team.

In Mr. Halperin's first hearing before the Armed Services Committee on Nov. 19,
conservative senators said his published articles criticizing the use of
American troops abroad made him especially unsuitable for the new job, which
involves decisions about whether American troops should be put under United
Nations control in peacekeeping operations.

Rejecting Detractors

"Since we are convinced he already has and will in the future put American lives
and interests in jeopardy, we have a constitutional and moral obligation to
oppose him," Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, the ranking Republican on
the panel, said at the November hearing.

Mr. Halperin rejected his detractors' accusations with verve. "If the charge
against me is espousing pointed and provocative views, I have no quarrel with
that," he said at the November hearing. "But I resist any suggestion that I have
done anything which compromises our nation's security or weakens our defenses."

Not even his severest critics have challenged Mr. Halperin's intellect. But in
many ways, Mr. Halperin was a creature of the cold war and, perhaps, one of its
last casualties.

A Republican Who Switched

Mr. Halperin joined the faculty of Harvard University at the age of 23. At early
demonstrations against the Vietnam War at Harvard, he spoke in favor of United
States involvement.

He took at job at the Defense Department at age 29 and oversaw a group that
compiled a secret history of the Vietnam War, later known as the Pentagon
Papers. Mr. Halperin, who was originally a member of the Republican Party,
joined the National Security Council in 1969, serving under Henry A. Kissinger,
who was then President Richard M. Nixon's national security adviser. But he
turned against the war and left the Government in 1970.

Mr. Halperin's writings on a variety of civil liberties issues kept him in the
spotlight among Washington intellectuals. Mr. Halperin was the senior associate
at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace when Mr. Aspin tapped him for
the Defense post.

Mr. Aspin created the post when he reorganized the Pentagon's policy division
last year.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 10, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Back to Free-Spirited San Francisco of the 70's

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 902 words


With the six-hour "Armistead Maupin's Tales of the City," public television is
doing precisely what it should be doing. This evening through Wednesday at 9
P.M., PBS is broadcasting a first-rate mini-series that commercial television
wouldn't touch on a dare. In fact, "Tales of the City" comes to American
television only because Channel 4 in Britain decided to produce it, getting some
financial input from station KQED in San Francisco and the "American Playhouse"
series, one of a handful of PBS entities still capable of showing some courage.

The setting is San Francisco in 1976. Mr. Maupin's characters -- part factual,
part fictional -- began appearing that year in his San Francisco Chronicle
newspaper columns. They became players in a print soap opera that was later
collected into a series of best-selling books. Now, Richard Kramer, one of the
senior and most accomplished writers on the series "Thirtysomething," has
adapted, with remarkable fidelity, the first of the Maupin books.

Mr. Maupin is gay, and many, though hardly all, of the characters in his stories
are gay or bisexual. Using the "I Am a Camera" technique of Christopher
Isherwood, Mr. Maupin records what he sees and hears, then puts much of it under
a fictional veneer (in this production he can be glimpsed briefly behind a
window, pecking away at a typewriter as a scene unfolds). The upshot is a
startlingly accurate snapshot of a particular place and time.

Rolling off the rebellious and permissive 1960's, these varied characters are
still lurching through a world in which sex and drugs are casually taken for
granted. With Vietnam having wound down, they are running out of causes. AIDS
has yet to enter the wings. San Francisco, like most major cities but perhaps
more so, is a place where young men and women can still think about finding
themselves in a world of limitless possibilities. The Dorothy coming into this
Oz, centered in a fabulous old apartment house on Russian Hill, is Mary Ann
Singleton (Laura Linney), a fresh-faced, intelligent, compassionate innocent
from Ohio who quickly realizes that she is not in Cleveland anymore.

The other tenants of 28 Barbary Lane include Michael (Marcus D'Amico), a
hopeless romantic forever looking for Mr. Right; Brian (Paul Gross), a tireless
stud proving endlessly that he's irresistible to women; and Mona (Chloe Webb),
just past 30 and thinking that it's time she had some security. These and the
other denizens of Mr. Maupin's world wander separately or together through a
world of bathhouses, elegant dinner parties, drag shows and society benefits.
There is occasional nudity, lots of pot smoking, and even a scene in which two
male lovers kiss quite warmly. If any of that is likely to bother you, stay
away.

In fact, the dominating romance of this mini-series involves two people who
might be considered, as they say, beyond their prime. Anna Madrigal, a charming
bohemian fond of marijuana, and Edgar Halcyon, an old-line wealthy Republican,
are played to perfection by Olympia Dukakis and Donald Moffat. She is the
landlady, fluttering about like some bemused butterfly, convinced that "we are
all citizens of Atlantis in some secret part of ourselves." Does Anna object to
pets? "M'dear," she says, unhesitatingly, "I have no objection to anything." But
like just about everybody else in these tales, Anna does have a secret, which
becomes pretty obvious by midpoint.

On the whole, Mr. Maupin clearly loves his characters, each of whom, he has
said, reflects some aspect of himself. The exceptions, seen only in a couple of
short scenes, are several wealthy and snobbish homosexuals.  One is portrayed by
Ian McKellan, who does a wicked John Gielgud turn, imperiously summoning his
butler at dessert time with the notification, "Harold, we're ready for the
babas."

Cameo performances are scattered throughout the series. The familiar faces
include Rod Steiger, Country Joe McDonald, Mary Kay Place, Nina Foch, McLean
Stevenson and Paul Dooley. Alastair Reid, the Scottish director ("Traffik"),
also throws in several references to Alfred Hitchcock's "Vertigo," which was set
in San Francisco. But the series rests squarely on the shoulders of the
uniformly superb actors in the major roles. In addition to those mentioned, they
are William Campbell, Thomas Gibson, Barbara Garrick and Stanley DeSantis. Far
stronger on character than on plot, which too often gets carried away in a swirl
of coincidence, Mr. Maupin's tales have been transformed from a good read into
uncommonly fine television.

American Playhouse
Armistead Maupin's Tales of the City
PBS, tonight, Tuesday and Wednesday at 9 (Channel 13 in New York).

Directed by Alastair Reid; written by Richard Kramer, based on a book by
Armistead Maupin; director of photography, Walt Lloyd; editor, David Gamble;
costume designer, Molly Maginnis; music by John E. Keane; produced by Alan Poul
for Propaganda/Working Title Productions for Channel 4 in association with
American Playhouse and KQED San Francisco; Richard Kramer, Armistead Maupin,
Sigurjon Sighvatsson and Tim Bevan, executive producers.

Anna Madrigal . . . Olympia Dukakis
Edgar Halcyon . . . Donald Moffat
Mona Ramsey . . . Chloe Webb
Mary Ann Singleton . . . Laura Linney
Michael (Mouse) Tolliver . . . Marcus D'Amico
Jon Fielden . . . William Campbell
Beauchamp Day . . . Thomas Gibson

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Olympia Dukakis in "Armistead Maupin's Tales of the City."
(American Playhouse)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 10, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Returning to the Scene of a Vietnam Bloodletting

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 418 words


Tonight's edition of "Day One" is given to a retelling of a bloody 1965 battle
between American and North Vietnamese troops in the Central Highlands of
Vietnam. Although "They Were Young and Brave" makes use of newsreels and
recollections of both sides, the focus is on the experiences of a few American
veterans of the Seventh Cavalry who returned last year to the place where 234 of
their comrades and thousands of North Vietnamese died during the four-day
battle.

If you are left with the feeling that their war stories have been told before,
you're right. Harold G. Moore, a retired general who commanded the American
battalion as a lieutenant colonel, collaborated with a former war correspondent,
Joseph L. Galloway, on a book about the battle, "We Were Soldiers Once . . . and
Young" (HarperCollins ), and both men figure prominently in tonight's report.

Forrest Sawyer sets the scene and supplies the narration. It all happened in the
Ia Drang valley, a remote area near the Cambodian border, where the Americans
undertook a search-and-destroy mission against the North Vietnamese. The
pictures are striking; the accounts are moving, with enough of the heroism, the
blunders, the accidents, the confusions of close combat to give the hour a vivid
authenticity.

The most dramatic recollections are delivered in a practiced manner by Jack
Smith, who was a private then and is now an ABC News regular and a valuable
presence on "This Week." Private Smith was one of a group of soldiers who were
lured into an ambush. He tells of playing dead, lying on top of a sergeant who
had been killed, when the enemy overran their position: "A North Vietnamese guy
lay on top of me, using me and the sergeant as a sandbag for his machine gun and
started to fire. Hot shell casings are falling on my back."

The Pentagon interpreted the battle as a success. The American survivors had the
comfort of hearing Gen. William Westmoreland, the commander in Vietnam,
congratulate them on their "distinguished victory."

The North Vietnamese, who had lost many more men, drew a different lesson, with
heavy significance for what was to come. One of their generals tells Mr. Sawyer
that the decisive consideration was "the price in casualties that each side was
prepared to pay to win the war." And he adds, "We were willing to pay a very
high price."

Day One
ABC, tonight at 8 (Channel 7 in New York).

Produced by Terence Wrong for ABC News; Tom Yellin, executive producer; Forrest
Sawyer, host.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Appearing on the Ia Drang battlefield in Vietnam on an episode
of ABC's "Day One" were Lieut. Gen. Harold Moore, retired, second from left, the
leader of the American forces in the battle; Gen. Nguyen Huu An, center, leader
of the North Vietnamese forces; Forrest Sawyer, second from right, and two North
Vietnamese war veterans. (ABC)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 11, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Crowd of 1,700 Attends O'Neill Funeral

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Jan. 10


Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr., a bread-and-butter Democrat who told his
granddaughter that the Sermon on the Mount was "the greatest political speech
ever written," was mourned at a funeral Mass today by ordinary neighbors from
Cambridge and grand associates from Washington.

Seventeen hundred people attended the service at St. John the Evangelist Church.
Among them were Vice President Al Gore, former Presidents Gerald R. Ford and
Jimmy Carter and more than 100 present and former members of Congress, including
Mr. O'Neill's two successors as Presiding Officer of the House, former Speaker
Jim Wright and the current Speaker, Thomas S. Foley.

About 300 people waited outside the church in 15-degree cold while a
standing-room-only crowd of 900 worshiped in the sanctuary and another 800
followed the service on television in the bingo hall in the basement.

After the ceremony, Mr. O'Neill, who died last Wednesday at 81, was buried in a
private service at Mount Pleasant Cemetery in Harwich Port on Cape Cod.

Politics and Faith

Speaking at the Mass, Mr. O'Neill's son, Thomas P. O'Neill 3d, hailed him as a
champion of "a politics which defends working people but does not depend on
class resentment."

Nodding toward Mr. Ford, Gov. William F. Weld, Senator Bob Dole and
Representative Robert H. Michel, the younger Mr. O'Neill, a Democrat who was
once Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts, said, "As for you Republicans, as a
Catholic my father always believed 'hate the sin but love the sinner.' "

The Mass was celebrated by Msgr. John P. Carroll, who attended grade school at
St. John's with Mr. O'Neill and who also went to Boston College with him, and by
Bernard Cardinal Law, Archbishop of Boston.

Several speakers recalled Mr. O'Neill's religious faith, among them his
granddaughter Catlin O'Neill. She read from the Sermon on the Mount, beginning,
"How blessed are the poor in spirit, for the reign of God is theirs; blessed,
too, are the sorrowing, they shall be consoled." Her grandfather had taught her,
Ms. O'Neill said, that it was "the greatest political speech ever written."

'Caring, Compassionate'

While others hailed Mr. O'Neill as a great Speaker, from 1977 to 1987, the
spirit of the day was also captured in humorous reflections. Representative Joe
Moakley, Democrat of Massachusetts, told of Mr. O'Neill's amiable inability to
remember names, and Mr. O'Neill 3d recalled speaking to his father only hours
before he died and cited as "almost his very last words" a recollection of
honey-dipped doughnuts from a shop across the street from St. John's.

"Tip represented to me what a public servant should be: caring, compassionate,
dedicated and very much a Democrat," Mr. Moakley said. But, he added, there was
nothing pretentious, "slick" or "blow dried" about him. The Speaker retained a
lifelong interest in his old friends from the lower-middle-income North
Cambridge neighborhood, the Congressman said, recalling Mr. O'Neill's greetings
to them here and when they visited Washington: "Mary, darling" or "Johnny, old
boy, how's the arthritis?"

The younger Mr. O'Neill said, "My father loved being from Cambridge, North
Cambridge, Barry's Corner, St. John's Parish and all of it."

Mr. O'Neill's problem with names, Mr. Moakley said, was not with those of
constituents but with those of the famous. He told of the Speaker once meeting
the actor Warren Beatty, a Democratic supporter, and telling him, "Geez, you're
a good-looking bum, you ought to be a movie star." When Mr. Moakley asked
whether Mr. O'Neill knew whom he had been speaking to, the Speaker replied:
"Yeah. Was that Clyde Beatty, the lion tamer's, son?"

Mr. Moakley also recalled Mr. O'Neill's role as a prominent Democratic critic of
both the war in Vietnam and right-wing forces in El Salvador. He said the
Speaker had trusted in the word of Maryknoll nuns in El Salvador as proof of
government extremism there.

Lessons From Reagan

The younger Mr. O'Neill called his father an essential Democrat, one who loved
his party and "embodied for a time -- maybe even saved -- the values of our
party." He called his father an exemplar of the politics "that loves justice and
hates no one."

He also spoke of his father's warmth for his "nemesis," Ronald Reagan, the
second President under whom Mr. O'Neill served as Speaker, following Mr. Carter.


LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Millie O'Neill being escorted by her sons, Christopher, left,
and Thomas P. O'Neill 3d, for the funeral Mass of her husband, Thomas P. O'Neill
Jr., at St. John the Evangelist Church in Cambridge, Mass. (Joyce Dopkeen/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 11, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cave Find Shows Man And Apes Coexisting

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 709 words


VIETNAMESE and American anthropologists have discovered a jumble of fossils
pointing to the likelihood that early humans and a surprisingly large number of
other primate species lived in close touch with each other 250,000 years ago.

The fossils, which include at least two previously unknown species, represent a
period in human history long believed by many scientists to have coincided with
a major decline in the diversity of hominoids, the primate group that includes
apes as well as humans. Human beings themselves were suspected of having played
a role in this supposed decline by helping to drive other hominoids to
extinction.

But the discovery that human beings of the species Homo erectus shared
late-middle Pleistocene Asia with many other hominoid species may prompt a
revision of this theory.

The latest hominoid remains to come to light, consisting entirely of disembodied
teeth, were excavated from Tham Khuyen cave, one of many similar caves dotting
the picturesque limestone mountains of Lang Son Province in northern Vietnam,
bordering southern China. Initial results of the study are described in a paper
to be published this month by the American Museum of Natural History in New York
City.

Excavations at Tham Khuyen in the last several years were led by three
Vietnamese scientists, Dr. Vu The Long and Dr. Nguyen Lan Cuong, both of the
Institute of Archeology in Hanoi, and Dr. Le Trung Kha of the Social Sciences
Council of Ho Chi Minh City. They were joined last year in their study of the
teeth by Dr. Jeffrey H. Schwartz, a professor of anthropology at the University
of Pittsburgh, and Dr. Ian Tattersall, curator of anthropology at the American
Museum of Natural History.

During the trip Dr. Schwartz and Dr. Tattersall made to Vietnam, their study of
the Tham Khuyen fossil teeth convinced them that the cave is a treasure chest of
hominoid remains, including those of some unknown species. They intend to return
to Vietnam this month to continue their investigation, which will include, they
hope, a new round of excavations in the cave.

In their paper, the scientists report that although some of the fossil teeth
found in the Tham Khuyen Cave are those of orangutans similar to those living
today, most of the other teeth belong to a previously unknown species, similar
but not identical to orangutans. Another group of ape-like teeth, the scientists
say, belongs to a completely different and unknown genus of some large hominoid.
The cave also produced some teeth that have so far defied identification, as
well as nine teeth from the early human species Homo erectus and three from the
extinct ape Gigantopithecus blacki, which probably stood about 10 feet tall.

Anthropologists have long been tantalized by the many primate teeth discovered
at sites where no fossil bones have been found. As has often happened in past
studies, the scientists studying the Tham Khuyen remains are forced to extract
what information they can from teeth alone.

"The reason," Dr. Tattersall said, "is that the animals whose teeth we find did
not occupy these caves themselves. They died elsewhere, and during periods when
water washed into the caves, it carried their teeth along with it -- but
unfortunately, not the bones."

In general, hominoid bones are preserved much more rarely than teeth, and
consequently, many extinct primate species, including the Gigantopithecus
blacki, are known only from their teeth. Although the type, size and diet of a
long-extinct animal can be deduced from its teeth, scientists can only speculate
about the creature's appearance.

Underlying Dr. Schwartz's field research is his interest in the complex and
heatedly debated evolutionary pathways that led to modern humans. While many
scientists believe that the closest living relative to humans is the chimpanzee,
Dr. Schwartz contends that the orangutan may be an even closer kin. One piece of
evidence, he believes, is that alone of all the primates, women and female
orangutans lack an estrus cycle and are receptive to sexual activity year-round.

Further discoveries in the limestone caves of Indochina, he believes, might help
untangle a few of the daunting puzzles facing anthropologists as they seek out
man's roots.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

In America;
The Truth Sculptor

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 692 words


You'd like to believe that the President is someone you can trust, someone you
can believe when he looks the nation squarely in the eye and says that this or
that is so.

But the verdict has not yet been rendered on whether Bill Clinton is someone to
be trusted. He has not made a strong case for himself. It doesn't matter whether
the issues are large or small, public or intensely private, Mr. Clinton often
chooses to skate along the slippery edges of the truth.

At times this can seem inconsequential. During the Presidential campaign, Mr.
Clinton regularly replied to questions about whether he had used drugs by saying
he had never broken the laws of his state or his country. Eventually, of course,
he acknowledged that he had tried marijuana once or twice, without inhaling,
when he was in England.

Mr. Clinton's stumbling over questions about how he avoided the draft during the
Vietnam War was more serious. At one point he told a veterans' group that he and
his staff were trying to track down the relevant official records. He added,
awkwardly, "When we get final notification from everybody we've asked for
records from, I will then try to determine whether everything I have said is
entirely accurate."

It was not a tremendous leap from that kind of dissembling to the outright bogus
position Mr. Clinton established for himself on Haiti. During the campaign, he
denounced George Bush's "cruel policy of returning Haitian refugees to a brutal
dictatorship without an asylum hearing."

Now that policy is Bill Clinton's own. Moreover, he seems to be wavering in his
stated support for Haiti's legitimately elected President, Jean-Bertrand
Aristide. Don't ask the people of Haiti if the President of the United States is
trustworthy.

Each day, each week, throughout the campaign and through the first year of the
Clinton Presidency, the pattern has established itself more and more clearly.
Bill Clinton has a major credibility problem. He seems to approach the truth the
way a sculptor approaches marble, or a lump of clay -- as a medium to be molded
and shaped to achieve a particular end.

Sometimes it's possible to have fun with Mr. Clinton's more or less fluid
conception of what's real. The President went duck hunting in Maryland a couple
of weeks ago with a group of men that included Congressman Bill Brewster of
Oklahoma. The group bagged one duck.

"We only shot at one, and we got one," said Mr. Clinton. He then felt compelled
to add that he and Congressman Brewster had both shot at the duck, but it was
probably Mr. Brewster who hit it.

Surviving ducks have not allowed themselves to be fooled. In this week's New
Yorker magazine, a cartoon shows three ducks gathered among some reeds. One of
the ducks, rejecting Mr. Clinton's inclination toward ambiguity, says, "The
President definitely shot Carl, but they say there was a second gunman."

Most of the time there is nothing funny at all in the President's credibility
problems. They are myriad, a discouraging continuum that includes the Gennifer
Flowers fiasco (she ended up on the Arkansas payroll); the Administration's
initial tough talk and subsequent lack of action on Bosnia; the behavior of the
White House in the aftermath of the Vincent Foster suicide; the allegations that
Mr. Clinton used state troopers when he was Governor to arrange meetings with
women in Arkansas; and the growing Whitewater Development Corporation
controversy.

It would be impossible for all of this not to have a serious negative impact on
public policy. At the moment the President is overseas, but the chief domestic
concern of a team of senior Presidential aides is the fallout from Whitewater.

With George Stephanopoulos, David Gergen, Paul Begala, Bruce Lindsey and Harold
Ickes all focused like firemen on "damage control," you have to believe that
some other serious issues are being neglected.

And if the damage control team manages to successfully handle the Whitewater
problem, what will be next? Maybe they could make a concerted effort to heighten
Mr. Clinton's regard for the objective truth, thus bolstering his credibility
both at home and abroad.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 13, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Journal;
San Francisco Paradise Lost

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 704 words


So much sex on television, so little time.

Should I watch a perky animated condom leap into a couple's bed? If I did, I
could take sides in the new and rancorous debate about whether the Government
should produce commercials promoting safe sex.

Maybe I should turn instead to that courtroom where a young lawyer is telling a
jury that "a life is more valuable than a penis." If I studied the arguments
about "malicious wounding" on Court TV -- hold the photos, please -- perhaps I
would finally figure out whom to root for in the latest battle of the
us-vs.-them gender wars, the Bobbitt trial.

Then again, I think not.

So I end up surfing channels to San Francisco in the 1970's, where I find a man
and a woman in bed. A man and a man in bed. Men kissing men. Women kissing
women. Everyone smoking dope and coupling without benefit of wedlock. This is
the mini-series "Tales of the City" on PBS, and why, after a hard day of trying
to duck the crossfire about condom ads and the Bobbitts, does it come as a
relief?

Technically, "Tales of the City" should plunge a viewer right back into today's
sexual hostilities. Adapted from the first of the six Armistead Maupin novels
about intersecting lives in a small apartment house at 28 Barbary Lane, the
six-hour soap opera brings far more explicit bedroom behavior to prime time than
any condom ad. It exposes far more flesh than "NYPD Blue." It features feminists
and male chauvinist pigs (as the quaint patois once had it) and incipient gay
activists. It even has its own severed-penis plot twist.

Yet the series is a tonic. Its opening credits announce tales of "sex, drugs,
and rock and roll" from "an era of innocence" -- and it makes good on that
seeming contradiction.

True, 1976 was not all innocence.  By then, Vietnam, Watergate and "American
Graffiti" had come and gone, leaving the impression that American innocence had
died at least 15 years earlier. The air was thick with such worldly phenomena as
discos, "More Joy of Sex," poppers and Jimmy Carter lusting in his heart.

But an innocence pervades "Tales of the City" just the same. Not of the silly
"If You're Going to San Francisco, Be Sure to Wear Some Flowers in Your Hair"
variety, but a live-and-let-live innocence that looks like democracy.

The people in Mr. Maupin's San Francisco are hardly perfect but they are
tolerant. Women and men listen to one another and, if they battle, do so with
well-chosen words, however angry, rather than with attitudes, fists or knives.
Gay and straight men share dating tips. Parents and adult children agree to
disagree.

Even the unhip, unyoung and unliberal are embraced. More erotic than any of the
show's many trysts featuring nude young bodies is the affair between a patrician
Republican advertising man of 60-something (played by Donald Moffat) and the
56-year-old Barbary Lane landlady, Anna Madrigal (Olympia Dukakis).

Was life really so simple then, so easy? Perhaps not. As Richard Kramer, who
wrote the script of "Tales of the City," explained to me, Mr. Maupin's San
Francisco "is a tiny little postage stamp of earth that maybe never existed."
But it isn't nostalgic sentimentality to believe in Mr. Maupin's ideal. His
American city is an extended, improvised and sometimes contentious American
family -- an attainable community, not a utopia -- far more loving than most
conventional families, including that couple who stepped right off a wedding
cake, John and Lorena.

What happened to Mr. Maupin's characters after the 1970's? The specific answers
can be found in his sequels to "Tales of the City," which eventually pick up the
trail of a deadly intruder. But the larger answer has to do with a virus of the
mind, not body. It is not H.I.V. that decimated the family at 28 Barbary Lane,
but ideologues who pollute the air by turning words like "condom" and "Bobbitt"
into polarizing battle cries for one rigid and exclusionary version or another
of family values or sexual orthodoxy.

Mr. Maupin's San Francisco, meanwhile, remains a paradise lost -- or, as his
Anna Madrigal puts it, an Atlantis to which "we know we must return together."
Cartoon condoms may save lives, but they can't take us back there from here.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 13, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

David B. Kimmelman, Ophthalmologist, 80

SECTION: Section D; Page 21; Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 221 words


Dr. David B. Kimmelman, an ophthalmologist who practiced in New York City for
over four decades, died on Tuesday at his home in Lake North, Fla. He was 80 and
also had a home in Norwalk, Conn.

The cause was a major stroke, his family said.

Dr. Kimmelman, a native of Philadelphia, studied at Jefferson Medical College
and Harvard University. He retired from practice about 10 years ago.

In 1964, he was one of the first doctors to go to Mississippi to treat injured
civil rights workers.

In 1969, as a member of the United States-Cuba Health Exchange, he visited Cuba
at the invitation of the Cuban Ministry of Public Health and worked with
ophthalmologists there.

In 1974, he visited North Vietnam as the leader of a United States medical team.
He taught eye-surgery techniques to Vietnamese doctors. Travel to North Vietnam
was forbidden at the time but because the visit was strictly for medical
purposes, the group was not prosecuted. Dr. Kimmelman was accompanied by his
wife, an occupational therapist with a special interest in prosthetics,

He was a founding member of Physicians for Social Responsibility, an
anti-nuclear group.

Dr. Kimmelman is survived by his wife, Edythe; two sons, Michael, of Manhattan,
the chief art critic of The New York Times, and Burt, of Brooklyn; and one
grandchild.


LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 13, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Reporting on a Life of Reporting From the Front

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1016 words



Live From the Battlefield
 From Vietnam to Baghdad: 35 Years in the World's War Zones.
 By Peter Arnett
 Illustrated. 463 pages. Simon & Schuster. $23.

This is fame: While Peter Arnett was broadcasting from Baghdad, Iraq, for the
Cable News Network during the Persian Gulf war, delivering the news from the
enemy capital that was heard and seen around the world, he learned from a
Vatican reporter that the Pope wanted to meet him. And an Ankara reporter told
him that women in Turkey were naming their children after him, "even the
females."

And this is fame of a different sort: "I tuned in to the BBC at daybreak, and
heard White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater call me a liar."

Now, in "Live From the Battlefield," his powerhouse of a book of war reportage,
Mr. Arnett provides the unspoken details behind his controversial broadcasts.
His book conveys what a commercial television report, especially a censored or
self-censored one, cannot: the unvarnished discoveries and unrestrained emotions
of a great reporter.

The title ought to be read for a double meaning. His broadcasts from Baghdad
were "live," almost instantly transmitted via satellite to television screens
halfway around the world, although an Iraqi censor (called a minder) checked his
words beforehand. There was never any concealment from the public; all his
reports from the Al-Rashid Hotel were identified as having been cleared by the
Iraqis. The second meaning is even more remarkable: after 35 years of combat
reporting from Vietnam to Baghdad and beyond, Mr. Arnett is still alive to tell
his story.

And what a singular story it is. What emerges is a portrait of a charming and
even modest individual, who was determined to be where the action was and to
bring out only the truth of what he saw with his own eyes. After Vietnam, trying
to report the truth became a casualty of war; in later American military actions
-- Grenada, Panama, the Persian Gulf -- every effort was made to keep the
American press away from the battlefield. Inevitably, Mr. Arnett's probing
coverage got him into trouble with the authorities and certain other
journalists: from American generals in Vietnam, to hawkish columnists, to K.G.B.
strongmen in Moscow, to Presidents and Presidential spokesmen.

It's a close call, but Mr. Arnett doesn't consider himself a war lover. Here's
how he explains himself in the first sentence of his book: "I have a rule never
to do anything dangerous for fun." The next thing we know (it's now 1993, after
he has finished writing this book) is that he's off and running in Afghanistan,
testing his luck again by going through checkpoints manned by trigger-happy
rebels. He writes: "I remembered a local official telling me, 'Don't ever go out
at night. After dark, everyone in Afghanistan is a bandit.' "

It would be a mistake for the reader to turn immediately to the exciting war
stories from Vietnam, which Mr. Arnett covered for The Associated Press, and
then to his famous reporting for CNN from Baghdad. "Live From the Battlefield"
turns out to be a fascinating autobiography as well, the story of a young man
growing up in New Zealand, a descendant of English pioneers who intermarried
with Maoris. He says that because of his Polynesian blood and his upbringing, he
was "culturally unanchored, disoriented by my mixed heritage."

The young Peter Arnett, strongly supported by his Anglican parents, became a
scholar, won prizes in Bible study, discovered he was a loner and began to
dream. His wanderlust was usually inspired by the pursuit of his latest
girlfriend. He started to write for small newspapers in New Zealand, then moved
on to The Bangkok World in Thailand, where he covered every kind of story, from
boxing to a nostalgic Somerset Maugham, who told him of the inspiration for "The
Moon and Sixpence." For a while, Mr. Arnett lived a rather fictional life
himself, sharing the mistress of a high-ranking government official. That was
one way of getting political news.

In 1960, Mr. Arnett's glamorous newspaper career scaled a peak in Laos, where he
discovered the freedom of being a stringer for the news agencies. One time, he
found himself filing the same story, with slight variations, for The Associated
Press, United Press International and Reuters. He became a full-time
correspondent for the A.P. in Indonesia, honed his political skills and in 1962
moved on to the half-hidden war in Vietnam, escalated by the Kennedy
Administration.

In Saigon, his teacher became Malcolm Browne, then the A.P. bureau chief. He
writes with great admiration of many daring colleagues -- Homer Bigart, David
Halberstam, Neil Sheehan, Horst Faas, Charles Mohr, Jack Foisie, Gloria Emerson,
Peter Kalischer, Jack Lawrence -- who refused to get on the military publicity
team and, instead, went into the field with the troops.

"After the Cambodian invasion, I felt my detachment toward Vietnam cracking as I
watched the Administration expand the war," he writes, referring to the Nixon
Presidency. "I feared that I would no longer be an unbiased observer, that my
reporter's values were swamped in the bloodshed."

For a few years, Mr. Arnett covered stories in the United States as a special
correspondent. But he was back in Saigon when it fell in 1975; he refused to
leave, and gives a wonderful account of how the A.P. office was protected when
the North Vietnamese soldiers arrived. He quickly discovered that one of his
part-time photographers had been a Vietcong agent for 10 years. Mr. Arnett
continued to file from occupied Saigon, foreshadowing his feat in Baghdad for
CNN.

In "Live From the Battlefield," Mr. Arnett provides photographic and eyewitness
evidence that seems to support his most controversial story from Baghdad, the
one that earned him the tag "liar": the destruction of what the allies said was
a biological-weapons testing center and the Iraqis said (and he reported) was a
plant for processing milk for babies. As Mr. Arnett tells it so amusingly, by
the time he finished his Persian Gulf war duty, children were being named Peter.


NAME: Peter Arnett

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Peter Arnett.

TYPE: Review; Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 13, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

GARDEN NOTEBOOK;
The Legacy of the Earthman: Wise Words to Plant By

BYLINE: By ANNE RAVER

SECTION: Section C; Page 4; Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1568 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


GINNY MITCHELL stood in the Earthman's frozen garden one recent day and said,
"Henry really loved this mess."

It's a wild and woolly tangle of plants and tilting homemade structures, crammed
into a small backyard (exactly 40 feet by 185 feet) in northwest Washington.
Walking down Davenport Street, you can't mistake the Earthman's house. It's the
one you can hardly see, thanks to the yews, the hollies, the big rumpled
boxwoods, the roses as old as Pliny, the clematis rearing up over the porch, the
epimedium, the ivy (how many bulbs are hidden there?), the -- oh, you get the
idea.

Out back, holding her coat closed against the cold, the Earthman's Assistant --
that's what Henry Mitchell called his wife in his gardening column in The
Washington Post -- pointed out all the things that his readers knew so well,
even if they'd never met him.

There was the mangy palm (he was very proud of it because it lived through the
winter), the rare canna (he instructed her to put bags of leaves around it), the
"dog house" he built out of junk for the bronze lion (or maybe it was a dog, or
a dragon; he didn't know), the summer house he banged together for the
grapevines. It's listing now because a storm got it last March, though frankly,
the Earthman wasn't so great with a hammer, the Assistant said.

"We don't eat the grapes, but the birds do," said Mrs. Mitchell, but please,
call her Ginny. "We have all kinds of birds -- purple finches, chickadees,
nuthatches. We love birds, both of us do."

She used the present tense the way you do for a while, until your mind
understands that your closest friend -- they were married for 45 years -- hasn't
just gone out to walk the dogs.

Step carefully, she warned, as we crunched on the icy snow. "I planted a lot of
daffodil bulbs here, the day before he died," she said. "He kept waving from the
window upstairs -- 'yes, no' -- as I was planting."

The Earthman died on Nov. 13, just short of his 70th birthday, going out the way
a gardener should, with dirt on his hands, planting bulbs.

Maybe you never read him. Or maybe you followed his every word, in the 23 years
he wrote his Earthman column for The Post (as well as Any Day, which was about
anything that struck his interest). The column surfaced all over the country,
through The Post's wire service, and the best of his work was collected in two
books, "The Essential Earthman" (Indiana University Press, 1982), which will be
reissued this spring by Houghton Mifflin, and "One Man's Garden" (Houghton
Mifflin, 1992).

The Earthman -- everybody called him Henry -- wasn't just a garden writer,
though he could tell you exactly how to plant a rose or start a rare arum from
seed (if his Welsh terrier, Max, didn't eat the seeds when they fell off the
mantel). He knew gardeners backward and forward. He knew how they stuff small
places with too many plants, and leave tools out to rust, and never get around
to wrapping the fig tree (he freely admitted to killing hundreds of plants).

He knew the rage in their hearts when a deep freeze killed the camellias or a
summer storm smashed the irises. He raged for them, he howled at the skies. Then
he told them to stop whining and get on with it.

"There is no place, no garden, where these terrible things do not drive
gardeners mad," he wrote in his blessedly dark voice.

But this spring, when a storm dashes the daffodils or the hound sits on your
rarest flowers, the Earthman won't be around to comfort you. I meant to visit
him -- I knew he was dying of cancer -- but like the fig I never wrapped, it
didn't happen. Weeks later, I called the Assistant and asked if I might come
down. "Of course," she said. "I love to talk about Henry."

They met at the University of Virginia, where Henry was a student. Actually it
was in the health clinic, where Ginny, a technician, gave him a flu shot. They
locked eyes or something and married years later, when Henry got a job. His
father, a surgeon in Memphis, wanted him to go to West Point (he failed the eye
exam, to his joy), and in lieu of that, to law school (which he tried, but slept
through the last year).

He picked cotton for 40 cents an hour one "divinely happy" year back in the
1940's. He suffered death threats covering civil rights in the 60's for his
hometown paper, The Commercial Appeal, and finally quit in 1966, when the paper
wouldn't run a column he wrote commending Senator Wayne Morse, Democrat of
Oregon, for opposing the Vietnam War.

A few years later, the Southerners came north, and in 1970, Henry got a job on
the night copy desk of The Post. He used to design gardens for friends at work,
and one day the paper needed a story about the art of making a garden. He wrote
one in about 20 minutes, mentioning that he usually recommended jasmine with
caution, because its fragrance drives people mad with desire. His editor, Sarah
Booth Conroy, was hooked -- for more than 20 years.

He was a scholar who quoted Jefferson (who botched that dome down at Monticello,
he said) as freely as Miss Marple and Shakespeare and Proust (who, he told
gardeners, "used to say that the things we bitterly regret are the things we
never let our hearts long for"). He spun great Southern yarns in his deep,
gravelly voice -- made deeper by cigarettes -- about ordinary things, like the
mouse that gnawed its way through the ceiling during a Thanksgiving dinner and
was ignored by everyone, because "in the South, at dinner, you are not supposed
to notice anything short of a three-alarm fire." That mouse, he said, had
beautiful eyes.

When a man like that goes, it takes a while for his weeder to get her bearings.

"I got the heater in the lily pool all right, so the fish won't freeze," she
said, twigs pulling at her old gray skirt. The bamboo stake that Henry had put
up to keep his dragonflies from drowning was nowhere in sight. "They like reeds;
they like to perch like eagles," he wrote.

When the doctors told Henry he had two weeks to live (though he got five, so he
fooled them), Ginny just opened the front door to a procession of friends,
beginning with Thomas Lovejoy, an environmentalist at the Smithsonian
Institution, who came for a cup of coffee at a quarter to 8, to neighbors
bearing fresh-squeezed grapefruit juice and fruit, to travelers from Brazil and
England, and to cronies from The Post bearing gossip.

They sat by his bed, next to Maude, the terrier mutt (Max is buried in the
garden, with five other hounds), and a tub of goldfish. They looked out at the
garden and talked.

"We had the most wonderful conversations," Mr. Lovejoy said. They might start
out with "Pilgrim's Progress," he added, and end up with archy, the literary
cockroach, and his intrepid cat friend, mehitabel. Who had inspired this
eclectic mind? Miss Cuneo, his kindergarten teacher, the Earthman had told Mr.
Lovejoy. She helped each child plant a nasturtium seed in a cold-cream jar.

"His last request was that I take this rare arum, Typhonodorum lindleyanum, out
to St. Louis to the Missouri Botanical Garden, because they didn't have one,"
Mr. Lovejoy said. Which he did, of course.

Perhaps you remember the arum. It hails from Madagascar and spent every winter
in the east window, at the head of Henry's bed, in a five-gallon bucket of mud
with four inches of water over the crown. He dropped it once, "down 11 steps,
flinging mud on each," he wrote. "Heh-heh."

Ginny just smiled through the smoke of her Winston. "Henry was very messy," she
said, leading the way into the living room. "One morning, I'd just cleaned the
rugs with Woolite and vacuumed, and Henry comes in through the front door,
dragging two tubs of plants -- that he had just watered -- and dragged them
through the house to the back door. I said, 'Henry, did you ever think of taking
them around the side of the house?' 'No,' he said. I let the mud dry and
thought, 'Do I want a neat house and a miserable marriage, or a messy house and
a good marriage?' "

The light is surprisingly dim in this room, where palms and cycads used to lean
over the guests on the sofa. But as the Earthman became ill, friends carried
most of the good ones off, especially the agaves that got as big as Volkswagens.

Henry didn't even like potted plants, Ginny said. "But then our son started
working as a trashman, and he'd bring these plants home that people had thrown
away, and Henry couldn't stand seeing anything thrown out."

We watched the squirrels through the window, eating their ears of corn (they get
three a day). You should feed the squirrels, the Earthman wrote. Sure, they'll
eat your cyclamens and your crocuses, but they're more fun to watch than bulbs.

Henry and Ginny were two peas in a pod, Mr. Lovejoy said at the eulogy he gave
on Nov. 19 at All Saints' Episcopal Church in Chevy Chase, Md. ("They sparked
each other," he said on the phone, and would get going on a story like two geese
honking.) He and Benjamin C. Bradlee, the former executive editor of The Post,
told tales in that church that got all 600 people laughing, Ginny said.

"One lady said, 'I never heard of people laughing at a funeral,' and I thought,
'Lady, you didn't know Henry Mitchell,' " she said.

The Assistant is a little worried about one thing. The Earthman made her promise
to scatter his ashes over the Mississippi. It's kind of illegal, like burying a
hound in the back yard. But Ginny thinks she's found a way.


LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Earthman's tangled mess; A bust of Henry Mitchell amid some
of his plants. (Photographs by Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 13, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Can Help Stop the Land-Mine Slaughter;
Humane Warfare

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 310 words


To the Editor:

"Moving Toward a Land-Mine Ban" (editorial, Dec. 27) is naive, misguided and
baneful. Land mines, as a weapon, are the most humane form of warfare, when
properly used.

Under the theory that good fences make good neighbors, land mines make
excellent, inexpensive and technically undemanding fences: no incursion, no
death. Sarajevo would have been overrun a year ago and the populace massacred
out of hand without land mines to channel numerically superior and better-armed
Serb infiltrators into a narrow killing ground. Army land mines could have shut
down the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Cambodia, saving countless American and Vietnamese
lives, if the political will had existed.

The key to using land mines effectively is remote control and time-delay
deactivation-detonation. Tiny embedded radio receiver and quartz clock chips
insure that modern mines can be activated, deactivated or detonated by remote,
coded command, fail-safed by time delay (for example, automatic detonation or
deactivation after two years).

The Geneva Convention should be modified to permit only these types of land
mines. Countries laying these mine fields should indemnify innocents with
mandatory contributions to a United Nations restitution fund. In addition,
one-third of each mine field radio code should be stored under the lock and key
of three United Nations members: one chosen by the mine layer, one by the
neighbor mined against and the third by the General Assembly. Under unusual
circumstances, concurrence of these three could disarm a mine field without the
mine layer's approval.

Without land mines, countries that are unprepared technologically or emotionally
will inevitably fall victim to more populous, aggressive neighbors.

JEFFREY O. MILMAN
 New York, Jan. 1, 1994
The writer served as an Army captain in Vietnam, 1968-69.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Clintons' Personal Lawyer: A Survival Expert

BYLINE: By STEPHEN LABATON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1383 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 13


A few years after graduating from law school, David E. Kendall wrote an article,
entitled "How to Keep Your Client Alive," in which he offered advice based on
his extensive experience defending inmates on death row. Now Mr. Kendall, a
lawyer little known outside bar circles, is working for the political survival
of Bill and Hillary Clinton.

Since last summer, he has been the Clintons' personal lawyer. His role became
public only last month, after it was disclosed that the Clintons had used him to
negotiate the terms of a Justice Department subpoena for the business records of
their real estate investments in the Whitewater Development Corporation. The
Clintons had a partnership in the company with James B. McDougal, the proprietor
of an Arkansas savings and loan institution that is now closed.

Almost like a mantra, friends and partners describe the 49-year-old Mr. Kendall
as an "earnest Midwesterner," a soft-spoken Indianian with a rabid appetite for
movies (high-quality and low-), literature (high-brow and junk) and history
(American and European). His passion for social causes goes back at least to
1964, when he was arrested in Mississippi while registering black voters.

Specialist on Death Penalty

To those who do not know Mr. Kendall well, he seemed an unusual choice for the
President and his wife. Mr. Kendall's legal specialty over the last two decades
has been death penalty and libel cases. His clients have ranged from Playboy
magazine and the National Enquirer to William F. Buckley Jr., the conservative
columnist and author, and John A. Spenkelink, the first convict executed against
his will since 1977, when executions were resumed in the United States after a
10-year hiatus.

But to his friends in the Government, to his clients and to his partners at
Williams & Connolly, Mr. Kendall was a natural choice.

"He's a brilliant lawyer, but more than that there's a nice comfort level to
David," said Jack Valenti, president of the Motion Picture Association of
America and one of Mr. Kendall's clients. "He gives you the feeling that if
you're going to fall over the precipice, he'll be there to catch you."

Mr. Kendall is also a member of the Clintons' generation, and part of his resume
could easily be mistaken for that of the President himself. As a student he
opposed the Vietnam War and was the co-author with Leonard Ross of a practical
guide to the draft and alternatives to serving in the military.

Similar Academic Careers

And Mr. Kendall's career includes stints at Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar, followed
by graduation from Yale Law School a year before Mrs. Clinton and two years
before Mr. Clinton. Friends recall that he knew Hillary better than Bill.

Unlike Mr. Clinton, however, Mr. Kendall enlisted in the Army in 1972, although
he never served in Vietnam.

Mr. Kendall has declined all requests by reporters to be interviewed. He told
one friend that he preferred to maintain a low profile, recalling Edward Bennett
Williams's aphorism "It's the spouting whale that gets harpooned first."

Still, long before he first stepped into the Oval Office, Mr. Kendall attracted
the attention of influential lawyers, who ushered him onto better things. As a
result, his legal pedigree conforms to what one would expect of the President's
lawyer.

After clerking for Justice Byron R. White of the Supreme Court during the
1971-72 term, he worked at the elbow of Anthony Amsterdam, one of the nation's
foremost clinical teachers of the law, handling death penalty appeals for the
NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund Inc.

Almost immediately after moving to Williams & Connolly in 1978, he was taken
under Mr. Williams's wing. He also worked closely with Irving Younger, a partner
at the firm and widely regarded as one of the nation's best trial lawyers.

Among the select group of lawyers who handle death penalty cases, Mr. Kendall is
known as the one who won Coker v. Georgia, the 1977 Supreme Court decision that
says states can execute only criminals who have committed homicides, not those
convicted of rape.

To other lawyers in Washington, Mr. Kendall is known as the one they would turn
to in sensitive matters. Drew S. Days 3d, who hired Mr. Kendall at the NAACP
Legal Defense and Education Fund and is now Solicitor General, said he retained
him last year to do the legal work needed for his confirmation proceedings.

Got 'Excellent Advice'

"I wanted to have someone who I knew would be protective of my interests during
what could be a perilous process," Mr. Days recalled. "He did everything,
including reading every article and speech I'd ever given, and he provided me
with some excellent advice."

How Mr. Kendall came to be the President's lawyer is instructive of the
connections between Washington's legal and political circles.

After the 1992 election, the Clintons' personal lawyer was Robert B. Barnett,
another Williams & Connolly partner. Mr. Barnett had met Mr. Clinton in 1988,
when they both advised Michael S. Dukakis, then the Democratic Presidential
nominee, during his preparation for the debate with Vice President George Bush.

Mr. Barnett played Mr. Bush in the mock debate sessions. It was a role in which
he excelled. Four years later he gave an encore performance to help prepare Mr.
Clinton for his debates with Mr. Bush.

But last August, after Mr. Barnett's wife, Rita Braver, a CBS News reporter, was
assigned to cover the White House, Mr. Barnett withdrew as the Clintons' lawyer
to avoid a conflict of interest. He recommended that the President retain Mr.
Kendall.

As the President's main "outside" lawyer, Mr. Kendall has an ill-defined role;
there are few explicit guidelines governing his relationship with Bernard W.
Nussbaum, the White House counsel, and his staff. It was Mr. Nussbaum who sent
Mr. Kendall the business files of the Whitewater Development Corporation that
were found in the office of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the deputy counsel who
committed suicide last July. Mr. Foster had handled many of the Clintons'
private matters as one of Mrs. Clinton's partners at the Rose law firm in Little
Rock, Ark.

Private and Public Affairs

In earlier times the White House counsel handled most of the First Family's
personal matters, while the Justice Department provided legal guidance for
issues concerning the Presidency. More recently, this has changed; the White
House counsel has emerged as an adviser on a wide range of policy issues
affecting the executive branch and is not supposed to handle purely private
matters for the First Family. In practice, it is often hard to draw a line
between what is purely private and what is not when it comes to Presidential
affairs.

The White House counsel is not supposed to involve himself in the President's
personal legal matters because it is improper for the Federal Government to pay
for such services. But it is unclear how the Clintons, whose assets are put at
$600,000 to $1 million, are planning to pay Mr. Kendall's bills.

As one of the more expensive firms in Washington, Williams & Connolly charges
clients at rates that can exceed $400 an hour; any prolonged work could easily
reach into the hundreds of thousands of dollars.

Billed for 'Routine Stuff'

Bruce Lindsey, a senior adviser to the President, would not say how much Mr.
Kendall had already cost the Clintons. "He's billed them and they paid it --
routine stuff," Mr. Lindsey said.

The President is not Mr. Kendall's sole client, nor is he the first one facing
trouble from associating with a savings and loan. Mr. Kendall also represents
Arthur Andersen, the accounting firm involved in litigation over the failure of
a Houston savings and loan institution that was owned by Arkla Inc., the company
previously headed by Thomas F. McLarty 3d, the White House chief of staff.

And Mr. Kendall has continued to represent The Washington Post on libel and
other issues, a role that can sometimes lead to confusion. Indeed, there was one
instance last month when he momentarily struggled to figure out which client he
was being asked to serve.

When a Post reporter telephoned Mr. Kendall to ask about Whitewater, the lawyer
picked up the phone before he knew the nature of the call and asked: "What is
it? Did you get a subpoena?"


NAME: David E. Kendall

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: David E. Kendall, who has served as the Clintons' personal
lawyer since last summer, in Washington on Wednesday. (Stephen Crowley/The New
York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Paris Journal;
With Head Unbowed, Communist Boss Bows Out

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 986 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Jan. 13


During Georges Marchais's two decades as leader of the French Communist Party,
support for his movement fell from 21.4 to 9 percent of the electorate. Then, as
a final blow, the collapse of the Soviet Union undermined the very ideology that
he had long espoused.

But as he prepares to retire as party leader this month, the 73-year-old former
metalworker with the trademark bushy eyebrows sees no reason to apologize for
being a Communist. "I don't view what has happened as a personal failure," he
said.

If French Communism is not too well today, he said, it is because his party
formed a coalition that brought Francois Mitterrand's Socialist Party to office
in 1981. And when the Socialists turned to the right and betrayed their common
platform, he said, the Communists were also -- unfairly -- blamed.

He is equally convinced by his explanation for the demise of the Soviet Union:
it stagnated under Leonid I. Brezhnev and crumbled under Mikhail S. Gorbachev
because its leaders failed to engage the people. "I told them, 'If you don't
change, you're heading for catastrophe,' " he said.

Faith in Future Intact

So his faith in the future remains intact. "Have you ever known a moment when
the crisis of capitalism was deeper?" he asked in an interview this week.
"Socialism in the East has failed, but capitalism is not the future. We must go
toward a new society and we believe it will be a Communist society."

In truth, the past of the French Communist Party looks far rosier than its
future. It led the fight against fascism before World War II, it played a key
role in the Resistance against Nazi occupiers, it was the single largest party
in the late 1940's and, in the early 1970's, Washington again worried that it
could reach power.

Today it holds only 23 seats in the 577-member National Assembly and, with its
once-powerful labor movement badly weakened and Left Bank students no longer
easy targets for Communist recruiters, the party has been reduced to a bit
player on a political stage dominated by conservatives, who won a stunning
victory in parliamentary elections last year.

France has changed, then. And even with 12 percent of the work force currently
unemployed, the Communist Party has so far made few gains. For many here, it is
a throwback to an era that has gone forever. For many leftists, it has little
hope of recovery as long as it remains under Mr. Marchais's thumb.

His retirement is therefore a watershed, an opportunity to renew the party, to
open it up to other leftists, to make it relevant to the millions who are
unhappy about the current situation, even perhaps to change its name. Or is it?

An Eye Still on Power

Sitting at his desk in the glass-fronted party headquarters designed by Oscar
Niemeyer, the Brazilian architect and Communist, the burly old boss did not
sound ready to retire. "I will still be a member of the party," he said. "I am a
deputy in the Assembly, and that's an important part of my work as a Communist."

More to the point, he appears intent on holding on to much of his power. In a
letter written from a hospital bed after a hip operation last September, he gave
his age and occasional health problems as his reasons for stepping down when the
28th party congress is held here this month.

But since then he has insured that no obvious successor emerges. When the new
Secretary General is finally picked, he clearly plans to have the last word. And
Communist dissidents, who have long bemoaned his "Stalinist" control of the
party, cannot yet count on his disappearing from the scene.

The dissidents in fact seem resigned to remaining sidelined. Charles Fiterman,
who served as a minister in the Socialist-led Government from 1981 to 1984, has
described the succession process as "quasi-monarchical." Anicet Le Pors, another
former Communist minister, said Mr. Marchais was a man of "positive instincts
and disastrous initiatives."

Party's 'Gravest Mistake'

For the retiring Secretary General, though, the dissidents offer noisy proof
that his leadership is democratic. "If we weren't democratic, we would have
thrown them out," he said. "Instead, they have high positions in the party.
Since I took over, we have never expelled anyone."

Rather, he said, looking back over his long tenure, he believed his main
achievement was to modernize the party. "Its gravest mistake was that for a long
time it considered the Soviet Union to be a model," he said. "From 1972 when I
took over, that's what we questioned. The new society had to be built on what
France is."

"When I joined the Communist Party in 1947, if I had known that Stalinism
existed and what it was, I would never have signed up," he continued,
overlooking the fact that by then Stalin had already been in power for two
decades. "When I found out about Stalinism in 1956, I decided to stay on and
fight for change. I have done my bit to bring change, and I am proud of that."

Signs of Mellowness

Although Communist parties in Italy and Spain changed their names to escape
association with the Soviet debacle, Mr. Marchais refused to follow suit. "It
would be hypocrisy," he said. "I see no reason to abandon the name of a
Communist party that has played such an important role in our history."

Still, for all his stubborn pride in being a Communist, there are signs that Mr.
Marchais is mellowing. Throughout the cold war and, particularly, during the
Vietnam War, he viewed successive American Governments as his enemy. And for
years he was barred from entering the United States because he was a Communist.

Finally, in 1992, he made his first trip, meeting black and women's groups and
lecturing at several universities. "I was happy I made the trip and deeply
regret not having gone there sooner," he recalled with enthusiasm. "Until my
dying day, I will have good memories of my visit. And I hope I can return there
one day."

NAME: Georges Marchais

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Georges Marchais, who will retire this month after two decades
as leader of the French Communist Party, at the party's headquarters in Paris.
"Socialism in the East has failed," he says, "but capitalism is not the answer.
We must go toward a new society, and we believe it will be a Communist society."
(Lily Franey for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Tie Vietnam Status to Rights Reform

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 303 words


To the Editor:

"Vietnam: An Outdated Embargo" (editorial, Jan. 6) prematurely calls for the
United States to "declare victory and get out," normalizing relations with
Hanoi. The Vietnam War taught us to think carefully before jumping in and to
avoid false declarations of victory, two lessons you miss.

Vietnam, unlike its former Communist allies, has not "transformed its economy
along capitalist lines," as you suggest. Although the economic devastation
caused by decades of drought, corruption and mismanagement prompted some reforms
by Hanoi to boost foreign investment and aid, just last June the Communist Party
Central Committee repeated its unequivocal commitment to the Marxist-Leninist
tradition.

And this tradition includes flagrant disregard for the rights of its citizens.
In 1991, the first member of Amnesty International in Vietnam was sent to prison
for 20 years because he petitioned the Government to "respect the human, civil
and property rights of the people." Eight prominent intellectuals were
imprisoned last year for "attempting to overthrow the Government." They had
producing a hand-typed newsletter suggesting democratic reforms. Last year also,
two Vietnamese Buddhists -- one in Hue and one in Connecticut -- torched
themselves to protest Hanoi's religious persecution. But their deaths have been
wasted, ignored by an international press eager to show magnanimity by calls for
reconciliation.

Reconciliation may be warranted, but not at any cost. Hanoi's unprecedented
concessions on the missing in action issue show that it is desperate to have the
embargo lifted. This responsiveness means that the United States has the
leverage to demand that Vietnam should also answer to its rights abuses before
we normalize relations.

VIET D. DINH
Washington, Jan. 9, 1994

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 16, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: January 16, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1446 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2  75   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                    $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 2      1  11        SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                  $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                                                              colleague's wife.

 3      3  14      NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                                                                    and a poem.

 4      5  44        THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                     secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                                      presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 5      4  21      WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                                                              in North Vietnam.

 6      6  40          LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                                                      woman on a Mexican ranch.

 7     10   6   THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of
                 Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.

 8      7  16      LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues
                     the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching
                                                                         Hour."

 9      8   5           THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A
                    collection of stories about American men and the strains of
                                                             contemporary life.

 10     9  10           MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery
                writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined
                                                to kill him and take his place.

 11    11  13       A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A
                       young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in
                                              Victorian England's high society.

 12    15   7    THE TRUCE AT BAKURA, by Kathy Tyers. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.)
                The "Star Wars" Rebel Alliance responds to a call for help from
                                                          a threatened outpost.

 13         6          THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Talese/Doubleday,
                   $23.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly
                                                      reappears in their lives.

 14        16      THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                 Concluding the "Griffin & Sabine" trilogy, about an artist and
                                                            his secret admirer.

 15         4          SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &
                Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates
                                                    a child's mysterious death.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      7   4    THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                     $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                                                        folklore and elsewhere.

 2      2  13      PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                               memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 3      1   9        SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.)
                                           Comments on the state of the nation.

 4      9  36      EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                    (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 5      4  21            THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                      (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                                                                      behavior.

 6      3  19   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                                               on life's pleasures and ordeals.

 7      5  15        WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                     (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                                                                          evil.

 8      8   7    HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                  Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                                                   100, reflect on their lives.

 9      6   6       LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The
                                                      country singer's memoirs.

 10    12  75         WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                                                      understand their psyches.

 11    13  15    FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                            & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                                            relationships and spiritual growth.

 12    10  15      A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by
                    Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Thoughts on 43 years of
                                                                      marriage.

 13         1        A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Knopf, $27.50.) The
                development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years in Judaism,
                                                        Christianity and Islam.

 14        15             MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.)
                                                          Inspirational essays.

 15         1         FLY FISHING THROUGH THE MIDLIFE CRISIS, by Howell Raines.
                    (Morrow, $22.) A journalist looks at middle age through the
                                                   prism of his favorite sport.

 16*        1              SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A
                              psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  25    AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                                              A physician's advice about aging.

 2         12    STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                   prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                                                            health and fitness.

 3      4  34            MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                                           (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.

 4      2   9     AND IF YOU PLAY GOLF, YOU'RE MY FRIEND, by Harvey Penick with
                   Bud Shrake. (Simon & Schuster, $20.) More tips and anecdotes
                                                      from the golf instructor.

Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 1, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear In Mind
(Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interst)

ALLIGATOR DANCE: Stories, by Janet Peery. (Southern Methodist University, cloth,
$22.50; paper, $10.95.) Short stories that offer insight into how people assess
and change their lives, written with rigorous attention to what makes people
decide to act, or not act, in any ordinary moment.

A FROLIC OF HIS OWN, by William Gaddis. (Poseidon, $25.) Mr. Gaddis's fourth
novel, easier to like than his previous work, constructs a harsh, misanthropic
but hilarious comedy from the language of law and litigation, in fantastic
combination and obsessive detail.

MAKE ME WORK, by Ralph Lombreglia. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) Short stories
that fizz with humor and hipness explore the lives of happy underachievers and
the women patiently waiting for them to grow up.

MARK ROTHKO: A Biography, by James E.B. Breslin. (University of Chicago,
$39.95.) This account of the tormented artist's life, by a professor of English,
is well researched, well written and carefully thought out.

PADDY CLARKE HA HA HA, by Roddy Doyle. (Viking, $20.95.) This luminously written
Irish novel, winner of the 1993 Booker Prize in Britain, is about the life force
incarnate in its narrator, an unforgettable 10-year-old boy in the brilliantly
realized world of 1960's Dublin.

THE PARTISAN, by Benjamin Cheever. (Atheneum, $21.) Families are made, not born,
in Mr. Cheever's funny, sad second novel, whose college-boyish hero is
pervasively and fortuitously intruded upon by a preposterously handsome and
sophisticated writer.

THE RAGE OF A PRIVILEGED CLASS, by Ellis Cose. (HarperCollins, $20.) The class
in question is the black middle class, and Mr. Cose's account leaves little
doubt that they are daily humiliated by white people, and don't like it a bit.

SARAJEVO: A War Journal, by Zlatko Dizdarevic. (Fromm, $19.95.) A lament for
Bosnia and for civilization, by a newspaper editor who celebrates the endurance
and heroism of ordinary people caught in an insane conflict.

VERDI: A Biography, by Mary Jane Phillips-Matz. (Oxford University, $45.) This
portrait of the composer, an important account that alters accepted
understanding on matters large and small, portrays him as a brutal and
self-indulgent man with a remarkable capacity for lust, love, anger and
compassion.

W.E.B. DU BOIS: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919, by David Levering Lewis. (John
Macrae/Holt, $35.) The first half of the epical life (which lasted till 1963) of
the man who by World War I had become the most outspoken, eloquent and
influential black American.

WRINKLES IN TIME, by George Smoot and Keay Davidson. (Morrow, $25.) An
astrophysicist (Mr. Smoot) and a science writer relate an adventure yarn
(exciting outdoor experiments go blooey) that is also an entree to modern
cosmology, the science of where everything came from.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 16, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Life Under Fire

BYLINE: By Bill Keller;     Bill Keller is the Johannesburg bureau chief of The
New York Times.

SECTION: Section 7;   Page 1;   Column 4;   Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1658 words



LIVE FROM THE BATTLEFIELD
From Vietnam to Baghdad:
35 Years in the World's War Zones.
By Peter Arnett.
Illustrated. 463 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $23.

PETER ARNETT may be the quintessential war correspondent of our half-century. It
is not just that he has covered the defining wars, from the dispiriting slog of
Vietnam to the new-world-order slaughter of the Persian Gulf. He has also made
the transition from the teletype world of the wire services to the real-time
world of Cable News Network. His fearless insistence on seeing things for
himself has won him about every prize available in either medium, left
competitors awed and envious (David Halberstam, who made his own name in
Vietnam, called Mr. Arnett "the best reporter of the war") and often infuriated
the men whose wars he covered.

Given his journalistic background, a reader might have expected "Live From the
Battlefield" to be a pastiche of 800-word dispatches cobbled together or, worse,
an air-filling flight of live-television filibuster. Fear not. Mr. Arnett can
sustain a story, and he can write. He has constructed an engrossing memoir of
reporters and war, lean and clear in its narrative, rich in anecdote, redolent
in its description.

"I lived my youth in Bluff, a gale-lashed town at the bottom end of New Zealand,
which is at the bottom end of the world," he begins, a promising start to the
obligatory early-years stuff that is often the ballast of memoirs. He wheedles
his way into newspapers, has a Ben Hechtian baptism in the trade (he is first on
the scene when an ax murderer is cornered, but gets scooped by a rival who
fabricates the killer's confession), hops a tramp steamer to Asia and, almost
before we know it, is covering a coup in Laos -- where he even swims the Mekong
River to get his stories out for the Associated Press.

Mr. Arnett arrived in Vietnam in 1962 and found the story that consumed him (and
consumes more than half of his book). He was one of a handful of correspondents
who stayed to watch the Vietcong roll into Saigon 13 years later -- a triumph he
observed in part in a black Daimler liberated from the abandoned New Zealand
Embassy.

More often he could be found hunched under fire, up to his hips in
leech-infested swamps or following infantrymen along booby-trapped jungle
trails. Mr. Arnett, most accounts of the war agree, logged more battlefield time
than any other correspondent. From his bounty of eyewitness material he selects
the turning points, and sketches them skillfully. War is a lethal confusion of
plans and accidents, panic and resolve; Mr. Arnett rarely seems to lose his way.
And he avoids two common pitfalls of the genre: he is more interested in what is
going on around him than in himself (though no one will accuse Mr. Arnett of
being self-effacing), and while he is fascinated by the drama of combat, he does
not romanticize war.

Against the now-tired claims that a negative press sapped America's morale and
lost the war in Indochina, Mr. Arnett defends himself by evenly recounting, from
grunt's-eye level, the blunders and miscalculations that really lost the war.
While it is true that most correspondents in the field eventually came to
believe the war was a doomed enterprise, Mr. Arnett adds, in their coverage they
were restrained by a considerable degree of self-censorship.

"It would still have been professional suicide for us in the A.P. to suggest
that the Vietcong insurgents and Hanoi's regular forces were generally superbly
trained and well motivated and seemed to believe in their revolutionary cause,"
he writes. "We were dissuaded by our editors from suggesting that the Vietnam
conflict contained significant elements of a civil war, even though every
Vietnamese knew the truth of that description."

After a restless interlude of peace in the United States, where he eventually
became a citizen, Mr. Arnett took a job with an upstart television network
sneeringly known in the industry as "Chicken Noodle News." CNN's round-the-clock
format and emphasis on hard news made it, he decided, "a video version of the
Associated Press," and to his joy the network sent him back to wars -- in El
Salvador, Afghanistan and most memorably the gulf.

In Baghdad he became a celebrity by reporting from the enemy capital under
siege. On the scene, he matched wits and tempers with Iraqi authorities who,
having expelled all his competition from Baghdad, felt entitled to use Mr.
Arnett as their mouthpiece. At home, he was the object of official praise when
his reporting showed the precision of American bombing, but vilified as "Baghdad
Pete" when he reported on civilian casualties or interviewed Saddam Hussein.
Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican of Wyoming, casually smeared Mr. Arnett as
an inveterate enemy sympathizer, suggesting that back in Vietnam the reporter
had slanted his coverage because his Vietnamese wife had a brother "active in
the Vietcong." (Mr. Simpson, who professes to mistrust reporters, got this
unsubstantiated brother-in-law gossip from a reporter.) In his defense, Mr.
Arnett is never defensive. He calmly and persuasively describes the reporting
labor that went into the stories that angered the Bush White House, like the
bombing of a baby milk factory.

MR. ARNETT is a war reporter, not a foreign correspondent in the fuller sense.
Although he has some insightful things to say about the countries torn by war
and the politicians who inflict wars, the battlefield is what engages him. He
spent two years in Moscow for CNN at the onset of the Gorbachev reforms, but he
gives them exactly two desultory pages here.

"I had little insight into the issues," he says, referring to Cyprus but apropos
of his career, "but would try to cover the story as I had in Vietnam, simply to
write only what I saw myself."

Mr. Arnett's newsgathering motto -- "to write only what I saw myself" -- is also
his approach to this book. He rarely stands back to tell us what he thinks he
has learned from the wars he has covered, or to speculate about the ebb and flow
of our national confidence.

More surprising, there is little rumination on the changing role of the press,
although the hegemony of CNN -- live, worldwide and virtually unblockable --
raises lots of chewy questions. Mr. Arnett stands up fine to the charge that
Saddam Hussein manipulated him in Baghdad, but he is silent on the extent to
which the Pentagon manipulated his colleagues, turning the press, and in
particular his employer, CNN, into a megaphone for its self-glorifying version
of the gulf war. More generally, I'd like to know if CNN has measured up to his
initial hopes that it would be a place where "the news was the star," or whether
he thinks it has lost its original mission in the endless drone of chat shows
and self-promotion.

Then again, it is an exceptional reporter who can resist the temptation, after
35 years in the field, to pontificate on the larger issues of his industry and
the world. And it will probably be an exceptional reader who will complain
because Mr. Arnett is content just to tell us what he saw.



PETER ARNETT IS NOT LOOKING FOR A FIGHT. HOWEVER . . .

At age 59, Peter Arnett may not have seen his last battle. "I could never say
I've had enough wars," he said in a recent telephone interview from his home in
McLean, Va. "If I did, maybe my brain would stop functioning."

He knows that he doesn't have to go looking for a fight to find one. "When I
went to Vietnam in the early 1960's the war was a small counterinsurgency. It
just turned into America's longest war as I watched it unravel," he explained.
"I went to Israel in 1990 to cover the intifada, and while I was there the gulf
war happened to erupt next door. I don't actively fly around to every conflict."

Mr. Arnett has never questioned risking his life just to beat rival news
organizations by a few minutes. He said that competition is the lifeblood of
reporting. "Rather than leading to slapdash irresponsible journalism,
competition leads to greater accuracy," he said. "We weren't getting any money
in Vietnam, so the real pleasure was getting the story first and getting it
right."

He said he has no regrets about moving to television journalism, although he
feels it lacks the competitive rush. "It's a much more subjective medium and
it's a blur," he explained. "With newspapers, your scoop sits on page 1."

In Vietnam, it was often difficult for reporters to distance themselves from the
conflict completely. In battle, Mr. Arnett was occasionally ordered by United
States officers to take a gun and help in defense, and he sometimes carried a
handgun. "I didn't want to be captured at pitchfork point by a farmer and
marched off like an idiot into the jungle and put away for the remainder of the
war," he recalled.

In 1963, he stood by as a Buddhist monk immolated himself in Saigon. "Even if I
could have, it was inconceivable to interfere," he explained. "The Government
was so repressive -- it was torturing and killing Buddhist dissidents -- and any
act by us to ward off the monks' actions would have been seen as an act of
betrayal to their cause."

During the war against Iraq, Senator Alan K. Simpson criticized Mr. Arnett's
coverage and claimed that the author had been manipulated by Hanoi in the 1960's
through the family of his Vietnamese wife. Although he had no idea while in
Baghdad that these charges were being made, after the war Mr. Arnett was pleased
to discover how his colleagues in the news media had defended him. "When I
returned, lots of news organizations wanted to set us up in a debate, but I
wasn't interested and CNN didn't want me to get into a shouting match face to
face with a senator," he said. "A few weeks later I ran into Senator Simpson at
a party and he shook my hand and apologized and said 'I learned one thing from
this, Peter, that you've got more friends than I've got.' "
   TOBIN HARSHAW

NAME: Peter Arnett

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Peter Arnett in 1967 in Bihn Dinh Province, Vietnam. (michael
Renard)(pg. 1); Peter Arnett. (GEORGE BENNETT)(pg. 28)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 16, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Cousin Bobby May Kiss, but He Doesn't Tell

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 23;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 942 words


In his career as an Episcopal priest, the Rev. Robert Castle has hurled himself
eagerly into the fray -- whether befriending and supporting Black Panthers in
Jersey City, demonstrating against the Vietnam War in Washington or agitating
for social justice in Harlem. His defiant refusal to compromise his beliefs has
earned the outspoken 64-year-old cleric both accolades and arrests.

"At my age," he said, in the cluttered rectory of his Harlem church, "I don't
have any hesitation about anything anymore."

Well, there was the matter of kissing Joanne Woodward.

You see, Father Castle, better known as Cousin Bobby from the title of Jonathan
Demme's 1992 documentary about him, appears in Mr. Demme's new movie,
"Philadelphia," as Tom Hanks's father, Bud Beckett -- and Joanne Woodward's
husband. One scene called for Father Castle to kiss Ms. Woodward during the the
Becketts' 40th anniversary party, and Mr. Demme admitted it required a bit of
coaxing to nudge him over his shyness.

Recalling the scene, which was eventually cut from the film, Father Castle
became uncharacteristically flustered.

"It was just a . . . ," he began, then paused. "I guess I did. Period." Another
pause, a weak smile and a wave. "I'm an old man now."

Viewers of "Cousin Bobby" know that reluctance is a word not often associated
with Father Castle, a hulking man with a stubbly pate and wire-rim glasses.

"I'm shy about some things," he said. "But issues of social justice I'm not shy
about."

Indeed, angered by New York City's refusal to install a stoplight at a dangerous
intersection near his church, he had his congregants haul the altar from the
sanctuary and gleefully celebrated mass in the street. Appalled by the rampant
drug use and sales that claimed many lives in his community, he spoke like a man
possessed at a dizzy, declamatory rally in 1989, accusing the city's power
structure of condoning nothing less than genocide.

Mr. Demme said the idea of casting Father Castle -- who really is his cousin --
as the father of a young lawyer who is wrongly dismissed from his job because he
has AIDS originated with Ron Nyswaner, the screenwriter. Mr. Demme said Mr.
Nyswaner had helped arrange a screening of "Cousin Bobby" at an upstate New York
festival and had been impressed with Father Castle's commitment and spunk. "I
probably would have been afraid on a nepotism level," Mr. Demme said. "But since
someone else had suggested it, it's O.K."

Father Castle, who said he is easily bored, seized the chance to read for the
part, even if he was a little unsure about his acting.

"In getting this part I had confidence in my role because I knew Mr. Demme
wouldn't put something on the screen that's bad," he said, lapsing into his
habit of referring to friends and relatives as Mr. or Ms. "He'd make sure I'd do
it right."

Although Father Castle joked that his only acting comes every Sunday at church,
Mr. Demme saw a grain of truth in that.

"He's an emotional guy and a communicator," Mr. Demme said. "That's what
acting's about."

The movie appealed to Father Castle not just for its treatment of the AIDS
issue, but also for its portrayal of a family that accepted their son's
homosexuality and supported him during his trial. His own church, St. Mary's,
runs an AIDS residence, and Father Castle says he knows what it is like to see
friends wither away from the disease.

The experience of losing friends and parishioners to AIDS probably helped Father
Castle achieve the right frame of mind for the part, he said, adding that those
experiences were more on a subconscious level. But he drew directly on a more
personal tragedy, the death of his own son Robert, who drowned while swimming in
a Vermont river at the age of 19.

His memories of the accident prompted him to add to his lines in the scene where
the Becketts say what would be their final goodbye to Andy as he lies in a
hospital bed, tubes in his arms and an oxygen mask on his face.

"The line originally was 'Good night, son. Try to get some rest.' " Father
Castle recalled. "What I added was 'I love you, Andy.' This was very important
to me. If I had been able to see my son before he died, I would have wanted to
say that to him."

The "Philadelphia" role is not Father Castle's first. He and his wife, Kate, had
fleeting nonspeaking roles as missionaries getting off a plane in "The Silence
of the Lambs." Ms. Castle noted that her husband's acting is a welcome relief
from the strains of his pastoral and political work.

"He needs a little glamour in his life," she said. "I think he loves it, even
though the minute it's over it doesn't mean much to him. But while he's at it,
he loves it."

She said she once joked that her husband said he'd like to go against type,
perhaps playing a villain. But she knows that he looks more like a priest or a
cop.

However slim, there might be a chance to delve into that darker side. Mr. Demme
said some colleagues have said Father Castle would be a good choice to play T.
Eugene (Bull) Connor, the segregationist Public Safety Commissioner of
Birmingham, Ala., during the 1963 civil right demonstrations in a movie he plans
based on the Taylor Branch history "Parting the Waters."

For a person of Father Castle's political bent, that might be too much evil to
handle.

"There are plenty of guys who can play Bull Connor -- with conviction maybe," he
said. "Let me be somebody else, for a cause."

He says his convictions will keep him as a pastor in Harlem, even though he may
hedge his bets and get an agent.

"I'm not sure about just doing anything," he said. "I am first a priest. That's
what I want to do and be."

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Rev. Robert Castle in "Cousin Bobby," the 1992 documentary
made by his cousin, Jonathan Demme. (Cinevista)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 16, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By ELEANOR CHARLES

SECTION: Section 13CN; Page 8; Column 5; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1228 words



REVIVING ALLEN'S FILMS

Four of Woody Allen's films are to be shown at the public library in Stratford
this week, billed as "Unsung Woody Week." The films were, in the estimation of
the library staff, overlooked or misjudged for one reason or another.

The series begins with "Stardust Memories" (1980) on Tuesday. Charlotte Rampling
co-stars with Allen in this seriocomic piece about a movie director. "Another
Woman" (1987), an adult drama featuring Gena Rowlands, Gene Hackman, Blythe
Danner and Ian Holm, will be shown on Wednesday.

Mia Farrow and Joe Mantegna have the leading roles in "Alice," a 1990 fantasy
about an idle-rich housewife, scheduled on Thursday. And Ms. Farrow appears with
Allen, Sidney Pollack and Judy Davis in "Husbands and Wives" on Friday.
"Husbands and Wives" was released during the Allen-Farrow domestic maelstrom and
consequently suffered at the box office despite good reviews.

Curtain time is noon each day, and viewers may bring bag lunches. Admission and
popcorn are free. The library is located at 2203 Main Street. The number for
more information is 385-4162.

LINCOLN AND 'AMERICA'

Following a week of previews, Suzan-Lori Parks' new comedy "The America Play"
opens on Thursday at 8 P.M. at the Yale Repertory Theater, York and Chapel
Streets, in New Haven. It was directed by Liz Diamond, whose staging of Parks'
"Imperceptible Mutabilities in the Third Kingdom" won her an Obie in 1990.

The character of the black man who drives this play is dead. Nicknamed the
Foundling Father, a pun prompted by his lack of personal identity, he was
obsessed in life with Abraham Lincoln. He earned his living reenacting Lincoln's
death for a street audience that paid him in pennies. Wrapping himself in
Lincoln's persona, he achieved an illusion of the American Dream of reaching
high places.

His wife and son, the leading characters, whom he abandoned when the boy was
very young, try to reconstruct him through the props he left behind -- fake
beard, chair, gun -- in an effort to shape a legacy for the son.

Performances are scheduled through Feb. 5, Monday through Friday at 8 P.M.,
Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M., with additional 2 P.M. matinees on Jan. 26 and Feb. 3.
Tickets are $10 to $28. For reservations, 432-1234.

BLACK HISTORY ON STAGE

Black History Month will be celebrated at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven
with a week of play readings and a two-week workshop, beginning Tuesday and
running through Feb. 6.

James Baldwin's "The Amen Corner" (1965) will open the readings on Tuesday at
7:15 P.M. on Stage II, Steve Carter's "One Last Look" (1967) and Regina Porter's
new one-act drama "Mourn in Red" are scheduled on Wednesday at 8:15 P.M. New
plays will be featured at 8:15 P.M. on the remaining three nights by Pearl
Cleage, Philip Hayes Dean, Silas Jones and Regina Porter.

A roster of distinguished directors includes Ricardo Kahn of the Crossroads
Theater Company, Marion Isaac McClinton from Baltimore's Center Stage, Seret
Scott and John Stix. Some of the readers are Carmen de Lavallade, Gilbert Lewis
and Danny Robinson Clark. Admission is free but a contribution of $5 is
suggested.

A workshop production of Michael Henry Brown's "King of Coons," based on the
life of Stepin Fetchit, opens Jan. 25 through Feb. 6, directed by Gordon
Edelstein, who worked with Mr. Brown on "The Day the Bronx Died" and
"Generations of the Dead in the Abyss of Coney Island," produced at Long Wharf
from 1990 through 1993.

Mr. Fetchit earned some $2 million in the 30's and 40's, and King of Coons was
his nickname for himself. He is viewed by some as a trailblazer in a
white-dominated industry and by others as a perpetuator of a negative black
image.

Performances will be on Tuesday at 7:15; Wednesday through Friday at 8:15,
Saturday at 4:15 and 8:15, Sunday at 2:15 and 7:15. Tickets at $18 to $26 may be
ordered by calling 787-4282.

A TRIP TO THE PAST

Early American Hearth Tours, conducted through the Farmington Valley Visitors
Association in West Simsbury, are scheduled annually from late January through
early March. They focus on activities or meals at historic sites, combining some
New England lore with contemporary fun.

The first program is called Sleigh Bells, Schoolhouses and An Old Canal, to be
held on Saturday from 1 to 4 P.M. in Simsbury and Avon, and repeated at the same
hours on Feb. 26. Bundled up against the weather, participants will take a
horse-drawn sleigh ride through the woodlands of Flamig Farm in Simsbury, hear
stories about the 1830's Farmington Canal at the Living Museum in Avon, and
attend a re-created town meeting at Simsbury's Massacoh Plantation. The tour
ends with the performance of period skits in a 1771 tavern, and cocoa and
cookies by the pot-bellied stove.

The price is $15 for adults, $12 for children. The tour is not suitable for
children under 6.

Future programs include an open hearth 18th-century dinner that patrons help
prepare as well as eat, a Colonial candlelight dinner and house tour at the
Sarah Whitman Historic Homestead in New Britain, and readings of poetry, humor,
recipes and other early-American literature by costumed interpreters, plus a
tour of the Stanley-Whitman House in Farmington and a snack of gingerbread and
cider. The number is 1-800-493-5266 for more information or reservations.

TRIPLE EXPOSURE

A group of three photographic exhibitions opens this week at Wesleyan
University's Center for the Arts in Middletown, drawn from a large, prestigious
collection donated to the center by the Middletown Press. They will remain on
view through March 4.

At the Ezra and Cecile Zilkha Gallery, beginning on Tuesday, is a selection of
photographs called "Shooting Blind." The pictures were taken by or of blind
people, and the exhibit examines the phenomenon of sight. It was curated by Vik
Muniz and Klaus Ottmann.

The remaining two shows open on Wednesday in the Davison Art Center. Valentine
Burr, a 1993 graduate, was the curator of "Created Reality: Photojournalism and
the Photo Essay." It contains images from the early 1900's to the present, shot
by Jacob Riis, Lewis Hine, Margaret Bourke-White, Weegee, Robert Capa and other
celebrated photographers. The pictures frequently manifested the newspaper's or
magazine's editorial policy.

More recent works are by Robert Frank, Mary Ellen Mark and Eugene Richards, and
they include color photos of the Vietnam War by Larry Burrows, published mostly
in Life Magazine.

According to Ellen D'Oench, the center's director, "because of television,
photographers now work less in spot news photography, and more for book
publication."

The third exhibit, curated by Carlyn Henry, another 1993 graduate, is titled
"The Photographed Interior," and explores the unpopulated insides of houses,
stores, motels, cars and other normally inhabited structures. Margaret
Bourke-White's photograph of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt's dressing
table, Alex Harris' interior of a Chevrolet, Len Jen schel's New Mexico
interiors, Aaron Siskind's pictures taken inside Harlem, and Walker Evans'
Southern houses, all reveal volumes about the former or current occupants.

Viewing hours are Tuesday through Friday from noon to 4 P.M., Saturday and
Sunday from 2 to 5 P.M. Admission is free. For more information, 347-9411,
extension 2401.
   ELEANOR CHARLES

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Woody Allen in "Stardust Memories," one of the films to be shown
at the public library in Stratford.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 16, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
Another Presidency Brings Another Credibility Gap

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6; Column 1; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 940 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


MILLIONS of Americans were exposed last week to the two contrasting images of
their President that have defined the first year of the Clinton Administration.
In a "Nightline" interview aboard Air Force One, Bill Clinton showed ABC's
viewers a picture of authoritative leadership as he set out on his biggest
foreign trip. He moved from tender reflections on his mother's funeral to
confidently displaying a command of issues awaiting him.

By the time Mr. Clinton got to Prague two days later, the aura of confidence was
gone. The television audience saw a man who grew testy and defensive when asked
about his involvement in Whitewater, an Arkansas real estate deal of long ago
that went awry. After the second question, Mr. Clinton stalked off, telling his
interviewer,

"I'm sorry you're not interested in the trip."

Time after time, the forceful, trustworthy Bill Clinton is upstaged by a Bill
Clinton who cannot shake questions about his credibility. Assessments of the
Clinton Presidency inevitably come down to one issue: Can he be trusted? Beyond
the wear and tear on Mr. Clinton's image, such doubts could threaten his policy
goals -- unless his various constituencies, from Congress, to the voters to
other world leaders, can accommodate a degree of doubt without losing their
fundamental trust.

Now the issue is his investment in the Whitewater Development Corporation in
Arkansas more than a decade ago. As with earlier problems, Mr. Clinton seems
inclined to talk his way out of this situation with carefully drawn answers. As
with earlier problems, this technique only raises more questions.

Ever since President Lyndon B. Johnson overpromised about ending the Vietnam War
-- perhaps since George Washington -- Presidents have struggled to overcome the
"credibility gap" between what they say and what they do. But while Mr. Clinton
has perhaps been more forthcoming about his personal life than any of his
predecessors, the complaint persists that he isn't candid enough. As Mr. Clinton
tries to convince East Europeans that they do not need full membership in NATO
and as he prepares to sell his ambitious health care and welfare proposals to an
independent-minded Congress, the last thing he needs are renewed doubts about
his intentions.

It is not all Mr. Clinton's fault. As the press has become more adversarial,
more frankness is expected of Presidents and national candidates. Part of Mr.
Clinton's appeal is his personal connection with people. Some voters have said
that his acknowledgment of past marital troubles was a plus: He seemed more
human.

But in his unbridled desire to please, Mr. Clinton often comes off as two-faced
and too inclined to back off his principles. So while Mr. Clinton seemed the
forceful leader on free trade, on standing up for President Boris N. Yeltsin of
Russia and in pushing his budget through Congress, he sounded evasive many other
times, from explaining his draft record to his marijuana smoking to his
reversals on policy, like the promised middle class tax cut and his commitment
to Haiti and Bosnia.

Fred Greenstein, a Presidential scholar at Princeton University, said that even
if there is not a "smoking gun" in the Whitewater case, the most favorable
scenario can hardly be a comfort to Mr. Clinton. He said the public will ask:
"Why does the President shoot himself in the feet? Why is this such an odd,
inept Presidency?"

'Elmer Gantry'

Although there may be evidence of poor judgment on the part of Mr. Clinton,
there is no evidence that he has ever broken the law. But that does not slow the
Republicans, who eagerly pounce on Whitewater as the latest of many Presidential
obfuscations. "I don't have any idea what the facts are," said Haley Barbour,
chairman of the Republican Party. Yet Mr. Barbour did not hesitate to scold Mr.
Clinton on the subject. "One of the big problems of this Administration is that
they say one thing and do something else," he said. "That's why I call this the
Elmer Gantry President: He will mount the bully pulpit and say whatever he
thinks people want to hear."

Mr. Clinton has more to fear than Republicans who hide behind Whitewater as
another excuse not to cooperate on health care, for his credibility problems
have spread to his own party. It was Senate Democrats who forced the President
to request a special counsel in the case last week. Senator Bob Kerrey of
Nebraska, one of the Democrats who called for a counsel, said the more open the
President is, the better off he will be. "As long as it's put out there in an
honest, straightforward way," he said, "people are going to say, 'So what?' "

Whitewater, with its intricate issues of banking regulation, tax writeoffs and
real estate partnerships, has not so far registered dramatically with the
American public, perhaps because it is too complicated. A Gallup poll taken at
the end of the first week in January found that Mr. Clinton's favorable rating
is 62 percent, nearly as high as the 66 percent when he first took office.

But it can take time for political damage to set in. As Watergate unfolded,
President Richard M. Nixon won a landslide. There are signs of trouble waiting
for Mr. Clinton: in another finding in the Gallup poll, the President dropped to
49 percent from 54 percent on the question of being "honest and trusthworthy."

Mr. Kerrey warned that no politician, let alone the President, should
underestimate public mistrust of elected officials. "Every politician today in
America has credibility problems," he said. "You raise your right hand. Take
your oath. The minute you're sworn in, the presumption is, 'You're a crook.' "


LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 16, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 813 words



International 3-15

CHINA PLEDGES RIGHTS EFFORT
China's President told an American Congressional delegation that he will make an
effort in the coming months to satisfy President Clinton's concerns about human
rights. 1

CLINTON MOVES TO NEXT ISSUE
President Clinton shifted his focus from Russia to the Middle East as he flew to
Geneva. He stopped in Belarus, where he became embroiled in a local dispute. 1


Hopes are high for President Clinton's talks with Syria's leader. 10

TOUGH MESSAGE FOR RUSSIA
News analysis: President Clinton's message was that American aid cannot make a
difference unless Russia has an effective plan to curb inflation and institute a
free market. 1

MIXED REACTION TO TALKS
As President Clinton left Russia, those who expected major results and big
announcements were disappointed but those who expected little said they liked
him. 10

EMIGRES SHAPE CROATIA POLICY
A group of wealthy emigres have helped shape Croatian policy in the
post-Communist period, and that includes the aggressive stance with regard to
Bosnian territory. 14

An air base in Italy is standing by, ready for Bosnia air strikes. 14

JAPAN TRADE PACT BOGGED DOWN
News analysis: Despite optimism about a new approach when the United States and
Japan reached a trade agreement in July, it has become bogged down in
discussions about the details. 3

Veterans will be reassured over plans on the Vietnam embargo. 8

A grave that may hold 20 bodies has been found in southern Mexico. 7

Haiti's exiled leader criticized diplomatic pressure on him. 6

Zaire sought American aid for elections to end political turmoil. 11

The service systems Palestinians will inherit are a shambles. 12

Catholics and Protestants seek an end to job bias in Ulster. 13

A new law is helping Canadian strikers. 15

National 16-22

MAKING THE CASE FOR CHASTITY
In programs that emphasize abstinence rather than contraception, a growing
number of teen-agers around the country are learning the rewards of postponing
sex. 1

A HOLIDAY, BUT NOT FOR ALL
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday is still struggling for acceptance: widely
observed by governments, mostly ignored by businesses and in danger of being
viewed as a black holiday rather than a national one. 1

A RUSH TO BUY GUNS
Business at gun stores around the country is brisk as people react to the
possibility of tougher gun controls and a growing American fascination with
guns. 16

NEW GOVERNOR FOR VIRGINIA
George Felix Allen, a conservative Republican with a folksy image, promised to
reduce taxes and spending as he was inaugurated Virginia's 67th Governor. 16

A DISPUTE OVER THE EVERGLADES
The Administration and Florida are increasing pressure on the state's sugar
growers to clean up farm water runoff and restore the Everglades. 18

WHITE HOUSE SPIN FIASCO
Even by its own accounting, the White House's handling of questions about
President Clinton's Arkansas real estate dealings has been a near fiasco. 20

ASPIN MAY SERVE ON COMMISSION
Defense Secretary Les Aspin said that after he departs he would like to serve on
a Pentagon commission studying ways to reduce duplicated missions in the armed
forces. 20

NEW GAMMA-RAY PUZZLES
A new analysis of mysterious gamma-ray explosions in space lends fresh evidence
to a time effect predicted by Einstein's theory of relativity. 21

AMERICA VIA TOWN MEETING
The Clinton Administration plans to finance several nationally televised New
England-style "town meetings" to explore the bonds that hold American society
together. 22

Metro 23-30

NEW AGENDA IN NEW JERSEY
For Christine Todd Whitman, the hard part is about to begin. To cut taxes, as
she promised, she will have to pour money out of a budget bag that already has a
huge hole in the bottom. 1

MOSQUE 'MISUNDERSTANDINGS'
A day after his Police Commissioner met with Muslim officials to discuss a brawl
with police officers at a Harlem mosque, Mayor Giuliani sought yesterday to put
the incident behind him, saying that he believed "misunderstandings" had been
resolved. 23

CRACKDOWN ON SUBWAY BEGGING
Transit police officers have said a crackdown on subway panhandling might not be
so futile as many people assume. The officers estimate that only about 50
panhandlers work the trains regularly. 23

INTO THE WILD BLUE YONDER
Aviation High School in Long Island City, Queens, expects that more than 60
percent of its graduates will go to college, often on scholarships and with
advanced standing. These successes, unusual at any high school, are particularly
impressive for a vocational school serving an industry afflicted by a severe
slump. 23

Neediest Cases 30

Obituaries 32

Harry Nilsson, singer and a composer.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 16, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Arctic Chill Spreads Misery Throughout the Northeast

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 26;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1293 words


An Arctic air mass plunged the New York region and much of the East into a
bone-warping deep freeze yesterday. It kept millions indoors, caused one death
in New York City, inflicted new miseries on the homeless and slowed travel,
commerce and weekend life to a crawl.

Descending from Hudson Bay, the brutal cold covered a huge swath of North
America -- all of Eastern Canada and half the United States in a vast triangle
that reached from the Dakotas to Maine and south to Georgia. It brought
well-below-zero temperatures to the Midwest, where four deaths were blamed on
the weather, left roads icy in many states and threatened citrus crops in
Florida.

In the New York metropolitan area, a useless sun swam in a nearly cloudless sky,
but the crystalline brilliance of the day belied the cold and its perils. Midday
temperatures rose only into the teens -- 14 in New York City, 13 in White
Plains, 12 in Danbury, Conn., with winds gusting to 25 miles an hour -- and
those were the day's mildest. A forecast by the National Weather Service
predicted the snow flurries falling overnight in New York City would likely end
before dawn, when the temperature could hit zero. More snow or freezing rain is
expected tomorrow.

This has been the town's coldest weather in nine years and among the coldest in
50 years, said the weather service and other meteorologists. A zero reading
could eclipse the 1 degree record for Jan. 16, set in 1893.

The worst of the blast struck in Minnesota and Wisconsin, where temperatures of
20 below zero and 20-mile-an-hour winds made it feel like 50 below zero. Other
reported lows included 14 below zero in Chicago and Des Moines, 6 below in
Indianapolis and 3 degrees at Albany and Buffalo.

Meteorologists at Pennsylvania State University said the huge cold air mass was
moving slowly eastward out to sea, but today was expected to be more of the same
in the New York area: bitter cold, with high temperatures in the low- to
mid-teens and with diminishing winds.

While the cold was expected to ease into the 20's tomorrow, forecasters at Penn
State predicted a moderate snowfall over the region for tomorrow, and another
strong Arctic cold front, with temperatures dipping into the teens or single
digits, moving into the New York area on Tuesday.

One death was attributed to the cold in the metropolitan area yesterday. The
police said Albert Muzikant, 73, died in a fire, caused by a portable electric
space heater, that gutted his home at 195 Van Pelt Avenue in Port Richmond,
S.I., shortly after 9 A.M. His mother, Mary Muzikant, 98, and sister, Minnie
Whiteside, 75, were relocated by the authorities.

The harsh weekend cold, which followed last weekend's snow-and-ice storm and
another blast at midweek, was yet another torment for the homeless and heatless
thousands. Hundreds told of heatless apartments in calls to the city's heat
complaint bureau, and the Coalition for the Homeless said there was no heat on
Friday night at the Atlantic Avenue shelter in Brooklyn, and inadequate heat at
another shelter in Fort Washington, in upper Manhattan.

"Fort Washington is an ice park," said Mike Harris, who monitors shelters for
the coalition. "There's no back door and the wind is whipping through."

At another city shelter at Bellevue Hospital Center in Manhattan, an overflow of
homeless people forced some to sleep on the floor or in chairs. "I slept on the
floor -- no blanket, nothing, freezing myself off," said Glenn Wilson, 31, who
has been homeless for six months.

Shelters Are Filled

The city's shelters for the homeless were filled to near capacity with about
6,300 people, and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said the city had declared a cold
emergency, stepped up outreach efforts to get homeless people off the streets
and moved extra beds into the shelters to accommodate the anticipated overflow.

"It's being managed as effectively as it can be under the conditions," the Mayor
said of the homeless situation. "They anticipate at some point over the weekend
they are going to get at or slightly over capacity and they're making
arrangements now to expand the system."

Inevitably, there were some, like Tom Whalen, a 42-year-old Vietnam veteran with
AIDS and no home, who chose to spend the frozen day outdoors, hoping for
handouts from the few passers-by. "This vent brings out some heat," said Mr.
Whalen, huddling over a grate in a blanket outside an exclusive private club on
Fifth Avenue near 54th Street. "If the police leave me alone, I'll stay here."

A few blocks up the avenue, Rob Vinci, a 22-year-old guard for a merchants'
association, seemed to be taking the cold in stride. "If you're out here every
day, you get used to it," he said. "The coldest part of my body is my face. It
gets like a numbing ache."

Icy Roads and Busy Malls

Despite the day's woes, there was a blustery winter beauty on the landscape:
frozen ponds where birds skidded and squawked, woods with branches looped and
netted, eaves and fences with beards of ice, puffs of chimney smoke drifting
starkly in a blue sky, people muffled to the eyes with scarves trailing in the
wind, and here and there an empty sidewalk cafe hinting of spring.

Operations at Kennedy, La Guardia and Newark Airports were normal, and no
service disruptions were reported on Metro North, the Long Island Rail Road or
New Jersey Transit. But ice on roads across the region slowed traffic and was
blamed for numerous minor accidents.

The cold also kept most people remained indoors, though weekend shoppers
ventured out and some suburban malls did a brisk business. "We're really happy
about the weather," said Patrick Bockino, manager of a men's clothing store at
the White Plains Galleria Mall. "Outerwear -- coats, gloves, you name it -- sell
much better. I smile when I see weather reports."

Layers and More Layers

Clothes, clothes and more clothes was the order of the day. In Mount Vernon,
N.Y., where she caught a train into Manhattan, Alice Masters was bundled up in
long johns, a turtleneck sweater, a sweatshirt, sweatpants, a windbreaker, a
fake fur jacket, two scarves, a beret, ear muffs, gloves and boots.

In Buffalo, where the Bills defeated the Los Angeles Raiders in a National
Football League playoff game, afternoon temperatures hovered between 1 and 5
degrees and the wind chill was calculated at 25 below to 40 below, the weather
service said.

Temperatures hit zero as far south as Kentucky, and Asheville, N.C., bottomed
out at a record 7 degrees. But the lowest readings were reported at Grand Forks
and Fargo, N.D., with 33 below zero and International Falls, Minn, with 34
below.



Help IN Battling thed Freeze



UTILITY EMERGENCIES

NEW YORK CITY - Con Edison in the Bronx, (718) 904-4900; in Brooklyn, (718)
802-6100; Manhattan, (212) 360-2600; Queens, (718) 830-7400; Staten Island,
(718) 390-6400. Brooklyn Union Gas, (718) 643-4050.

LONG ISLAND - Long Island Lighting Company, (516) 755-6000 for heat failures;
(516) 755-6500 for gas smells or leaks.

WESTCHESTER - Con Edison, (914) 925-6900.

NEW JERSEY - Public Service Electric and Gas, local numbers listed on the top of
customers' bill or with directory information.

CONNECTICUT United Illuminations, (800) 722-5584; New England Utilities, (800)
286-2000.



SHELTER
Information about emergency shelter is available in New York City at (212)
960-4800, or from local branches of the Red Cross throughout the region


FROZEN PIPES
Turning faucets to a constant slow trickle will reduce the possibility of the
water's freezing. Pipes that are frozen but have not burst can be defrosted with
a hair dryer if they are exposed, or with a space heater if they are behind
walls.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A woman taking the opportunity to rest in a warm room yesterday
at the Volunteers of America drop-in center at the World Trade Center. (Ed Quinn
for The New York Times); Wind-chill factors of 30 to 50 below zero did not make
it easy for Mohammad Masri to sell clothing from a fence on West 207th Street
and Ninth Avenue in Manhattan. And many buyers were probably staying home.
(Chris Maynard for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 16, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Jan. 9-15: Casualty at the Pentagon;
An Unconventional Choice Retreats Under Heavy Fire

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 2; Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 214 words


Conservatives branded him a threat to national security and to the lives of
United States soldiers. Liberals defended his integrity and patriotism and said
he was a victim of cold war ideological battles.

But no one disputed that Morton H. Halperin was an unconventional choice for an
unconventional job, a new Pentagon position for peacekeeping. But when Mr.
Halperin, a former Pentagon official and director of the Washington office of
the American Civil Liberties Union, withdrew his name last week for the job, he
fell victim not only to resistance from conservative senators but to changes in
President Clinton's foreign-policy team.

Mr. Halperin's nomination had ignited passionate debate rare for a middle-level
position. His critics opposed Mr. Halperin for reversing his initial support of
the Vietnam War, for criticizing many American spying operations abroad and for
his ideas about using American troops in international peacekeeping roles.

Administration officials believed they could win a fight in the Senate, but Mr.
Halperin's days were numbered when his patron and biggest supporter, Defense
Secretary Les Aspin, resigned. Mr. Halperin is now looking for another
government job -- one that does not require Senate confirmation.   ERIC SCHMITT

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Halperin.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 16, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Administration Hoping to Lift Vietnam Embargo

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 15


The Clinton Administration has reached a consensus about lifting the trade
embargo on Vietnam, but has taken steps to reduce the political backlash
expected from veterans groups.

These steps include meeting with veterans groups, starting talks with Hanoi
about its human rights performance and sending an admiral to assess progress in
learning about Americans missing in Vietnam.

These efforts come as the American Legion and groups representing Americans
missing in action have begun an intensive campaign to press the Administration
to maintain the embargo. They argue that Vietnam is still hiding information
about the fate of 2,239 Americans missing in Indochina and that lifting the
embargo would remove the pressure for Hanoi to cooperate.

Some Administration officials say the move could be announced by the end of the
month, although one official said that despite the consensus Mr. Clinton could
still bow to political pressures and decide to let the embargo stand. "The
President will make his decision based on what he thinks is best on the
question" of missing Americans, a senior Administration official said. "If he
feels that acknowledging past cooperation will help get future cooperation,
he'll take another step forward."

The embargo presents Mr. Clinton with a classic clash between domestic political
pressures and foreign policy considerations: Vietnam would accuse him of
breaking his promise to lift the embargo if it cooperated in helping Washington
learn the fates of the missing Americans.

Veterans groups began their lobbying campaign after learning that Administration
officials, including those from the Pentagon, had agreed at an interagency
meeting in December to lift the embargo. Before taking that step, however, the
Administration decided to take political soundings around the country, and the
veterans groups are trying to make those soundings as negative as possible.

To help overcome opposition to lifting the embargo, the Administration has sent
Adm. Charles R. Larson, commander of American forces in the Pacific, to Vietnam
with the hope that he will give the Pentagon's seal of approval to Hanoi's help
in determining the fates of missing Americans. Last July President Clinton
pledged not to lift the embargo until Hanoi cooperated in providing "the fullest
possible accounting" about those missing.

In another move to defuse anticipated criticisms, the Administration agreed last
week to begin a dialogue with Vietnamese officials to press them on the human
rights issue. Echoing the views of many veterans groups, Senator Bob Kerrey, a
Nebraska Democrat who was wounded in Vietnam, said the embargo should not be
lifted until the United States sent a delegation to Vietnam to examine its human
rights performance.

"We've only recently begun to talk about the thing we fought the war for -- the
freedom of the Vietnamese people," Mr. Kerrey said in an interview.

The Administration argues that lifting the embargo would be the best way to get
the most information about missing Americans from the Vietnamese. This would
increase the American business presence in Vietnam, the argument goes, and the
greater the number of Americans there, the more Americans could learn.

But in a letter to the President, Bruce Thiesen, national commander of the
3.1-million-member American Legion, wrote, "To lift the embargo now would
eliminate any remaining leverage we have to attempt to encourage real
cooperation."

The veterans groups and the Administration clash sharply over how well Vietnam
is cooperating in accounting for the missing Americans. On a visit to Vietnam
last month, Assistant Secretary of State Winston Lord spoke of "tangible
results" in determining the fate of missing servicemen. Administration officials
said that Hanoi had turned over 67 sets of remains last year -- the third
highest number since the war ended two decades ago -- and a large number of
documents. But veterans groups maintain that there are still a lot of remains
and documents to be turned over.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 16, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Bibliophile's Baedeker

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 13; Page 1; Column 1; The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2956 words


THERE'S a scene in Bernard Malamud's novel "The Assistant" when the owner of the
corner grocery first visits the larger, more modern competitor down the street,
all gleaming shelves and modern technology, and is filled with foreboding.

A somewhat similar feeling has settled over some of the people who still make
"The Assistant" available to the public, the bookstore owners who have watched
with a certain apprehension as the new Barnes & Noble superstore at 82d Street
and Broadway in Manhattan has turned into the biggest thing in the New York
bookselling business since Scribner's on Fifth Avenue, threatened with
extinction, was transformed into Brentano's.

What is the state of New York's bookstore world in the era of the superstore?
After a week or so of reconnaissance, it gives me a certain perverse pleasure to
offer a critical disclosure followed by a pleasant discovery.

The disclosure: Barnes & Noble may be big. It may have 250,000 titles and 40,000
square feet of space. But it does not begin to satisfy the voluminous and
specialized needs of New York's book buyers. Barnes & Noble is like the Macy's
of bookstores, a perfectly magnificent store, but one whose centralized
purchasing techniques and mid-range commercial tastes could, in a less
intellectually vibrant town, standardize the choices available to the collective
mind.

Which brings me to my pleasant discovery: Some of the greats, like the Eighth
Street Bookstore, may be long gone, but New York is still a fine bookstore town,
in the same league as such other bookstore metropolises as London or Paris.

According to Fern Jaffe, president of the New York-New Jersey Booksellers
Association, the total number of booksellers in the city has remained steady in
recent years. What's more, only one well-established store, Eeyore's, the
children's place on upper Broadway, has closed since the new Barnes & Noble got
going.

"All the other stores that were there before are still there," said Ms. Jaffe,
"Coliseum, Shakespeare, Bookberries, Books & Co., the Corner Bookstore,
Endicott's, etc."

The best way to truly appreciate New York's bibliophilic richness, though, is to
embark on a bit of literary tourism. The boroughs outside Manhattan have some
good general-interest bookstores: Ms. Jaffe's Paperbacks Plus on Riverdale
Avenue in the Bronx, the Community Bookstore on Seventh Avenue in Park Slope,
the Book Nook and the Clove Lake Bookstore on Staten Island. And that, of
course, adds to the great emporia of used books, like the Strand on lower
Broadway, Gotham Book Mart on West 46th Street and Gryphon Books, diagonally
across the street from Shakespeare & Company Booksellers on upper Broadway.

But nowhere is that wealth of scope and depth more apparent than in the
specialty bookstores concentrated around Manhattan. There is a commercial
critical mass for almost every bibliophilic interest, so that touring these
bookstores is like walking through a vast encyclopedia of human thought.

Can it last? Who knows? What follows, then, is a somewhat random sampling of
specialty stores for the here and now. No claim is made that they are the only
such stores, or even the best ones. But the list should give a sense of the way
in which New York, despite it all, still manages to cater to the noble human
activity that is the cultivation of intellect.


THE BLACK EXPERIENCE



THE NORTHEAST corner of Lenox Avenue and 131st Street in Harlem is home to a
landmark, the Liberation Bookstore, founded 26 years ago as one of the first
shopsspecializing in the African-American experience. It is a crowded place,
crammed with books on shelves, piled atop cardboard boxes, the jumble of
inventory itself a reflection of the explosion of works of literature, history,
politics and social analysis produced by and about Africa and the African
diaspora.

Liberation's owner, Una G. Mulzac, has divided her shelves into myriad highly
specialized categories -- among them, ancient African history, precolonial
Africa, current African history, African art, African religions,
African-American history and culture, African-American art and theater, and the
origins of African-American nationalism.

But Liberation Bookstore is also the place to go for mainstream black writing,
whether by Terry McMillan, Maya Angelou or Itabari Njeri. There are shelves of
works by and about James Baldwin, Langston Hughes and Richard Wright, as well as
numerous scholarly offerings, including works by W. E. B. DuBois, Cheikh Anta
Diop, E. A. Wallis, Basil Davidson and Frank Snowden Jr. There are children's
books, health guides, cookbooks, cards. It's a treasure.

Another bookstore with similar interests is Black Books Plus on Amsterdam Avenue
and 94th Street, which seems to have somewhat larger selections of
African-American fiction and children's books. Among the offerings that caught
my eye were books on the psychological development of black children, books on
blacks in the American West and the "Book of African Names," compiled by Molefe
Kete Asante of Temple University.

THE SEARCH FOR GOD



NEW YORK has several Jewish bookstores, among them, the 8-year-old Judaica
Emporium on upper Broadway, just down the street from the Jewish Theological
Seminary. This is the place to go for something truly weighty -- say a 30-volume
set of the Talmud (one, published by the Traditional Press in English
translation, is $450; another is the Steinsaltz translation, at $45 for each of
the seven volumes that have been published so far), a copy of the Zohar, the
seminal work of Jewish mysticism, or the Shulhan Arukh, the Code of Jewish Law.

But the owner, Albert Bitton, who had an earlier career as an exporter of
women's wear, also has a good selection of children's books, from "Hank
Greenberg: Hall of Fame Slugger" to "Once Upon a Hasid." There are music tapes,
computer programs for Talmud study and a shelf of used and rare books.

West Side Judaica, on Broadway between 88th and 89th Streets, has a large
selection of books, along with everything else involving Jewish practice, from
menorahs to tefillin. Farther downtown is J. Levine Company, a kind of Judaica
department store on two floors on West 30th Street. The second floor is the book
department, with sections on liturgy, philosophy, women, Israel, history, the
Holocaust, Yiddish literature and others.

There are, of course, many other religious bookstores. Among the sources of
books on Christianity is Paraclete Book Center on East 74th Street, specializing
in theology, particularly Catholic theology. And there is Christian Publications
Inc. on 43d Street near Eighth Avenue, with a huge collection of works inspired
by evangelical Christianity.

GAY AND LESBIAN STUDIES



A DIFFERENT LIGHT, at 548 Hudson Street, just uptown from Charles Street, is New
York's main gay and lesbian bookstore. It is a long, narrow, very busy place
(the owner, Norman Laurila, says he hopes to move to larger quarters) with gay
and lesbian scholarship, erotica, fiction, posters, videotapes, biography,
science fiction and magazines and newsletters.

Judith's Room, a couple of long blocks west at 681 Washington Street, is a
feminist bookstore, started by Carol Levin and Sally Owen.

"We provide books whose primary purpose is to cater to women's needs and
interests -- history, art, photography, philosophy, literature -- where women
are not an afterthought but are the prime focus of the books," Ms. Levin said.
Specifically, she said, Judith's Room specializes in books published by small
independent publishers, like Naiad Press, Firebrand Books and Cleis.

There are, of course, the more mainstream feminist writers -- Simone de
Beauvoir, Andrea Dworkin, Catherine MacKinnon, Susan Faludi, Camille Paglia and
others -- along with sections or shelves devoted to Judaica, biography, women of
color, international, poetry, lesbian politics, lesbian fiction, science fiction
and fiction.


AFFAIRS OF WAR



SKY BOOKS is one flight up on East 50th Street, a railroad flat of a room
devoted to the literature of war and aviation. Near the entrance are display
racks of several series on military affairs, like the Osprey Series, which I
could happily have read all afternoon if only there had been a comfortable place
to sit. There was the volume called "Kaiserschlacht: The Final German Offensive,
1918," and another on the Egyptian Mamelukes of the 13th century. There are
volumes on the Aztec, Mixtec and Zapotec armies, on the Bengal cavalry
regiments, on German combat equipment in World War II.

My appetite whetted for combat, I made my way to the Military Bookman, whose
enormous collection on military history is lodged on the ground floor of a
handsome brownstone building on East 93d Street. The store is the business and
extramarital love affair of Harris Colt, a former stockbroker, and his wife,
Margaretta Colt, who used to be a picture researcher at Time-Life.

"We thought we'd do something that wasn't being done on any scale," Mr. Colt
said, moving on to show me some special features of his collection, like a 1727
edition of Humphrey Bland's "Military Discipline," which, Mr. Colt said, was the
standard manual on this subject in the 18th century and was used by both sides
in the French and Indian and Revolutionary Wars. (A copy that was actually used
in either of those wars would be far more valuable than the example of the 1727
edition, at $750, that I had in my hand.)

The Military Bookman is arranged more or less in chronological order, beginning
with the Greeks and Romans, moving on toward medieval and Renaissance Europe,
going into the American Revolutionary and Civil Wars, the Napoleonic campaigns,
the Victorian-era wars, the Russo-Japanese War, the two World Wars, Korea and
Vietnam.

A special feature of the store is its computerized 56,000-title database, called
Oliver.  Mr. Colt spends a lot of his time, it seems, fielding calls from
potential customers, who might want to know what he has on the the Sudanese
campaigns of Charles Gordon, or what editions exist of Lord Napier's "The
Peninsula War." Oliver has the answers.


BOOKS ON ART, BOOKS AS ART



HACKER ART BOOKS onWest 57th Street is impressive both for the vastness of its
collection of large-format volumes filled with color reproductions and for the
completeness of its section on criticism and theory, from Bakhtin to Derrida,
with a strong sprinkling of feminist criticism.

Diagonally across the street is what might be the most classically elegant
bookstore in New York, where the art is the books themselves. This is the new
quarters of Bartfields, where the rich cherrywood cases are filled with the kind
of handstitched, gold-embossed, leatherbound volumes of literature and history
that they don't make any more.


BATMAN AND KASPAROV



AT THE esthetic extreme from Bartfields is Forbidden Planet, a two-floor,
high-ceilinged place at Broadway and 11th Street, which is devoted less, it
seems, to the subject matter of comics and science fiction than to a fascination
with the grotesque and fantastic. Here you have, along with a vast offering of
new and "vintage" comics, games and models, zombie calendars, horror toys, even
"adult," which is to say, pornographic, comics. If you are interested in both
Batman and Kasparov, you can get them both in a single trip. In a tiny
third-floor room just down the street is Chess Books, where Fred Wilson sells
what every beginner or grand master might need on strategy and end games or
openings and historic matches.


FOR AND ABOUT CHILDREN



I AM RUNNING out of space and I have still many bookstores to go. Let me mention
Books of Wonder, across from Barney's at Seventh Avenue and 18th Street, which
has a vast collection of new and classic books for children of every age,
including a large shelf of used books, with a 1940 copy of "The Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn" that was difficult to resist.

Books of Wonder brings to mind a very special bookstore in Morningside Heights.
This is the Bank Street College Bookstore, on Broadway at 112th Street, which
has a solid collection of books for children on the first floor and a remarkable
collection about them, mostly for teachers, on the floor above.  I noted, in
particular, the fad for diversity.  There were "The Kids Multicultural Art
Book," "Arts and Crafts from Around the World" and "The Anti-Bias Curriculum:
Tools for Empowering Young Children."


VEIL OF MYSTERY



MURDER INK at 92d Street and Broadway is a handsome shop about the size of a
carriage on the Orient Express catering to the armchair homicide and mystery
crowd. This includes children's mystery series like the Hardy Boys and Nancy
Drew of memory, but adult fare also, from "The Complete Sherlock Holmes" through
true crime and the latest best sellers by the likes of Tom Clancy, Carl Hiassen
and Dick Francis. There are magazines: New Mystery, The Armchair Detective,
Mystery Scene. There are Arthur Conan Doyle and Edgar Allan Poe T-shirts, as
well as tapes of BBC broadcasts with Basil Rathbone playing Sherlock.


STAGE AND SCREEN



AND FINALLY, a standing ovation for Applause Theater and Cinema Books on West
71st Street near Broadway, not only because of its enormous collection, relied
upon by all those many waiters and waitresses who spend their spare time
auditioning for roles, but also because of the daily performance of its manager,
David Cleaver, who knows everything. ("I got bored looking it up," he told me.)

Applause is a long, narrow place, slightly underground, where on one side there
are paperbound scripts of just about every play ever written and on the other a
cornucopia of books on the theater and film, including histories, studies of
voice and diction, of acting and directing, biographies, screenplays, writing
guides, encyclopedias and other reference works, all of this presided over by
the energetic and funny Mr. Cleaver.

"Who wrote 'Gypsy'?" a customer asked him the other day.

"Arthur Lawrence wrote the book," Mr. Cleaver replied instantaneously. "Stephen
Sondheim wrote the lyrics and the music was by Jule Styne."

An actress walked in: "I'm looking for 'Piece of My Heart,' " she says.

"You and everybody else," Mr. Cleaver said as he snatched it down from the shelf
like a hawk snaring a mouse for dinner.

"Barnes & Noble," he said by way of general reflection, "will never catch up
with this."

The Best Browsing: Tips From Five Writers

NAME Meg Wolitzer, novelist, "This Is Your Life," "Sleepwalking" and "Friends
for Life" (to be published in March).
FAVORITE BOOKSTORE Three Lives & Company, 154 West 10th Street, at Waverly
Place.
WHY I no longer live anywhere near it, but Three Lives used to be right around
the corner from my apartment, and they loved books and it was very apparent. I
got to for the first time witness someone buying my book, which was really a
thrill, at Three Lives. They have great piped-in music, and a real love of
fiction is always evident in the store. At Barnes & Noble, they had tea, all
kinds of different tea, but I wasn't seduced.
 *

NAME Luc Sante, author, "Low Life" and "Evidence"
FAVORITE BOOKSTORES The Strand, 828 Broadway at 12th Street; Skyline Books and
Records, 13 West 18th Street, and St. Marks Bookshop, 31 Third Avenue at Ninth
Street.
WHY I used to work at the Strand, and they've done really well by me lately. The
Strand is a great place because it's so vast that even though it's been picked
over by seven million people that same day, there's always the possibility that
you'll come across something that someone overlooked. My other favorite
bookstore used bookstore is Skyline. It's just out of the way enough to
encourage a certain kind of serendipity. It's reminiscent of the old Fourth
Avenue bookstores back when that was the district for books.

I like St. Marks for a new bookstore. They always have the latest diverse
publications from small presses and eccentric presses and all that stuff.
 *
NAME Nelson George, author, "Urban Romance" and "Elevating the Game: The History
and Esthetics of Black Men in Basketball."
FAVORITE BOOKSTORE Coliseum Books, 1771 Broadway at 57th Street.
WHY Because it's really big. It's one of the bigger stores in town, and it seems
to have books first before the chains do. If there's a book coming out that I
really want, I always go there first to get it. Also, it's the kind of place you
can get lost in. It doesn't have chairs or anything, but it's very intimate. I
always see people in there I know, as well.
 *
NAME Victor S. Navasky, editor, The Nation, and author of "Naming Names."
FAVORITE BOOKSTORE Murder Ink, 2486 Broadway, between 92d and 93d Streets.
WHY I really try to go up to the Book Barn (a store that deals in used books,
and some new ones, in Hillsdale, N.Y., in Columbia County). But Murder Ink takes
care of my scandalous infatuation with murder and mysteries. You're not supposed
to be drawn to those, but they have them and they put out their little circular
and they have authors that come and read so you can see that they are real. They
do their job well.
 *
NAME Anne Roiphe, novelist, "If You Knew Me" and "The Pursuit of Happiness."
FAVORITE BOOKSTORES Shakespeare & Company Booksellers, 2259 Broadway at 81st
Street, and Barnes & Noble, 2289 Broadway at 82d Street.
WHY We on the Upper West Side are caught in this bookstore war, and as a writer
I happily patronize both. I like Shakespeare & Company because it supplies
unusual and usual books, and because it has employed my children and relatives.
I like Barnes & Noble because it has a great cafe.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Liberation Bookstore at 421 Lenox Avenue was one of the
first shops to specialize in African-American literature and history.; Forbidden
Planet on Broadway at East 11th Street offers two high-ceilinged floors of the
grotesque and the fantastic.; Jim Ferry browsed by a Franklin Mint chess at
Chess Books at 80 East 11th Street, which offers chess strategies and histories
(Ozier Huhammad and Marilynn K. Yee/The New York Times) (pg. 12)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 17, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Man at The Side of (Not Behind) Whitman

BYLINE: By KIMBERLY J. McLARIN,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1607 words

DATELINE: TRENTON, Jan. 14


John R. Whitman is not shy. It turns out his Greta Garbo performance during his
wife's gubernatorial campaign was part of a political strategy and not at all
reflective of a retiring personality.

Sitting with his wife in her transition office, sipping Diet Pepsi and laughing
freely at his own jokes, Mr. Whitman talked without prodding about Christine
Todd Whitman, her campaign, the next four years and his much-discussed role in
it all. In those long, weary months on the trail, Mr. Whitman, 49 years old,
steadfastly avoided the spotlight, professing his desire not to become a public
figure. He did so, he says, because he wanted to avoid becoming an issue. But
now the campaign is over.

"I have to now sort of admit that I exist," he said.

"I've been trying to deny it for 20 years," joked his wife.

Mr. Whitman, who is a financial consultant, is his wife's closest adviser and
the core of a close-knit family that surrounds the Governor-elect. There are her
children, Kate, 16 years old, and Taylor, 14, both attending boarding school in
Massachusetts. There is her brother, Webster B. (Danny) Todd, a Montana rancher
and former New Jersey Assemblyman who ran the day-to-day operations of the
Whitman campaign until he was moved aside in favor of a political consultant,
Edward J. Rollins Jr. Mr. Todd was the visible family member, a rugged, colorful
character who wore ascots and cowboy boots, dished out homey quotes and snarled
at reporters.

Subject of Questions and Rumors

But it was the elusive Mr. Whitman who was the subject of the most questions,
and was the focus of rumors that he was the real engine behind his wife's
campaign.

"The reports of my influence were greatly exaggerated," Mr. Whitman said last
week during a 40-minute conversation as peppered with the plural "we" as with
the singular "I."

Christine Todd Whitman, who takes office Tuesday as the first female governor of
New Jersey, is the product of a politically prominent New Jersey family. Her
father, the late Webster B. Todd, was a builder whose projects included
Rockefeller Center and Radio City Music Hall as well as a powerful figure in the
state and national Republican parties. Her mother, the late Eleanor Schley Todd,
was head of the New Jersey Federation of Republican Women.

Mr. Whitman's family was also immersed in politics. His father was a circuit
court judge in New York. His grandfather, Charles S. Whitman Sr., was Governor
of New York from 1914 to 1916.

Mr. Whitman, a Vietnam veteran who was twice awarded the Bronze Star for valor
in combat, said he knew of his wife's ambitions when he married her. "Our
marriage vows could have said in sickness and in health and in politics, given
Christie's family tradition and mine," he said.

They appear to be a close couple. They finish each other's sentences. She frowns
slightly when he says something potentially embarrassing and firmly reminds him
that she can speak for herself whenever he starts to define her role in
promoting New Jersey.

Mr. Whitman has the unrestrained manner of the truly confident. His criticism of
the Florio administration, which he described as deadly to New Jersey's economy,
allows no softening for the defeated. He cracks jokes and laughs wholeheartedly
at them. One example: "I said to her if she divorces me, I get half of New
Jersey. She said, 'I'll gerrymander it.' "

During a photo shoot, Mr. Whitman playfully wraps his wife in a suggestive
embrace. She swats at his hands and tells him, laughingly, to stop.

Mr. Whitman formerly worked in the venture capital unit at Citicorp and was
chairman and chief executive officer of Prudential-Bache Interfunding, a group
that financed leveraged buyouts. In 1992 he started his own investment
consulting business, Broken Bridge Inc., in which he advises companies on how to
obtain financing. He declined to name any of his clients.

Investments Pay Off

The Whitmans are wealthy and got wealthier through Mr. Whitman's financial
dealings on Wall Street in the late 1980's and early 1990's, according to their
financial records. In 1990 the couple reported income of more than $4 million. A
large chunk of that came from the sale of stock.

In 1992, the Whitmans reported more than $3.5 million in income. Mr. Whitman
made nearly $268,000 from a profit-sharing program at Citicorp Capital Investors
Limited and $1.5 million from his own business. The couple also made $1.8
million from the sale of government bonds and stocks.

It was, in part, this knack for financial dealings that Mr. Whitman worried
would be somehow used against his wife by the Florio campaign.

"They could have brought up the fact that I've obviously done very well," he
said. "I've worked on Wall Street -- a whole bunch of things people can say were
unpopular. I could be an example of the excesses of the 80's."

Matters of Speculation

The Florio campaign strategy, as interpreted by Mr. Whitman, was to take the
focus off Mr. Florio and his $2.8 billion tax increase. The Whitmans said they
wanted to keep voters focused on Mr. Florio, and the choice offered by Mrs.
Whitman.

"Nobody was going to vote for me," Mr. Whitman said, making it clear that the
campaign wanted to insure that no one voted against him.

"We wanted to be sure it was clear that it was Jim Florio and Christie Whitman.
It wasn't Christie and her alter ego and Svengali, John."

But Mr. Whitman's stealth performance did not keep observers from both parties
from speculating about his influence over the campaign. Mrs. Whitman's
impressive, though unsuccessful, 1990 race against United States Senator Bill
Bradley was run almost exclusively by the Whitmans with help from Mr. Todd. Mr.
Whitman acted as the finance manager in that campaign.

Given Mr. Whitman's financial background, pundits speculated that Mrs. Whitman's
surprising proposal to slash the state income tax 30 percent over three years
held more of the husband's fingerprints than the wife's, especially since Mrs.
Whitman had earlier dismissed talk of a tax cut as a "cynical" election-year
ploy.

Taking No Role

Both Whitmans said sexism and egotism fed the rumors of his exaggerated role in
the campaign.

"A lot of that came from the inside people," Mrs. Whitman said, referring to
fellow Republicans. "I think it grated on some of them that a woman was saying,
'No, we're not going to do that.' They said it has to be the men behind her who
don't know what they're doing, because this is such a good idea of mine."

Mr. Whitman said he will have no role -- official or otherwise -- during Mrs.
Whitman's governorship. If Mrs. Whitman asks for his opinion on an issue, he
said, he will give it. Otherwise, he said, he will stay out of state affairs.

"I will carry on my business, which is an investment business and consulting
business, with a very careful eye to not doing business with anyone who has
something to do with state government," he said.

Mr. Whitman runs his business from Pontefract, the couple's 237-acre farm in
Somerset County. Mrs. Whitman has said she plans to use Drumthwacket, the
governor's mansion, during the week but said the family will remain at home for
the foreseeable future.

Sharing Opinions

Mr. Whitman knows his business is likely to come under close scrutiny as he
begins life in the biggest public fishbowl in New Jersey. During the campaign,
the couple was reluctant to release their tax returns, but relented under
pressure from the Florio campaign. Releasing tax returns is not required under
state law.

Mrs. Whitman said voters can be assured that she is running the show. While she
often asks her husband for his advice, she does not always take it, she said.
"We don't have an embargo about talking about things facing us," she said. "But
to say his opinion is always the one that wins -- that doesn't happen."

Sal Russo, a Washington political consultant who worked on Mrs. Whitman's
Republican primary campaign, said voters have yet to realize how thoughtful and
tough-minded Mrs. Whitman really is.

"She pretty much calls her own shots," he said. "John's not going to play a
Hillary Clinton."

Not a Consensus Builder

Mr. Whitman said that his role will develop over time and that he is eager to do
what he can to promote New Jersey and support its institutions.

During the campaign, the Whitmans made an effort to shield their children from
the daily slings and arrows of politics, even taking a week off during the
summer to go biking in Idaho, a decision that drew criticism from fellow
Republicans who felt Mrs. Whitman should have been concentrating on the
election. During the campaign, Kate Whitman recorded a radio commercial praising
her mother, but the two teen-agers were rarely seen on the campaign trail.

Mr. Whitman said having the children attend school in Massachusetts maintains a
semblance or normalcy for them. "They can behave like everybody else does," he
said.

Asked if he himself had ever considered seeking political office, he said no. "I
am not the kind of person who is electable," he said.

Why not?

"I really believe if you run something, you run it and you're responsible for
it," he said. "You decide what you're going to do and you do it. I don't need to
go and talk to 27 or 46 or whatever the Legislature numbers are to ask them to
come along."

Besides, he added, "I've never been really good at convincing other people to
come happily along."

Mrs. Whitman agreed that consensus-building was not her husband's strong suit.

"You have a lot of strong suits, but not that one," she said warmly.

"I like making money," he said, and laughed.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Our marriage vows could have said in sickness and in health
and in politics, given Christie's family tradition and mine," said John R.
Whitman, a financial consultant whose wife will be sworn in tomorrow as governor
of New Jersey. (Keith Meyers/The New York Times)(pg. B1); In preparation for
Christine Todd Whitman's inauguration as governor of New Jersey tomorrow, John
O'Neil, a custodian, cleaned her office in Trenton. Mrs. Whitman's desk, at
right, has been used by every New Jersey governor since Woodrow Wilson, who
served from 1911 to 1913. (Laura Pedrick for The New York Times)(pg. B4)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 17, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Lines Drawn On Albany Bill For Restricting Of Weapons

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1308 words

DATELINE: ITHACA, N.Y., Jan. 13


The calls were not nice, and as the white phone messages piled up like paper
snow, State Assemblyman Martin A. Luster began to taste the tricky politics of
getting tough on crime.

He supports strong restrictions on assault weapons. And as lawmakers around the
nation react to a public primal scream against violence, he plans to vote on
Monday against the weapons in a special legislative session on gun crimes called
by Gov. Mario M. Cuomo. Still, he is not crazy about phone messages that read,
"Fed up with your position." Or worse in this election year, "I will do
everything I can to keep him from getting re-elected."

"It was the intensity," said Mr. Luster, a Democrat, describing the 150 calls
from this largely liberal but also rural and gunwise community. "We have never
had as many calls in so short a period of time on one issue."

Drawing Battle Lines

While Mr. Luster and other legislators have been flooded with calls, some from
National Rifle Association members, this is only the start of the fight -- in
this case a fight over a session that is unlikely to produce any anti-crime laws
at all. On Monday, at Mr. Cuomo's behest, legislators will consider a range of
crime proposals. Each side accuses the other of posturing and no one is
predicting success.

But this opening round shows where the battle lines are likely to be drawn as
negotiations continue in the coming months. It also shows just how far apart the
two sides remain despite claims by Democrat and Republican alike that they want
to crack down on crime.

So far, it is clear that the rifle association and local groups of hunters and
target shooters will be active, and the pro-gun groups have already mobilized
members to phone legislators around the state. But they are not invincible, as
the passage of laws against assault weapons in New Jersey and Connecticut
proved. It is also clear that the Democratic Governor, the Republican-led State
Senate and the Democratic-led Assembly will play the issue for all it is worth
in a triple threat of maneuvering for command of the agenda. The Republicans,
for example, have paired an assault-weapon bill with action on the death
penalty, assuring the bill will sink under a veto from Mr. Cuomo.

But in this year of furor over crime in New York and nationally -- after the
anger over random acts like the shootings on the Long Island Rail Road or the
disappearance last year of Sara Anne Wood, a 12-year-old from Frankfort, N.Y. --
there is a blurring of traditional party roles. In the eyes of many in both
major parties, Mr. Cuomo has edged to the right with his get-tough talk. And
Republicans, normally opposed to gun control, have embraced an outright ban on
some assault weapons, a stance sure to upset some conservatives.

'A Political Year'

"It's a political year, it's an election year, and they are holding onto their
fannies," Robert Romanowski, 63, a gun proponent and former member of the Ithaca
City Council, said of his fellow Republicans in disgust. "They think this is an
issue that is going to defeat them."

On the table is a mix of anti-crime legislation from both parties, often similar
in intent but different in emphasis and scope.

On Monday, the Democrats in the Assembly will consider bills to restrict some 35
brands of so-called assault rifles to target shooters and collectors, to require
handgun safety courses, to make it a crime to store firearms negligently and to
increase penalties for the criminal sale of firearms and for the use of assault
rifles in crimes.

The Republicans will consider their own proposals, including a complete ban on
roughly 20 brands of assault rifles, increased penalties for crimes involving
guns or other violence, and the death penalty for various crimes, including
murder with an assault weapon.

Although experts disagree on what constitutes an assault weapon, the term covers
a range of military-style semiautomatic or fully automatic rifles capable of
quickly firing a large number of rounds. Many lawmakers consider the legislation
largely symbolic, given that handguns, not assault weapons, account for a vast
majority of slayings in New York State and around the country.

Time to 'Swallow Hard'

Few politicians in Albany expect much action on Monday, but the feeling there is
strong that the public wants something done and few are ruling out some
negotiated bill as the session wears on.

"If the Governor is serious and the Assembly is serious, I think it's time for
us to swallow hard," said Senator Nicholas A. Spano, a Westchester Republican.
"Once we get beyond the rhetoric I think we can craft a proposal that will not
infringe on legitimate gun holders and will send a very strong message to
criminals."

No one appears ready to give in yet. And at the forefront of the battle will be
the issue of assault rifles, which may in truth be more trouble with the public
at large than with legislators. Politicians in both parties already agree that
the menacing, rapid-fire weapons should be restricted, if only as a symbol of
willingness to act.

Here in Tompkins County, where 94,000 people are spread from the predominantly
liberal city of Ithaca to more conservative rural areas, the fight has already
begun. In opposition are hunters and target shooters, some of whom said they
received calls from the National Rifle Association urging them to put pressure
on Assemblyman Luster. (The association's liaison for New York, Susan Baldya
Misiora, declined to discuss her organization's strategy for defeating the bill,
except to say it had been asking members to call their lawmakers.)

These are the people neither party wants to offend, and the Democratic proposal
limiting the size of rifle and handgun clips was careful not to include anything
that can legally be used to hunt.

The Real Issue

Still, many hunters and sportsmen say they feel oppressed by the legislation,
people like Frederick D. Bowen, 63, who recently gave up a 20-year business
selling rifles from his home here out of disgust with Federal firearms
regulation. He said the ban avoided the real issue -- criminals who possess
firearms -- and he worries that it is the first step toward complete gun
control.

"This is not about good guns and bad guns," said Mr. Bowen, who was an avid
hunter until a brain aneurysm confined him to a wheelchair in 1966. "This is a
battle for all guns."

His conviction has been tested in tragedy: One day in 1979, his eldest son,
still haunted by his service in Vietnam, picked out a handgun from Mr. Bowen's
basement and shot himself to death in front of his parents.

"If anybody should be against guns, it's us," he said.

Favored by Drug Dealers

But Mr. Luster, an Assemblyman since 1988, argues that the bill is not against
all guns, only assault weapons, capable of quick destruction and, he said, a
favored tool of the trade among drug dealers. At an Ithaca news conference
today, he sat beside the city's Police Chief, Harlin McEwen, and a state police
major, Joseph F. Loszynski, to denounce the weapons.

"Criminals, by definition, are people who violate the law," he said. "Does that
mean that we should throw up our hands and not even attempt to restrict the use
of these weapons that are capable of inflicting so much harm?"

Several private citizens came to this forum in the public library, some to argue
with Mr. Luster -- an indication of how the issue could spell electoral trouble
for lawmakers supporting the bill. But with public sentiment running so high
against violence, it could also aid their re-election.

"Historically this is a constituency that while sophisticated has had a history
of skepticism about any gun regulation," Donald Lifton, an associate professor
at Ithaca College, said at the library. "So I think it's commendable that he's
doing this."

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Disgusted with Federal firearms regulations, Frederick D. Bowen
recently gave up a 20-year business selling rifles from his home in Ithaca, N.Y.
State Assemblyman Martin A. Luster plans to vote today against assault weapons
in a special legislative session on gun crimes called by Gov. Mario M. Cuomo. He
spoke last week at a news conference. (Photographs by Michael Greenlar for The
New York Times)(pg. B4)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 20, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Rock Greats Hail, Hail Their Own At Spirited Hall of Fame Ceremony

BYLINE: By SHEILA RULE

SECTION: Section C;  Page 15;  Column 2;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 865 words


A star-packed audience at the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame heard Bob Weir of the
Grateful Dead reveal, "I've hated tie-dye all my life."

Unlike their many fans, who are known for wearing tie-dye, the Dead wore tuxedos
to take their place among other rock legends at the Hall's ninth annual
induction ceremony at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. The head Dead, Jerry Garcia,
did not attend, but a life-size cardboard cutout of him served as a stand-in.

In presenting the award to the group, Bruce Hornsby, their occasional
keyboardist and a star in his own right, said: "There were many times I'd be on
stage with these guys and I wouldn't know what the hell was happening."

In an evening shot through with heartfelt tributes, wise-cracking irreverence
and great music, the Dead shared the spotlight with other new Hall of Fame
members, including Elton John, Rod Stewart and John Lennon, who become the first
three British solo artists to enter the hall.  Though the Beatles were inducted
as a group in 1988, Mr. Lennon was inducted on his own last night for his
contributions after he left the group. Also inducted were Bob Marley, the reggae
pioneer and superstar who died in 1981; Duane Eddy, an early guitar hero known
for his unusual "twang" sound, and the legendary rock bands the Animals and the
Band.

Chicago bluesman Willie Dixon was inducted in the early influences (or pre-rock)
category, and Johnny Otis, composer of the late 50's classic "Willie and the
Hand Jive" was cited in the nonperformer category for his contributions to
rhythm-and-blues.

The Living and the Dead

About 1,200 music-business figures and performers paid $1,250 and $1,500 a
ticket to attend the ceremony, a lavish black-tie dinner and closing jam
session. They saw not only most of the living greats being honored -- Mr.
Stewart who was still in Los Angeles because of Monday's earthquake -- but also
Jeff Beck, Etta James, Chuck Berry, Bono, Axl Rose, Eric Clapton and others step
up to the dais to present awards and pay tribute to fellow departed musicians.
Even Paul McCartney appeared to present Mr. Lennon's award to his widow, Yoko
Ono, and his sons, Julian and Sean. He was a no-show in 1988, when the Beatles
were honored, at the time citing "business differences."

Mr. Beck, accepting for Mr. Stewart, said he had written notes for a speech
about the artist on "a sick bag" and added: "You can have the schmaltzy speech
if you like, or the truth about Rod Stewart." He said backstage later that it
was the singer's "hairy throat" that caught his attention back in the late 60's,
when Mr. Stewart became front man for Mr. Beck's band.

Linking Jamaica and Ireland

In presenting Mr. Marley's award to his widow, Rita, and their son Ziggy, Bono
gave a poetic speech comparing Jamaica to Ireland as islands that had both been
under the colonial yoke. He described Mr. Marley's music a "sexy revolution and
the artist as "Dr. King in dreads." He said he "wanted everything at the same
time and he was everything at the same time."

Mr. Rose, of the group Guns n' Roses, introduced Elton John. Mr. Rose said: "For
myself as well as many others, no one has been there more for inspiration than
Elton John. When I first heard 'Bennie and the Jets' I knew at the time I had to
be a performer."

Members of the Hall of Fame must have made their first recordings 25 years
before they are voted in, so this year's ceremony harked back to 1968, when the
United States was in the throes of civil unrest and Vietnam, and radio stations
were playing the Beatles' "Hey Jude," Otis Redding's "(Sittin' on) the Dock of
the Bay" and Simon and Garfunkel's "Mrs. Robinson."

A committee of historians and musicologists selects nominees. More than 600
industry professionals, producers, broadcasters, music journalists and
performers then cast ballots. In most years, the seven top vote-getters gain
induction; this year, there is an eighth inductee, under a provision that allows
the Hall of Fame's board to honor someone who has missed election in seven
consecutive years.

Historical Perspective

The 25-year time limit was intended to provide historical perspective for those
who choose Hall of Fame members and to free them from what is viewed as having
the commercial nearsightedness that affects other music-business awards.

But given the extraordinary length of some rock careers, the 25-year rule can
still be too short. The Grateful Dead and Mr. Stewart are still going full
steam, and Mr. John, who recently released a new album, "Duets" (MCA), hasn't
slowed much, either.  The Dead was the top-grossing concert act of 1993, and Mr.
Stewart wasn't far behind. His latest album, "Unplugged . . . and Seated"
(Warner Brothers), was a huge international hit. Several members of the Band --
Levon Helm, Rick Danko and Garth Hudson -- have also begun playing together
again, though they have not been able to lure Robbie Robertson, the group's lead
guitarist, back with them.

Mr. Eddy may have described the evening -- part party, part jam session, part
nostalgia trip -- most simply.

In accepting his honor, he said, "This is a great night, a hell of a party and a
great honor."

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Johnny Otis receiving his award from Etta James after being
inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. (Larry Busacca/Retna, for The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. PLANS TALKS ON VIETNAM CLAIMS

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 20


Continuing to tiptoe toward ending the trade embargo on Vietnam, the Clinton
Administration announced plans today to open talks with Hanoi to settle millions
of dollars in financial claims arising from the Communist defeat of the South
Vietnamese Government in 1975.

The Administration is leaning toward lifting the embargo, and today's move
appears part of orchestrated efforts to clear the way toward ending the embargo
and minimizing the political backlash to such a move.

The American Legion, the Disabled American Veterans, and relatives of servicemen
missing in action are eager to keep the embargo and have begun a campaign to
warn the President that lifting it would be unpopular and politically dangerous.


Political Soundings

Administration officials reached a consensus at an interagency meeting last
month to end the embargo, but officials said that before making that politically
sensitive move they first wanted to make political soundings.

State Department officials said Washington and Hanoi were still discussing dates
for the talks, which some experts estimate involve more than $200 million in
claims for confiscated property, including claims related to the seizure of the
American Embassy.

Administration officials maintained that the claims dispute was not an obstacle
to lifting the 19-year-old embargo, but resolving it could reduce overall
tensions. Last July President Clinton said the only factor he would weigh in
determining whether to end the embargo was if Hanoi was cooperating in providing
"the fullest possible accounting" for the 2,239 Americans listed as missing in
Indochina.

The announcement today follows several other recent moves that the Clinton
Administration has made to minimize the political backlash to ending the
embargo. Last week, it announced plans to start talks with Vietnam about
improving its human rights performance, and it also began the biggest excavation
efforts since the war ended to search for remains of Americans. In addition, the
Administration has sent Adm. Charles R. Larson, commander of the American forces
in the Pacific, to Hanoi to assess Vietnam's cooperation in helping Washington
learn about the missing.

Bentsen Is Optimistic

Despite the vigorous campaign by veterans' groups, the Administration still
appears to be leaning toward lifting the embargo. Last Tuesday in Bangkok,
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said he was optimistic that the embargo would
be lifted soon.

"As has been the case with other countries on other issues, a stategy of
engagement with Vietnam may be the most effective way to promote our goal of
accounting for P.O.W.'s and M. I. A. 's from the war," he said.

To help sell an end to the embargo, the Administration is arguing that the best
way to learn more about Americans missing in Indochina would be to increase ties
with Hanoi and increase the American presence in that country. But the American
Legion argues that the best way to force more cooperation from Hanoi is to
maintain the leverage of economic sanctions. In the Administration's view, even
if it removes the embargo, it can hold diplomatic relations as another carrot.

"I think the Vietnam embargo is going to be history," said Gary L. Ackerman, a
Democrat from Queens who is chairman of the House Subcommittee on Asia and the
Pacific."That's pretty much a foregone conclusion. I just think it's a matter of
the politically correct timing."

Clinton and the Draft

Administration officials concede that the embargo decision is especially
difficult for President Clinton because of his steps to avoid the military draft
in the Vietnam War and because of allegations that Commerce Secretary Ron Brown
received money to help push for closer ties with Vietnam.

Some officials fear that Republicans on Capitol Hill will accuse the President
of selling out the M.I.A.'s if he lifts the embargo. But the Administration has
taken comfort in the fact that five Republican senators have over the last month
spoken out in favor of lifting the embargo.

Administration officials also acknowledge that it is taking American economic
interests into account in deciding whether to end the embargo. They note that
American businesses have been forced to wait on the sidelines while Vietnam
links up with foreign businesses.

For instance, officials at the Boeing Company -- the company that Mr. Clinton
has often trumpeted as the nation's leading exporter -- note that because of the
embargo Boeing lost an order for four 737's that Hanoi had tentatively agreed to
buy. Hanoi instead obtained the needed planes from Airbus, the European
consortium.

Criticized by Veterans

Veterans' groups criticize the Clinton Administration for even considering
economic factors in the equation. In a letter to the President, the Disabled
American Veterans said, "It would be deplorable and deceitful to give up our
nation's quest for the fullest possible accounting of our missing servicemen
just to pad the bottom lines of a few American corporations."

For the most part, businesses have refused to lobby vigorously on this issue
because they do not want to give the impression that they are uncaring about the
nation's M.I.A.'s.


LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1098 words



International A2-11

RUSSIA LOSES 2D TOP REFORMER
A Finance Minister who has come to represent Russia's commitment to rapid
economic reform announced he was resigning. The decision came after President
Yeltsin named a new Cabinet that is expected to put higher priority on
protecting industrial jobs than fighting inflation.  A1

The United States voiced concern about Boris Fyodorov's exit.  A10


U.S. TO CHECK CHINA'S PRISONS
Visiting Beijing, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said China had agreed to
reopen Chinese prisons to American customs officers so they can insure that
prison factories are not making products for export to the United States.  A1

KURDS FORGING A QUASI-STATE
Almost three years after they were crushed by the forces of Saddam Hussein,
Kurds in northern Iraq are rebuilding their devastated towns and villages and
drawing them together into a de facto state that stops just short of nationhood.
A1

CROAT VS. SERB VS. SERB
News analysis: A diplomatic pact signed by Serbia and Croatia seeks not only to
target Bosnia's Muslim-led Government, but a breakaway pocket of Serbs in
Croatia.  A3

MEXICANS QUESTION THE SYSTEM
Uneasiness with Mexico's system of Government existed before the uprising in
southern Chiapas State, but the violence seems to have intensified feelings.
With elections scheduled in August, the governing party faces the challenge of
convincing voters that current injustices will end even if it stays in power.
A3

NEW SPECTER STALKS HAITIANS
Even by the rough standards of Haitian public life, where fistfights and gunplay
in Parliament no longer provoke scandal, a new rightist group has established
itself as one of the most brazen elements.  A4

KOREA SPURNS INSPECTION RULES
The International Atomic Energy Agency said the North had rejected a list of
inspection procedures that the agency says it must carry out to determine if
nuclear weapons are under development.  A5

TALKS WITH HANOI ON WAR CLAIMS
Still tiptoeing toward ending the trade embargo on Vietnam, the Clinton
Administration announced plans to open talks with Hanoi to settle millions of
dollars in claims arising from the defeat of the South Vietnamese Government in
1975.  A7

Japan's leader struggles to protect his vote reform package.A6

Greece's battle to claim the name "Macedonia" may have fizzled.  A2

In a German election year, disarray and squabbling.  A11

National A12-21

SPECIAL COUNSEL IS NAMED
Robert B. Fiske Jr., who has been named to investigate President Clinton's
Arkansas land dealings, said his inquiry would almost certainly include
questioning the President and Hillary Rodham Clinton under oath.  A1

Fiske's reputation for integrity is thoroughly entrenched.  A16

PLEADING FOR QUAKE RELIEF
An angry, tearful crowd pushed against the doors of a Federal disaster relief
center that opened at the epicenter of Monday's earthquake, as desperate need
for food, water and shelter clashed with bureaucratic procedures.  A1

CHILDREN DEAL WITH DISASTER
As adults in Los Angeles turn to insurance claims and the hellish morning
commute, children are trying to adjust to a world where nothing seems secure any
more.  A19

Thousands of Angelinos took their first ride on public transit.  A18

Patience may prove to be the survival tool of Los Angeles.  A18

NEW REGULATIONS FOR FISH
The Federal Government is expected to announce that it will for the first time
require the seafood industry to keep detailed records of safety procedures and
to label all shellfish to show where it came from.  A1

FIRST FEMALE STUDENT AT CITADEL
A young South Carolina woman became the first woman to take classes with cadets
at The Citadel, breaking a 151-year-old tradition at the historic military
college.  A12

ACCUSED OF ILLEGAL TESTING
A hospital has been accused of testing pregnant women for drug use without their
consent, and collecting confidential information from them to turn over to the
police without their knowledge.  A12

JURY DELIBERATES IN BOBBITT TRIAL
Jury deliberations began in the trial of Lorena L. Bobbitt, who is accused of
malicious wounding when she cut off her husband's penis with a kitchen knife
last June.  A13

RULING ON CHINESE REFUGEES
A Federal court ruled that victims of China's coercive population control
policies were eligible for asylum in the United States, despite the Clinton
Administration's efforts to expel some of them.  A14

RUDMAN SHUNS DEFENSE POST
Warren B. Rudman, the former Republican Senator from New Hampshire who was under
consideration for Defense Secretary, has asked that his name be withdrawn, White
House officials said.  A16

Law Page B18

Predicting jury verdicts in damage suits for settlements and profit.

At the Bar: A lawyer's homegrown ad bashes another kind of bar.

Metro Digest B1

HOMELESS DEFYING THE COLD
With the deep-freeze across the East making venturing outside painful, many
homeless people are going into shelters, but some are shunning them and deciding
instead to pit their survival instincts against the elements. They were the odd
nocturnal visitors on the doorsteps of some elegant shops along Madison Avenue.
A1

Neediest Cases B3

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-27, D17

In search of steak and history.  C1
Bundling up for the Winter Antiques Show.  C1
For Children C16
Theater: On Stage, and Off C2
"Holiday Heart." C3
"Irene Worth's Portrait of Edith Wharton." C3
Film: Two Ozu series.  C1
Dance: Joe Goode group.  C27
Restaurants C20
Art: Feminist works.  C5
Old Master works in the galleries.  C22
Books: "Separation," a novel.  C27
Television: TV Weekend D17
Home Video D17

Sports B9-16

Baseball: White may be ready to step down.  B9
Column: Vecsey on Jordan and baseball.  B9
Figure Skating: Prosecutors weigh moves in Harding case.  B9
Torvill and Dean recover.  B10
Football: Montana's liberated receivers.  B9
Hockey: Bourque remains the master at 33.  B9

Obituaries B8

David Kirschenbaum, book dealer.

Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27

Editorials

The Pentagon's pterodactyl.
Finding jobs for welfare clients.
Stillness along the Potomac.
A new prosecutor.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: The price of Korea.
Anthony Lewis: The royal President.
James Webb: Who can blame Inman?
Arthur Schlesinger Jr.: Who is Inman to wail?

Chronicle B7

Crossword C27

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

DIALOGUE: The Bobby Inman Show;
Who Can Blame Him?

BYLINE: By James Webb;   James Webb was Assistant Secretary of Defense and
Secretary of the Navy in the Reagan Administration.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 656 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va.


It is easy to dismiss Bobby Ray Inman's abrupt and seemingly petulant withdrawal
of his nomination with the truism that of all positions (save perhaps the
Presidency), the Secretary of Defense cannot afford the luxury of an eggshell
ego. Or perhaps, as some intimate, there were other reasons that caused him to
pull his name. But many who have left private-sector lives of power, prestige
and financial comfort in recent years only to face the ever more brutal costs of
serving their country can empathize with the admiral's dilemma.

First, Government service has become largely reactive rather than creative.
Political debate is sharper and commentary often personally vicious in the wake
of such divisive issues as Vietnam, Watergate, the civil rights movement, the
retreat into ethnocentrism and the multifaceted sexual revolution. Leaders who
dare to take an unambiguous stand on key issues are often battered by intense
media and interest group reactions, including ad hominem attacks, from which
they never recover. Many strong-minded people decide they would rather stay out
of Government and influence its actions in other ways.

Second, there's the commentary itself. Debate is the lifeblood of our society,
but there have been few times in history when negative feelings have so driven
American political thought. Experienced former officials like Admiral Inman who
have been required to deal with "real world" problems sometimes attract
hostility from commentators whose judgment is propelled by a handful of litmus
issues.

This hostility sometimes slides into unwarranted vitriol. The vitriol can become
infectious, spreading to other commentators. And the end result can be daily
misery, culminating in an irreversibly sullied reputation.

Admiral Inman served many years in Washington. When he read William Safire's now
infamous column he would have known beyond cavil that he was facing more than "a
good pop," as Mr. Safire later put it. He was being targeted. Mr. Safire mocked
him for continuing to use "Bobby," the name his parents gave him; he outlined
secondhand allegations from years ago and excoriated Admiral Inman as
"anti-Israel," possessing an "animus" that "contributed to the excessive
sentencing of Jonathan Pollard." Then, through highly selective analysis of his
long career, he labeled the admiral a "flop," a "naif" and a "cheat."

The remainder of his political life probably rolled in fast-forward before the
admiral's eyes. He no doubt understood that for a few journalists every decision
he would take as Secretary of Defense would be scrutinized, and even
hyperbolized, not on its immediate merits but because of innuendo surrounding
decisions he had made more than a decade before. And he must have decided that
the good he could accomplish would never outweigh the determined barrage that
would be unleashed on his character.

This is hardly McCarthyism, and it would not have driven a more determined
figure from Government. But it does allow understandable pause to a man of
Admiral Inman's wealth and reputation. The political landscape is littered with
casualties of the Reagan, Bush and Clinton Administrations who have been targets
of columnists and interest groups as they moved through the confirmation process
-- people whose lives will never be the same.

In our free-wheeling society, these imbalances must be accepted as the preferred
alternative to censorship.  Still, Admiral Inman, for all his flailing, was
right to decry the irresponsibility of some political commentators.

Former House Speaker Sam Rayburn used to say that "any jackass can kick a barn
door down, but it takes a carpenter to build one." Maybe the only sure answer to
this sort of irresponsibility, and the impact it is having on the formation of
talented, cohesive administrations, is for those who run the media to insure
that there are more carpenters among today's political commentators.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: January 23, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1467 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1          1   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A
                computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss
                and is accused by her of sexual harassment.

 2      1  76   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 3      2  12   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 4      6  41   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 5      4  45   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 6          1   BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent
                deaths.

 7      5  22   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 8     10  11   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery
                writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined
                to kill him and take his place.

 9      3  15   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                and a poem.

 10     9   6   THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A
                collection of stories about American men and the strains of
                contemporary life.

 11     8  17   LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues
                the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour."

 12     7   7   THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of
                Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.

 13    15   5   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &
                Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates
                a child's mysterious death.

 14*       47   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                illustrated cards and letters.

 15    11  14   A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A
                young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in
                Victorian England's high society.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      4  37   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2      1   5   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 3      5  22   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 4      3  10   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More
                comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 5      2  14   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 6      7  16   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 7      6  20   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 8      8   8   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                100, reflect on their lives.

 9      9   7   LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The
                country singer's memoirs, with an account of her relations with
                daughters Wynonna and Ashley.

 10    10  76   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 11    11  16   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 12    16   2   SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A
                psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.

 13    13   2   A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Knopf, $27.50.) The
                development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years in Judaism,
                Christianity and Islam.

 14        22   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A
                psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their
                effects on a person's self.

 15    12  16   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by
                Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Thoughts on 43 years of
                marriage.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2  13   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.

 2      1  26   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 3      3  35   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.

 4          1   MAGIC EYE, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when
                scrutinized at length.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 8, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editor's choices of books of particular interest)

THE BINGO PALACE, by Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $23.) Three decent people
look for love on a windblown prairie in this novel whose daily life is enriched
by supernatural events and the presence of Indian spirits.

A DRINKING LIFE: A Memoir, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Mr. Hamill's
brutally honest account of his drinking (and his father's) is the organizing
theme for the 37 years covered here, but the more fundamental matter is a fine
portrait of the emerging artist, boy and man, in a New York that is no more.

A FROLIC OF HIS OWN, by William Gaddis. (Poseidon, $25.) Mr. Gaddis's fourth
novel, easier to like than his previous work, constructs a harsh, misanthropic
but hilarious comedy from the language of law and litigation, in fantastic
combination and obsessive detail.

LEAVING HOME: A Memoir, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $22.95.) What he's really
trying to do with his humor, Mr. Buchwald says, is get even for a dark,
poverty-stricken childhood. Most readers would agree his revenge is complete.

LIVE FROM THE BATTLEFIELD. From Vietnam to Baghdad: 35 Years in the World's War
Zones, by Peter Arnett. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A lean, engrossing memoir of
reporters and war by a correspondent who was among the first to arrive and the
last to leave in Vietnam, and virtually the only voice from Baghdad during the
gulf war.

MARK ROTHKO: A Biography, by James E.B. Breslin. (University of Chicago,
$39.95.) This recital of the tormented artist's life, by a professor of English,
is well researched, well written and carefully thought out.

PADDY CLARKE HA HA HA, by Roddy Doyle. (Viking, $20.95.) This luminously written
Irish novel, winner of the 1993 Booker Prize in Britain, is about the life force
incarnate in its narrator, an unforgettable 10-year-old boy in the brilliantly
realized world of 1960's Dublin.

THE RAGE OF A PRIVILEGED CLASS, by Ellis Cose. (HarperCollins, $20.) The class
in question is the black middle class, and Mr. Cose's account leaves little
doubt that its members are daily humiliated by white people, and don't like it a
bit.

SARAJEVO: A War Journal, by Zlatko Dizdarevic. (Fromm, $19.95.) A lament for
Bosnia and for civilization, by a newspaper editor who celebrates the endurance
and heroism of ordinary people caught in an insane conflict.

A SCIENTIST IN THE CITY, by James Trefil. (Doubleday, $23.95.) The author, who
has written popular-science books that deal with the creation and the seashore,
has a fine sense of what lay folk don't understand; his rendition of the city's
potential and the constraints on it is fascinating.

W.E.B. DU BOIS: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919, by David Levering Lewis. (John
Macrae/Holt, $35.) The first half of the epical life (which lasted till 1963) of
the man who by World War I had become the most outspoken, eloquent and
influential black American.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THIS WEEK;
Paradise Lost

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tran Nu Yen-Khe stars a young servant in "The Scent of Green
Papaya." Tran Anh Hung's memoir, which chronicles family life in a Vietnam
untouched by war, opens on Friday at the Lincoln Plaza. (First Look Pictures
Releasing)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
Seeing 'Schindler' Plain

BYLINE: By Caryn James

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13; Column 5; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 887 words


IF YOU'VE READ EVEN A FRACTION OF WHAT HAS been written about "Schindler's
List," you might be led to this improbable question. Steven Spielberg: idiot
savant or misguided bar mitzvah boy? More than a month after its release,
"Schindler's List" is drawing large audiences and touching them deeply, but
among critics and commentators it is still struggling to shake off the burden of
being a Spielberg movie. Early reviews were nearly unanimous raves, but a sneaky
condescension showed through. The wonder, these rapturous reviews hinted, was
not that a powerful film had been made about the Holocaust but that Peter Pan
had made it.

It took a few weeks for the backlash to set in, as the discussion moved from the
entertainment pages to the op-ed pages and talk shows. The old Spielberg rap --
too entertaining for his own good -- came back to haunt him. Why did he make a
movie about a righteous Nazi? this argument goes. Why did he make a movie about
survival when the Holocaust was about death? If you read and listen enough, it
will appear that you can't see "Schindler" without seeing Spielberg.

In one sense, of course, you can't. Few directors could have gotten this film
made, and no one else would have made it the same way. But if Martin Scorsese
had directed "Schindler's List," as he once considered doing, would praise have
come with the same element of surprise, as if he were the monkey who'd typed out
"Hamlet"? And would this surprise have been translated into claims so
extravagant that the film sounds like the rebirth of cinema, the redemption of
history and the pinnacle of Western art rolled into one?

Reactions to "Schindler" involve nothing as high-minded as analyzing a
director's body of work. This is the cult of celebrity creating a scrim through
which a film is viewed.

Mr. Spielberg is not the only well-known director whose background has become a
dead weight attached to his film this season. If "Philadelphia" had been made by
some lightweight director, instead of the rigorous Jonathan Demme, critics would
not have complained so much about its melodrama. If someone other than Oliver
Stone had made "Heaven and Earth," someone who had never directed a story about
Vietnam, it would not been greeted with the same tired sense of deja vu.

But nowhere has the director's personality created more interference than with
"Schindler," a work that is defiantly not about Hollywood glitz. (Does anyone
really think Mr. Spielberg made this only to win an Oscar?) On a second viewing,
in fact, the history is more lucid and the characters more individualized than
they seem at first, when the experience of watching the film is simply
overwhelming.

The relentless narrative drive with which Mr. Spielberg depicts the liquidation
of the Cracow ghetto, for example -- some people in hiding, others shot in the
snow, thousands herded into a camp -- adds the visceral power of fiction to a
technique borrowed from documentaries about the Holocaust. As with
documentaries, the viewer is put in the position of being overcome by the
savagery on screen and then is made to witness more of it, then to endure even
more, until the enormity of the Holocaust becomes the inescapable point. But
such narrative strategies are not ordinarily associated with Mr. Spielberg, and
the film's effectiveness has been viewed by many as the dark side of the sunny
emotional manipulation in "E. T.: The Extra-Terrestrial."

These straight-on views of the Holocaust are the most compelling sections of the
film, the ones with the greatest claim on the viewer's emotions. And if Mr.
Spielberg was given too little credit for the immense artistic leap that led him
there, he was given too much credit for depicting Oskar Schindler as a
full-blooded character.

Schindler (Liam Neeson, in a charismatic but opaque portrayal) is the weakest
part of the film. To solve the mystery of his change from Nazi roue to protector
of Jews may be impossible. But it is possible to depict a complicated enigma, as
Thomas Keneally did in his novel. On screen, Schindler seems less an enigma than
a black hole at the center of the story.

"It was Oskar's nature to believe that you could drink with the devil and adjust
the balance of evil over a snifter of cognac," Mr. Keneally writes in
"Schindler's List." Mr. Spielberg and the screenwriter, Steve Zaillian, present
Schindler drinking with the devil, the Nazi Amon Goeth (Ralph Fiennes); they
show Schindler's Jewish plant manager, Itzhak Stern (Ben Kingsley) at first
refusing to drink with the devilish Schindler, then sharing a drink after
Schindler's sympathies have changed. Schindler's nature and contradictions are
visualized but not explored, and reviewers jumped in to fill the void,
attributing mysterious qualities to the underwritten character. It doesn't
diminish the film -- it might even make the praise more convincing -- to admit
that "Schindler" is not perfect. Like most enduring films, "Schindler's List"
has an emotional greatness that subsumes its flaws.

It would be a shame if the Spielberg factor influenced anyone's expectations
about the film. And it is no insult to Mr. Spielberg to say that the best way to
view "Schindler's List" is to ignore the fact that he is behind it, and let it
speak for itself as a profound work of art.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Steven Spielberg -- It's time to remove the Spielberg factor
from the reviews of "Schindler's List." (Peter Read Miller)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Port Authority's Homeless Policy Called a Success

BYLINE: By TOM TOOLEN

SECTION: Section 13NJ; Page 1; Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1322 words


THE prolonged cold and icy weather lingering in the metropolitan area has sent
hundreds of homeless people searching for warmth in bus, train and airport
terminals operated by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. The surge
of people has been testing the agency's two-year-old program to keep them out of
the terminals.

That program, Operation Alternative, was started in December 1991 with the twin
goals of keeping the terminals free of loiterers and panhandlers and at the same
time offering help to people who need food, clothing, shelter or medical
attention.

While the program has been a very visible success at the huge Port Authority Bus
Terminal in midtown Mahattan, travelers through Newark International Airport say
homeless people have maintained more of a presence there.

Last weekend, as temperatures fell below zero in the northern New Jersey
suburbs, dozens of homeless people were taken from PATH stations in Newark,
Jersey City and Hoboken and from Newark Airport to shelters in the area. They
were taken there by members of the Newark Department of Health and Human
Services and the Catholic Community Services of Newark.

The Lighthouse Community Services center in Newark received about a dozen people
from the airport last Sunday, said Mike Gavin, a Lighthouse worker.

"The city maintains 24-hour service out there at the airport to help people who
used to be just thrown out into the street without anywhere to go," Mr. Gavin
said. "The Port Authority program has helped bring these people off the
streets."

The Rev. Steven Parrott, executive director of the Lighthouse Community Services
center, said the center had about 125 people staying there over the cold spell.
Of that number, in addition to the dozen or so from the airport, there were
about 10 from the PATH stations in Jersey City, Newark and Hoboken.

Mr. Parrott said he usually received about 15 homeless people a week from the
airport. "We get more people from the airport than we do from the PATH stations
-- that's for sure," he said.

Rita Schwarz, coordinator for the homeless program for the Port Authority, said
the program had greatly reduced the number of people who have "taken up
residence at our terminals," including Newark Airport.

Mrs. Schwartz said conditions had also improved greatly at Newark Airport. She
said that last year, more than 1,400 people brought in from the airport had
accepted assistance from the Newark Department of Health and Human Services. In
addition, she said, only a handful of homeless people have been seen at the PATH
station in Journal Square in Jersey City. "At one time, hundreds of homeless men
and women would be panhandling at the terminals," she said.

Margaret Malinowski of the Mount Carmel Guild, a Newark social service agency
that has 25 beds, said conditions had improved at Newark Airport, because the
agency doesn't see as many people from the airport as it once did. "That means
that people out there are getting help instead of being brought here just to get
a bed," Mrs. Malinowski said.

The joint efforts by the Port Authority and various social agencies seem to have
cleared up the atmosphere and improved cleanliness and safety at the authority's
bus terminal, the largest in the nation.

"The 42d Street terminal was a problem two years ago, and it was not a nice
place to travel through for commuters," Mrs. Schwartz said. "We have enforced
our anti-littering and panhandling regulations, and we have found help for
people who would be thrown out one door and would come back in another in the
old days."

Janis Beitzer, the manager of the terminal, said: "This is a very large and
public terminal, so it's impossible to keep every undesirable person out, but we
are very proud of how we improved the atmosphere here for commuters as well as
providing help for the homeless."

Two Agencies on Site

The key to Operation Alternative, officials say, is that it finds help for the
indigent or troubled people in terminals instead of just having them removed or
arrested for disorderly conduct.

Police officers who encounter homeless people contact the two social agencies on
the site at the terminal -- the Manhattan Bowery Corporation and the Partnership
for the Homeless. The police talk to the people who are violating terminal
rules, like sitting or lying on floors or stairs, panhandling or smoking.
Instead of just throwing them out, officers now refer the offenders to the two
agencies. If the people refuse the referrals, the police order them out of the
terminal.

Over the two years, the program has made 22,000 referrals of homeless people and
others to social service agencies or shelters.

The program is "by no means a solution to a staggering social problem," said
Stanley Brezenoff, the Port Authority's executive director, who has strongly
supported the program from its inception. "The program is a balance of giving
the homeless an opportunity to get help and also to make the terminals much more
pleasant for the travelers."

The program has met with a favorable response from many Port Authority police
officers who patrol the terminals. Sgt. Mark O'Neill, a patrol supervisor on the
night shift at the Eighth Avenue terminal, said the program "gives us a chance
to help people, not to just throw them out of the terminal or arrest them."

A Case of 'Tough Luck'

Sergeant O'Neill remembers a man a year ago whom he found lying on the floor at
the terminal. "There was something about the man that told me he was a
hard-working guy who had run into some tough luck," Sergeant O'Neill said.

The man turned out to be a Vietnam veteran, so Sergeant O'Neill contacted
another officer who was active in helping homeless veterans. They got the man
placed into a halfway house.

The man returned several months later, and he "looked like a college professor
when he came up to me," Sergeant O'Neill said. "I didn't recognize him. I didn't
think he was the same man. All he needed was a break."

Charles Knox, superintendent of the Port Authority police, said, "The people in
trouble at least have an option of getting help." He said he was really only
talking about a few thousand people, because many of the people are repeat
referrals.

Superintendent Knox noted that of the 22,000 referrals over the last two years,
the majority were sent to alcohol and drug detoxification programs, psychiatric
counseling, job training and private shelters.

Edward I. Geffner, executive director of the Manhattan Bowery Corporation, said
that the success of the program was evident and that "there must be a more
comprehensive approach to dealing with the problem of the homeless; our clients
have been well served by the Port Authority program."

Assistance for 1,400 People

Operation Alternative has worked well at Newark Airport, too, according to the
Port Authority. In all, 1,400 people at the airport have accepted assistance
from the Newark Department of Health and Human Services over the last two years.

In addition, Catholic Community Services is credited with reducing the homeless
population at Journal Square in Jersey City to 20 people from more than 100.

The commuters using the Port Autority terminals also seem to be pleased by the
program. In a questionnaire to 3,800 weekday bus commuters, the respondents said
the incidence of being bothered by either the homeless or panhandlers has
dropped significantly over the last two years.

The Port Authority said that when people were asked if they were bothered by the
homeless, 31 percent said they were in 1993, as compared with 51 percent in
1992. The figures for those who said they were bothered by panhandlers were 38
percent in 1993 and 56 percent in 1992.

Also in 1992, 40 percent of the commuters felt some fear for their personal
safety while they were walking through the Eighth Avenue terminal, in 1993 that
figure dropped to 30 percent.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Economic Revolution: The 10-Day Tour

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2970 words


Secretary of the Treasury Lloyd Bentsen boarded a plane nearly two weeks ago for
an inspection of two huge transformations -- the move from Communism to a free
market in Russia and the surge from poverty to modernity in the space of a
generation by 2 billion people in Asia. His journey, intended to promote
American business and economic interests, brought home to the Secretary and his
entourage the striking contrast between the tentativeness of the transition in
Russia and the ferocity of it in Asia.

What follows is a diary of this journey by Thomas L. Friedman, chief economics
correspondent of The New York Times, who accompanied the Treasury Secretary.


Shannon, Ireland, Jan. 11
 First stop, Ireland.

What does Ireland have to do with this trip? Well, don't tell America's
competitors about this, but members of the United States Cabinet still fly
around the world in a museum-quality fleet of Boeing 707's maintained by the Air
Force. These planes are so old they cannot fly to continental Europe in one
leap; hence the refueling stop in Shannon, which adds three hours to the trip to
Moscow.

Secretary Bentsen's plane -- U.S. Air Force 26000 -- is the same plane that
brought John F. Kennedy's body back from Dallas in November 1963. Yes, the
United States Secretary of the Treasury is off touting American technology,
software and financial services to the world's big emerging economies, flying in
a puddle-jumper designed in the 1950's. Traveling the information highway by
Pony Express.

Moscow, Jan. 12

It is Day One and Mr. Bentsen and his top aide, Lawrence Summers, the Under
Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs, spent it closeted with
senior Russian economic officials. They basically told the Russians that the
United States would squeeze its Western allies and lending institutions to speed
up aid to Russia -- but only after it sees a firm commitment by the new Russian
Government and parliament to restructure the budget, curb the money supply, put
into bankruptcy most of the inefficient state industries and spend some of the
savings to help the unemployed.

Mr. Bentsen seems sober about the prospects of the Russians heeding any of this;
it's not the economics, it's the politics of it all that seems so daunting.

"I know a little something about the difficulty of writing a budget," said the
former chairman of the Senate Finance Committee.

Mr. Bentsen's staff was preparing the Secretary for a meeting with Viktor V.
Gerashchenko, chairman of Russia's Central Bank and a source of American
sobriety because of his penchant for printing rubles to solve every budget
problem. A top Bentsen aide suggests the Secretary begin his meeting with Mr.
Gerashchenko by dusting off his putdown of Dan Quayle: "I know Alan Greenspan.
Alan Greenspan is a friend of mine. And you, Mr. Gerashchenko, are no Alan
Greenspan."

Mr. Gerashchenko later reinforced American concerns about his competence when he
joined Mr. Bentsen in opening the first Citibank office in Moscow. Mr.
Gerashchenko was shown the Citibank computer, which was running a software
program called Micro Banker.  "I understand the meaning of a bank," said the
Russian Central Banker to his hosts. "I like the words 'micro' and 'macro,' but
not in economics. I don't understand all this stuff about micro and macro."

Moscow, Jan. 13

Secretary Bentsen and Secretary of State Warren Christopher split from the talks
between President Clinton and President Boris N. Yeltsin to preside over the
opening of the American Chamber of Commerce in Moscow, closed since the
Bolshevik revolution. What was striking about the remarks by Mr. Christopher and
Mr. Bentsen was how similar they were. Each man said he saw it as his top
responsibility today to promote American business abroad. Mr. Christopher says
diplomacy is now economics and Mr. Bentsen says economics is now foreign policy.

Listening to them captured the degree to which their jobs have merged in the
post-Cold War world. The Secretary of the Treasury can no longer do his job
without spending a good deal of time as a traveling salesman for American
business and the Secretary of State will have little job to do if he confines
himself to the classical diplomacy of arms control and peacemaking.

They even share a common jargon now. Mr. Summers remarked that as he was sitting
in on the Clinton-Yeltsin talks at the Kremlin he was struck at how the word
"tough" was being used by the participants. In the old days, it referred to a
Russian or American leader's willingness to risk military confrontation in
pursuit of strategic advantage. But in the Clinton-Yeltsin meetings, he said,
"Tough was being used to refer to how strongly opposed you were to inflation."

Tough was also being used by the American businessmen at the chamber lunch to
describe trying to operate in Russia.

"Not only is it risky in terms of economics, but there are a lot of contract
laws that are lacking to protect business," said Max W. Dajnowicz, head of the
General Motors operations in Russia. "There are no laws of repossession, for
instance. If a customer does not make payment, you can't go and repossess what
you sold. So everything is conducted with cash. The second problem we have is
the escalating crime. It is very difficult for foreigners to come in here. We
are very obvious, very exposed, and we usually carry more money than the average
citizens. So we are targeted quickly.

"Another huge problem is taxes," he said. "The cars we bring in here to sell are
taxed at 134 percent. A $20,000 Chevrolet all of a sudden costs $34,000. On top
of the taxes, they want to test all of our cars to make sure they are safe for
the Russians. Get this, they want us to pay for the tests -- $25,000 per model!"

His advice to American businesspeople thinking of opening shop here: "Analyze
the situation very carefully before you come. A lot of companies have come here
and left here very disenchanted with a lot fewer dollars in their pocket."

Moscow, Jan. 14

Mr. Bentsen, who is 72, was looking a little worn out today. It may be from
trying to keep up with the grueling pace of President Clinton. Or it could be
the after-effects of the 24-course meal -- ending with moose lips -- that Mr.
Yeltsin served the American delegation at his country home last night.

As Mr. Bentsen was leaving the home, the Russian President gave him a bear hug
and, through a translator, whispered to him: "You are going to get me my money,
aren't you?" Mr. Bentsen just smiled.

The Treasury Secretary washed out the taste of moose lips ("they're like mush,"
he reported) by touring the Red October chocolate factory, one of the more
successful state-owned enterprises that has been turned into a private company
owned by the workers. (All the same, what looked like a life-sized
white-chocolate statue of Lenin still graces its lobby.) In a burst of
solidarity, Mr. Bentsen ended the tour by opening his wallet, plunking down $20
and buying one share of the company from its director, Anatoly Duarsky.

Mr. Duarsky, a former Communist Party member with the pear-shaped physique of
someone who enjoys sampling his own wares, invited reporters into his office for
tea and bonbons and talk about what it is like for a manager to make the
transition from socialism to capitalism in the space of one year.

He held his head tightly in his hands as though trying to keep it from exploding
and described the biggest thing about being a capitalist: "I have more worries.
I have to study the relevant legislation every day of my life. I have to think
what to do next because of that legislation. You have to think about everything.
I am sorry I was born so early. If I had been born 15 years later, it would have
been wonderful."

Despite privatization, Mr. Duarsky said, the Government has not lost entirely
its habit of telling him where to ship chocolates. Last month he was told to
send some containers to the far north, before it was cut off by the winter snow
and ice, even though it seemed unlikely he'd be paid. So what did he do? He
shipped them.

"You have to show understanding," explained the capitalist-in-training. When we
responded that Nestle would not treat the citizens of Alaska so kindly, he
answered: "It would not be right if we stopped delivering merchandise there just
because they can't pay."

Jakarta, Indonesia, Jan. 17

We're moving up in the world. The White House switched our plane in Moscow and
we're now flying in the Air Force Boeing 707 that brought Richard Nixon to China
in 1972.

Secretary Bentsen spoke this morning to the American Chamber of Commerce in
Indonesia. What a difference from Moscow! In Moscow, the American businessmen
began their meeting by having a local minister lead them in a prayer for the
Russian economy. Here, Secretary Bentsen spoke for about 15 minutes and then
told the businessmen he would answer their questions for 30 minutes. After 15
minutes, there were no more questions. The Indonesian economy is so hot, and so
open to Americans, that they all just wanted to get back to work.

"Everybody has meetings, nobody has time," Sean Kendall Richardson, a young
lawyer just dispatched here by the New York firm Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &
McCloy, said as he breezed out the door. "We've got more work than we can
handle."

How does doing business here compare with New York?

"The most striking thing is that it is not adversarial -- everyone just wants to
get the deal done," Mr. Richardson said. "Nobody wants to get anybody else
angry. There is no need to get anybody mad with an economy growing this fast."

Indeed, Indonesia is now the world's fourth-most-populous nation, with 180
million people. Rich in natural resources, from timber to oil, and led for 25
years by a relatively stable dictator, President Suharto, it is exploding
economically. In the last 25 years, the number of Indonesians living below the
poverty line fell to 15 percent from 60 percent. Mr. Summers tells us that over
the last 100 years the American economy grew sevenfold. Indonesia and the other
Asian "dragons" will do that in one generation, he said.

In the process, Indonesia is expected to spend about $110 billion on
infrastructure between now and the year 2000, in part to link its 13,000 islands
through advanced telecommunications. But American businesspeople are grossly
underrepresented here, compared with Japan and the European Community, which is
one reason the Treasury Secretary has come to hoist the flag.

Jakarta is orderly, clean and a kaleidoscope of flora. Coming here from wintry
Moscow feels like someone changed the channel to color from black and white.

"I go away for six months and come back and I don't recognize some streets,
that's how fast building is going up," said John M. Daniels, general manager of
P&O Spice Island Cruises, and a resident here for 16 years.

Edward R. Gustely, a refugee from I.B.M. who opened a consulting firm called PAK
here to help newcomers break into the market, says working in Jakarta can be
stressful, but not like Moscow.

"The stress here comes from trying to focus on all the opportunities, because
there are so many," he explained. "Sometimes you don't know where to turn next.
I guess it's like America was in the 1950's and 60's, when people were sure that
tomorrow would be better than yesterday."

Bangkok, Thailand, Jan. 18

Secretary Bentsen visited the Thai Stock Exchange today and was mobbed by Asian
reporters. For the first time since we left Washington his Secret Service guards
had to form a protective cordon around him, as some 25 photographers and
television cameramen jostled each other to take his picture with a competitive
ferocity normally reserved for Michael Jackson and Madonna. It was very odd. Mr.
Bentsen seemed bemused.

The explanation, Thai journalists said, was that this is a mercantile culture,
with a booming economy and a stock market that doubled in value between
September and December, enriching millions of Thais. Every street corner exudes
commercial activity. This is a place that respects economic power, so the
American Treasury Secretary gets the celebrity treatment.

Also, many Thais are hungry for more American presence. They resent the fact
that after the Vietnam War ended Washington seemed to lose interest in Thailand.
Japan filled the void. Now many Thais want us back more than ever to play the
role of balancer between them, Japan, Vietnam and China -- both militarily and
economically. It is a reminder of how America's continued security role around
the world can also be good for business.

Said Thanong Khanthong, a financial editor with The Nation newspaper in Bangkok:
"People here are suspicious of the Japanese domination. The Japanese are
everywhere. All of our daily life is involved with Japanese products. You watch
a Japanese television, listen to a Japanese radio, drive a Japanese car, shower
with Japanese soap and tell time with your Japanese watch. We want the Americans
to counterbalance them."

At a luncheon speech Secretary Bentsen gave to the Thai Bankers Association, it
was striking to hear some Thai businessmen complaining of the same sort of
migraine headaches that Mr. Duarsky, the Russian chocolate maker, complained
about. But here, the source of headaches is a different kind of change, not from
socialism to capitalism, but from rudimentary capitalism to high-speed
capitalism.

"What happened here in the early 1990's," explained Chaktip Nitibhon, general
manager of Banque Indosuez, "is that the business sector grew so fast it simply
outstripped the legal and financial infrastructure. So, since 1991, the
Government has passed 270 new financial and regulatory laws to facilitate the
next stage of development. They set up a securities and exchange commission to
police the stock market; they reduced tariffs so more industries here would have
to compete with the world market; they passed all sorts of tax and environmental
laws."

What that means for Thai businessmen, Mr. Chaktip said, "is that everything has
speeded up. You have to be reading the paper every day, keep up with all the
news and then check with the Government that the news that is printed is
correct. It's exhausting."

Beijing, Jan. 21

The latest joke in Beijing is that China has a new national bird -- the crane,
because the skyline here is dotted with construction cranes. In fact, the
satellite dish and the crane seem to have replaced the hammer and sickle as the
symbols of the post-Communist world.

Shortly after arriving, Mr. Bentsen went off to Zhonganhai, the walled compound
near the Forbidden City where Chinese leaders live and work, to meet Prime
Minister Li Peng and his deputies. Every one of the Chinese officials arrived in
a new Mercedes sedan. It seemed to underscore the way the old Stalinist
political structure here is surfing along on a surging, increasingly free market
economy that the leaders have unleashed below.

China is still a politically repressive place. A Bentsen aide had an important
document disappear from her room while it was being guarded by Chinese security
when she was out.

While such Stalinist shenanigans were going on on the 12th floor, though, in the
lobby they were selling every important newspaper in the world, which any
Chinese can buy. Indeed, the police state here is being gradually undercut by
the proliferation of new sources of information that are demanded by a free
market connected to the global economy.

On the roof are three satellite dishes, one pulling in CNN, another the BBC and
another Japanese television. Pirate satellite dishes are in Chinese homes all
over town. In the newspaper is a story about how Chinese universities are
banning students from wearing their beepers to class because too many go off at
once.

On the way to his meeting with Prime Minister Li, Mr. Bentsen drove through the
very intersection where that lone, heroic Chinese student stopped the tank
during the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989. Today, on that very corner, is the
biggest McDonald's in the world. If that same student were to stop a tank there
today, a huge Ronald McDonald would be in the picture.

Both Prime Minister Li and the Central Bank chairman, Zhu Rongji, spent a great
deal of time in their meeting with Mr. Bentsen grilling him about his
impressions of Russia and explaining to him why China's reform approach was so
different and why there was no need here for "shock therapy." Some American
officials interpreted this, in part, as China's leaders' way of saying: Don't
even think about pressing us on the same sort of radical political changes that
Russia is undergoing. China can't tolerate that.

But American officials also detected a certain sibling rivalry in the Chinese
leaders' intense interest in their former Communist comrades. Russia and China
are like two brothers who both left home at the same time. One is making it big
on Wall Street and the other is still looking for a steady job. With more than a
hint of mischievousness, China's leaders seem to be saying to Mr. Bentsen: "So,
I understand you saw my brother Ivan last week. Tell me, how's he doing?"

Such scenes are a reminder of what this trip has really been about: great
historical experiments unfolding before our eyes, not in laboratories, but in
the real world. One, in Russia, is an experiment to see whether it is possible
to build democratic political institutions before a functioning market economy
is in place.

The jury is still out, but Moscow is heavy with a mood of pessimism. China is an
experiment as to whether it is possible to develop a thriving free-market
economy without democratic political reform. Here, the jury is also still out,
but, to look around this place, it is not obvious that they will fail.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lloyd Bentsen beginning his tour selling the technology of the
future from the old jet that carried President Kennedy's body from Dallas. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times)(pg. 1); On a tour of the Red October chocolate
factory in Moscow. (Reuters); Meeting President Suharto of Indonesia (left) in
Jakarta. (Agence France-Presse); With China's Central Bank chairman, Zhu Rongji.
(Associated Press); With Som Jatusipitak, president of the Siam City Bank.
(Associated Press)(pg. 6)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NIGHT;
Scenes From a Sandbar

BYLINE: By Bob Morris

SECTION: Section 9; Page 3; Column 1; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 1021 words

DATELINE: MIAMI BEACH, Jan. 21


This billion-dollar sandbar can appreciate a gold-digging seductress, and last
Saturday night Eartha Kitt was working that side of her psyche for all it was
worth.

For her final concert in the Naya Performing Arts Series, the limber diva slunk
onto the stage of the Colony Theater in a tight money-green sequined gown that
was breathtaking -- literally, by the looks of it. She dished in French. She
sneered in Spanish. She flirted in Turkish. And in a nod to her role as Catwoman
on "Batman" in the 60's, she let loose with a spine-straightening "meow."

"Go, girl!" a fan shouted as the orchestra vamped and she slowly sat down on a
divan.

"Don't rush me," she growled back. With almost every song in her multilingual
repertory about sex or money (or both), her performance sounded like one long,
loud gimme that was both primal and Continental.

The instant the concert was over, however, Ms. Kitt, who was born in poverty,
retired her venal outer diva for the more socially conscious diva within. And as
she often does when she's asked (and sometimes when she isn't), she broke into
her extensive repertory of political commentary.

"One of the problems with this country is that we're wasting the elderly," she
said, having observed the youth-obsessed scene in Miami Beach. "Our old people
have nothing to do and no reason for living. But nature wastes nothing, so why
isn't their knowledge recycled into the children? To me, there's nothing more
wonderful than an old person who loves children and wants to teach them."

Recalling a recent visit to New Zealand, where she witnessed Maori elders
teaching in the schools, Ms. Kitt was inspired to expound on indigenous peoples.
"In Australia, I'm always with the Aborigines, fighting for their land rights,"
she said. "It's just like here with the Indians. I'm part Cherokee, and what the
Europeans did to my people -- uch! They gave us blankets and smallpox."

In 1968, at the peak of her career, she found herself holding forth against the
Vietnam War in front of Lady Bird Johnson at a White House lunch. She was
blacklisted as an entertainer in this country for years after that.

"A lot of politicians still ask for my opinions," Ms. Kitt said. "Ask me to
lunch and I'll tell you what's going on in the world." Most likely, the meal
would include courses on civil rights, sustainable agriculture and health care.

"I'm thinking of starting a camp in the Catskills with city kids growing their
own food," she said. "We could get retired farmers to pass on their knowledge.
You have to keep people involved! And don't ask the government to help in any
fashion! Just do it and stop complaining about what the government isn't doing
and start asking why we aren't doing things for ourselves."

Her daughter, Kitt Shapiro, 32, who is also her manager, was leaning against a
mirror, marveling at her mother's energy. "She took three aerobics classes
today," Ms. Shapiro said. "I took one. Then I took a nap."

Two Wigs, One Physics Lesson

Tara Solomon, South Beach's youthful high priestess of party culture who writes
her weekly "Queen of the Night" column for The Miami Herald using the royal
"we," has the highest hairdo in town.

"I enhance my own hair with two wigs for extra height," Ms. Solomon said on
Tuesday at her weekly "Martini Club" cocktail party, which is held at Allioli, a
restaurant on Ocean Drive.

"I can get it on my head in about five minutes. That's important, because, as a
working journalist, I have to get dressed fast. It's instant glamour, and it's
very easy."

Usually, anyway.

"It did get stuck in my sunroof once," she said. "It became like Velcro, and I
couldn't turn my head while I was trying to change lanes and I ended up bumping
into another car."

Instant glamour can be dangerous.

Field Trip to Study the Natives

Culture Clash, a three-man Hispanic comedy troupe from Los Angeles that has been
on PBS, MTV and HBO, was in town to research a theatrical portrait of the city.
Commissioned by the Miami Light Project, a local arts organization, it will be
based on interviews with everyone from hipster Cubanos to farm workers, gospel
singers, gay couples and hurricane survivors.

Over dinner on Tuesday, the trio, who'd already spent time with local Haitians
and Bahamians, was scrutinizing Rhoda Levitt, the president of the Miami City
Ballet. "I don't know what to say," Mrs. Levitt said.

"I wouldn't worry about it," said Richard Montoya, who was taking notes while
his colleagues, Ric Salinas and Herbert Siguenza, looked at a Polaroid picture
of Mrs. Levitt as if it were rare documentation of a tribeswoman from an
uncharted island.

Mrs. Levitt then talked about Miami's exoticism, which fascinated the trio.
"Santeria, voodoo, all that stuff's so everyday," she said. "I thought it would
be really different for you to be with me, a nice middle-class Jewish lady."

Mr. Montoya put his arm around her. "I'm actually a Jewish boy trapped in a
Santeria body," he said. "You should have seen my bar mitzvah."

Dull Is Just Fine, Thank You

South Beach was far quieter this week than it seemed a year ago. It was so quiet
that you could hear the squeaking wheelchairs of elderly men as they wheeled
home from end-of-Sabbath services at the dilapidated Congregation Beth Jacob,
just a block from the slickly renovated Pommier Models building. So quiet that
on Tuesday night, you could hear the Century Hotel's music blasting onto the
street as it tried to pull in diners with the go-go dancers it had imposed on
its otherwise stark decor. So quiet that on Ocean Drive, with its hotels and
cafes lit up and looking like a row of stood-up homecoming queens on prom night,
you could hear the guard in front of Gianni Versace's empty villa yawning.

By Wednesday, you could almost hear all the arrogant young waiters with better
careers pending practice being nice to the bigshots who'd be arriving for the
National Association of Television Program Executives convention. One thing you
couldn't hear, despite the cool weather and clouds, were people wishing they
were in New York or Los Angeles.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Eartha Kitt, in white and seated in booth, is entertained at a
dinner after her show. (Sharon Gurman Socol for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Tip O'Neill Gave Leadership as House Speaker

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 550 words


To the Editor:

"The Shrinking Speaker," your Jan. 8 editorial on Thomas P. O'Neill Jr.'s tenure
as Speaker of the House of Representatives, approvingly recalls the autocratic
rule of Thomas B. Reed as Speaker in the 1890's and criticizes O'Neill.

Your ode to partisan leadership asserts that Reed "clearly spoke for" Republican
majorities, conveniently ignoring that he lacked the guts to take the floor and
speak against declaring war against Spain and, two months later, was a no-show
on the vote to annex Hawaii, preferring instead to send an announcement that he
would have joined his three Republican colleagues who voted against the
resolution.

When it came to the most important votes the Constitution gives Congress,
declaring war and expanding United States territory, Reed was not only silent
but, in the case of Hawaii, also could not be found.

Reed may have been adept at counting quorums and recording majorities, but he
seldom engaged in the art of political persuasion. O'Neill, in contrast,
preferred the friendly embrace over the iron hand, the gentle nudge over the
twisted arm in seeking votes. But his voice was never muted in debate, and his
presence was not absent from the chair during important votes.

When Tip O'Neill's ideals were at stake, the prospect of defeat in the roll call
did not deter him from taking the well of the chamber to persuade his colleagues
to vote with him.

As Mickey Edwards, a former member of the Republican House leadership, wrote
recently, the O'Neill axiom that all politics is local "meant knowing -- really
knowing -- the people in the streets in the precinct, in the shops," not just to
please them with your vote, but to explain to them like family and friends when
you voted against their wishes. O'Neill did this when he opposed the war in
Vietnam before most of his constituents did and when he opposed President
Reagan's economic legislation in 1981, when his constituents strongly supported
it.

O'Neill served in the leadership of the House nearly two decades. It was a time
of enormous change when the "go along to get along" Congressional ethos was
replaced by the antileadership ethos of independent legislators. Yet it was also
the occasion for the emergence of the Party Caucus, a body that Speaker Sam
Rayburn spurned and Reed feared. O'Neill welcomed the rise of the caucus and
worked with it, most notably in forging support for landmark legislation on
Social Security in 1983 and tax reform in 1986.

The Democratic Caucus was not only a vehicle for procedural reform, but in the
hands of Tom Foley, Gillis Long and Dick Gephardt, it became a vehicle for the
development of new ideas like tax reform. Indeed, under Gillis Long, it laid the
foundation for the Democratic Leadership Council and the New Democrat Agenda
embraced by President Clinton.

You assert that O'Neill's legacy is a weakened speakership. On July 5, 1981, you
suggested that after the 1982 Congressional elections, "Democrats in the House
of Representatives may not be electing anything higher than a minority leader."
You underestimated O'Neill's political leadership in 1981 and have done so again
in 1994.

KIRK O'DONNELL
Washington, Jan. 14, 1994

The writer served as counsel to the Speaker of the House, 1978 to 1986.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Tip O'Neill Gave Leadership as House Speaker;
No Dove on Vietnam

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 176 words


To the Editor:

Your Jan. 7 obituary article on Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. omits the important fact
that he was not an early opponent of the Vietnam War. Indeed, he was a strong
supporter of the war.

I was a member of the Boston area Mothers Against the War and was a part of a
delegation that went to talk to Mr. O'Neill in 1965 or 1966. We asked his help
in opposing the war. Our presentation was made by a quiet-spoken Quaker woman.
Mr. O'Neill interrupted her, saying: "I support my President. You are nothing
but a bunch of Communist sympathizers."

We realized nothing more could be said and left.

We conferred with delegations who visited other Massachusetts representatives
and learned their experiences were different. They were listened to politely,
although there was no outspoken support to end the war. The only member of
Congress who supported and encouraged us was Senator Wayne Morse of Oregon.

O'Neill did not oppose the war until 1967, when antiwar sentiment was
widespread.

ROSALINE HERSTEIN
Evanston, Ill., Jan. 10, 1994

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Outlaw Those Blind, Deadly Land Mines

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 348 words


To the Editor:

"Humane Warfare" (letter, Jan. 13) by Jeffrey Milman, an Army captain in the
Vietnam War, extols landmines as a "humane form of warfare." The statement would
be laughable if the implications were not so starkly tragic.

A State Department report released last year noted, "land mines kill or wound
more than 150 people per week worldwide -- most of them unarmed civilians." But
land mines do little to stop military forces. Such forces, equipped with mine
detection, breaching and clearance equipment, pass through minefields in short
order, as United States forces illustrated by passing swiftly through Iraqi
minefields in the Persian Gulf war.

The idea of interdicting forces along the Ho Chi Minh trail with mines is
farcical. This was part of the "electronic barrier" recommended by Defense
Secretary Robert S. McNamara in 1966. It failed miserably.

As for using mines effectively by remote control and time-delay
deactivation-detonation, this is another example of the siren call of
technology. These so-called self-destructing, self-neutralizing mines do not
live up to their hype. Patrick Blagden, a retired brigadier who is the United
Nations mine clearance expert, sometimes shows visitors to his office the
"brain" of such a mine. "If they so successfuly self-destructed," he says, "then
how come I've got one."

Modifying the Geneva Convention to permit only such mines -- even if they worked
as advertised -- still does not address the basic problem. As a recent report by
the Arms Project and Physicians for Human Rights notes, "mines are like no other
type of ammunition because they are not used for immediate effect, but are
primed, concealed and left as a hazard which remains indefinitely."

From which the report concludes: "This delayed action virtually insures
indiscriminate effect, contrary to the rules of war."

The real solution to the problem is to support a ban on the production,
stockpiling, transfer and use of land mines.

DAVID ISENBERG
Senior Research Analyst, Center for Defense Information
Washington, Jan. 18, 1994

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER REVIEW;
'Home,' Uplifting Tale Of Young Black Farmer

BYLINE: By LEAH D. FRANK

SECTION: Section 13LI; Page 14; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 588 words


THEATER Three in Port Jefferson is one of the few theaters on Long Island to
make an effort to produce drama by black playwrights on a regular basis.

In honor of Black History Month, the Second Stage is presenting through Feb. 9
Samm-Art Williams's uplifting drama "Home." It is the story of a young black
farmer who finds himself torn from his land and thrust into the turmoil of the
Vietnam War and American urban decay.

The play, which on first description might sound anything but uplifting, is in
fact a valentine to the indomitable soul of so many black men and women who have
fought and triumphed over personal tragedies, racial barriers, political
movements, economic upheaval and social and cultural discrimination.

The hero of "Home" is Cephus Miles, a black man growing up in rural South
Carolina. His mentors are his grandfather and uncle, who instill in him a deep
respect for the land, for nature and for God.

Cephus might on occasion use his Sunday school money for a bit of gambling, but
he has a love of God and nature that is humbling in its purity. Yet like all
good men in literature, Cephus, like Job for instance, must be put to a test to
see if his faith and goodness are true and unyielding.

When his uncle is killed in an accident that also claims their horse, Cephus
begins to believe God is vacationing in Miami. Then his grandfather dies working
in the field and his beloved girlfriend, Pattie Mae, goes away to a teachers'
college and winds up marrying a lawyer.

What finally does Cephus in, however, and convinces him that God has indeed
taken time off from caring for his flock is the war in Vietnam. When he is
drafted, Cephus simply states his conviction that "Thou Shalt Not Kill" is a
commandment from God that must be taken seriously. He quickly discovers that
that particular commandment is suspended in wartime.

The rest of the story is about Cephus's fall and redemption, and its ending is
so stirring that it can evoke copious tears of the sort that one shares at
weddings and other joyful occasions.

This three-member cast has been artfully directed by Bill Van Horn, who wisely
allows the material to unfold without adding the kind of melodramatic fireworks
that might be expected from a less talented director. Mr. Van Horn has also cast
"Home" with care.

The struggling Cephus is played by Kenshaka Ali, a large man with a Charles
Barkley haircut, who manages to create a character with pride and dignity
without the added burden of militant fervor.

Although it would have been nice to have a greater sense of Cephus's emotional
change and development, Mr. Ali presents us with such a kind, gentle farmer that
it is difficult to wish for anything more.

Tessa Martin is riveting in a variety of roles, ranging from the flirtatious
Pattie Mae to a number of other women and children in Cephus's life. Ms. Martin
gives a fresh, original performance and is remarkable for the smooth and
effective manner in which she brings each character to life.

The third member of the cast is Andrea Fletcher, who plays a number of minor
characters. The play has several song segments, and Ms. Fletcher and Ms. Martin
have clear, strong musical voices whether singing or speaking.

Proving that ingenuity and talent can overcome the challenge of a tiny space and
a limited budget, Ned Fox, the set designer, and Marvin Lune, who designed the
lighting, have created a world that ranges from Cross Roads, N.C., to an unnamed
megalopolis, with a couple of stops in between.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 24, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

LEADING CONTENDER IS SAID TO DECLINE TOP DEFENSE POST

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 956 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 23


Deputy Defense Secretary William J. Perry, the leading candidate to succeed Les
Aspin as Secretary, told the White House on Saturday that he did not want the
job, Pentagon officials reported today, but the Administration has mounted a
major effort to change his mind.

Mark D. Gearan, the White House communications director, said tonight that the
Administration considered Mr. Perry "very much in the running" for the job. He
said preliminary vetting of his record had begun. But a close friend of Mr.
Perry said the Deputy Secretary was "still quite reluctant on this."

If Mr. Perry eventually decides to stick to his initial position, he would
become the fourth man in little more than a week to spurn the post.

Talks With White House

A Cabinet member said he hoped the effort to persuade Mr. Perry to reconsider
would fail, because "we shouldn't even think about having anyone in a job that
important who has doubts about doing it." The last thing the President needed,
the Cabinet member argued, was a resignation by a defense secretary six months
from now, which he said would be "a real disaster."

A person who spoke with him today said Mr. Perry, a 66-year-old former
engineering professor at Stanford University, had told the White House chief of
staff, Thomas F. McLarty 3d, of his views in a telephone conversation. Mr.
McLarty is heading the troubled search for a successor to Mr. Aspin, along with
Vice President Al Gore and W. Anthony Lake, Mr. Clinton's national security
adviser.

Later on Saturday, one Pentagon official said, Mr. Gore, a friend of many years'
standing, told Mr. Perry forcefully that he could not let Mr. Clinton down at
such a moment.

Some 'Positive Signals'

A White House official said Mr. Perry subsequently "sent us some more positive
signals" than he had sent when he talked with Mr. McLarty.

Bobby Ray Inman, a retired admiral whom President Clinton nominated to succeed
Mr. Aspin in December, hinted to the White House early this month and then
announced last Tuesday that he was pulling out. Even before the announcement,
Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who heads the Senate Armed Services
Committee, turned the job down. On Thursday, former Senator Warren B. Rudman, a
New Hampshire Republican, withdrew his name from consideration.

A final withdrawal by Mr. Perry would be embarrassing to the President on
several levels. It is wounding, first of all, to have prominent people shun
service at the highest level of his Administration. Each time it happens, it
reinforces the impression, which began to form in the earliest days of Mr.
Clinton's Administration, that his personnel operation is ineffective.

Most important, the unavailability of Mr. Perry would leave a gaping hole in a
national security team that has been repeatedly attacked as inept, with
relatively few obvious candidates to fill it.  Mr. Clinton's relations with the
military leadership have never been warm.  His avoidance of military service in
Vietnam, his proposals to integrate homosexuals into the armed forces and his
deep cuts in military financing combined to open the gulf and helped to
undermine Mr. Aspin as Secretary.

Respected in Congress

Before he withdrew, Mr. Inman seemed the perfect solution to the problem to key
players in the Administration -- Mr. McLarty, David R. Gergen, the President's
top strategist, and Strobe Talbott, who has been nominated as the No. 2 man in
the State Department. Then Mr. Perry, who is widely respected at the Pentagon
and in Congress, seemed to offer a good way out.  Mr. Inman recommended him.

With experience as an entrepreneur, as a government official and as a pioneer in
high technology, Mr. Perry has an unusually diverse resume. But he has never
much liked the limelight. He has relatively seldom been seen in public during
his time as Mr. Aspin's deputy, leaving that to his boss.

"It's safe to assume that Bill Perry is now the front-runner," a top White House
aide said on Friday after the President and Mr. Perry talked that morning in
what was described as a warm session. Several senators immediately applauded the
idea, and Mr. Clinton was expected to ponder it this weekend at Camp David.

But Mr. Perry told friends this weekend that he was reluctant to fight the same
fights that had involved Mr. Aspin and Harold Brown, a former Defense Secretary
to whom Mr. Perry was also close. His wife was said to have reinforced his
preference for staying behind the scenes.

Other Options

As Mr. Aspin's deputy, one of Mr. Perry's major challenges was to overhaul the
cumbersome system under which the Pentagon spends about $100 billion a year on
new weapons and spare parts. After a time, he began to express frustration at
resistance from industry and from officers who thought changes in the system
would inevitably hurt combat readiness.

Mr. Perry was described by one Pentagon official as "the last man standing" in
the search for Mr. Aspin's successor.

The only other names that have been widely mentioned were those of Norman R.
Augustine, the chairman of the Martin Marietta Corporation, and John A. Young,
the retired head of the Hewlett-Packard Company. R. James Woolsey, the Director
of Central Intelligence, is not a candidate, a White House official said last
week, but thought has been given to asking Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, who
has had some doubts about his present position, to move over.

Mr. Aspin has agreed to stay until the Senate confirms a successor. With
Congress in recess from Feb. 12 to Feb. 22, confirmation is unlikely for more
than a month, which means that Mr. Aspin and his aides will present the
Pentagon's budget for the new fiscal year to Congress early next month.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 24, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

PEROT CRITICIZES CLINTON PROPOSAL

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 343 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 23


Ross Perot said today that his political organization would influence every
House and Senate race this year, and called President Clinton's plan to overhaul
the nation's health care system "an airplane with no wings."

In an interview broadcast on C-Span, Mr. Perot said the agenda of his
organization, United We Stand America, would be headed by calls for spending
discipline, improvements in campaign financing, term limits and a
balanced-budget amendment.

At first, Mr. Perot said it would be up to the leaders of state chapters of
United We Stand whether to add health care to the agenda. But later in the
45-minute interview, he delivered a long criticism of the Clinton plan.

"We have a system that needs dramatic improvement," Mr. Perot said, referring to
health care. "But just turning it over to the Federal Government, with its
history of mediocrity and failure in managing social programs and its total lack
of discipline on spending when it comes to social programs -- this is an
airplane with no wings."

Mr. Perot also renewed his accusation that the President had "opened the
Treasury" to buy enough votes to pass the North American Free Trade Agreement.
While Mr. Perot's standing in national polls fell sharply after Congress
approved the trade agreement in November, he said today, "As far as grass-roots
America is concerned, as far as our membership is concerned, it had no impact."

Mr. Perot, who won 19 percent of the vote in his independent campaign for
President in 1992, said that United We Stand now had leaders in every
Congressional district in the country and that the organization would sponsor
issue forums and debates throughout this election year.

He also renewed his 20-year claim that the Government deliberately left
Americans behind at the end of the Vietnam War, and suggested he had evidence
that some of these Americans were alive and being used for slave labor.

When pressed, he refused to elaborate. "When I say it, they will move them," Mr.
Perot said, "but we have a pretty good idea where they are."

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 24, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE EARTHQUAKE;
2 Angelenos Who Took a Second Hit

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1560 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Jan. 23


Piero Selvaggio had barely finished clearing the charred rubble of his Big Rock
Canyon home, which burned to the ground in November's brush fires, when last
week's earthquake tore through one of the restaurants he owns here, sending a
red river of wine worth a million dollars coursing down Pico Boulevard toward
the sea.

On the other side of town, Hung Lee was also a two-time loser. His furniture
store, stripped bare by looters in the 1992 riots, took a hard hit in Monday's
predawn tremor. Chunks of plaster fell from the ceiling, deep cracks laced the
walls, and Mr. Lee, already so deeply in debt that he had just leased his
building to a tenant, wondered where he would find the money for repairs.

Mr. Selvaggio, a Sicilian immigrant who made his fortune on these golden shores,
and Mr. Lee, who fled Vietnam in a rickety boat for the land of freedom, are two
of the untallied Angelenos who took a second or even a third blow last week when
a deadly earthquake battered this already battered city.

Windows Into the Soul

In apocalyptic succession, Los Angeles has been ravaged, first by riots in the
inner city, then by fires in the enclaves of the privileged and now by an
earthquake that has spread suffering among rich and poor alike.

It will be months before people like Mr. Selvaggio and Mr. Lee tally the latest
round of damage to their businesses and homes and take the measure of their
accumulated loss, material and emotional. But their stories, while incomplete,
are windows into the soul of this region, which has borne a world of misery in
the last few years.

"We go through bad things here," said Mr. Lee, clutching a bulging folder marked
"insurance" as he talked in his Koreatown store, where plaster litters the
carpets and lamp shades sit askew. "It happens again and again. But what can we
do?"

Mr. Selvaggio made jokes about living through "first the bake and then the
shake." But he has also had moments of wondering, "Why me? Why me again?"

But he, too, sees his own troubles in the context of a stricken place. "This
city has gone through so much that rebounding is becoming a way of life," Mr.
Selvaggio said, offering cappuccino and apologizing for the stench of wine in
his Santa Monica restaurant.

His wife, Stacy Dalgleish, a part-time psychologist and mother of three, spoke
of the double dose of trauma in the language of her profession. "I was just
getting through the shock so I could get to the depression," she said. "Now I'm
back to the shock."

Success in America

Mr. Selvaggio's restaurants are among the most renowned in the area, and are the
pride of a 47-year-old immigrant who came to the United States as a teen-ager
with a few dollars in his pocket and no knowledge of English. Mr. Selvaggio
worked in a cafeteria in Brooklyn and later made his way to Los Angeles, where
he joined an uncle who was waiting tables at Chasen's in Beverly Hills.

Mr. Selvaggio opened his first restaurant, Valentino, more than 20 years ago at
the eastern fringe of Santa Monica, serving chicken cacciatore in dowdy
surroundings. But today Valentino is a stylish palace of haute cuisine, one of
the first restaurants in the country to import fine olive oil and white truffles
and the home of a prized wine collection, which numbered 90,000 bottles before
last week's quake.

Mr. Selvaggio also owns two other restaurants, and they were largely undamaged.
They are Primi, in the West Los Angeles section, a virtual commissary to 20th
Century Fox Studios, and Posto, in the city's Sherman Oaks section, just miles
from the earthquake's epicenter. Posto was the only building on its block of
Ventura Boulevard to go unharmed.

Not so Valentino, where 13,000 bottles of wine flew from their racks in a
second-floor storage area, sending a cascade of wine down a narrow staircase,
toward the dining rooms and kitchen and out onto the street. Dozens of employees
rushed to the restaurant before dawn and helped clean up the mess. Two days
later, decked with fresh flowers and sweet with the smell of warm bread,
Valentino reopened.

Loss Put at $1 Million

Mr. Selvaggio estimates the retail cost of the lost wine to be $1 million,
although most of it is irreplaceable and none of it was insured.

As he grieved for the wine, his wife had earlier grieved for their home on the
cliffs of Malibu, destroyed in the fires that swept through the canyons last
fall. It was a relatively modest ranch-style home, but lushly appointed with Art
Nouveau antiques, Persian rugs and a library of first editions.

All that is left on the lot overlooking the Pacific Ocean is a stone barbecue
pit, a children's playhouse, a garden where the couple grew rosemary, tomatoes,
lemons and figs for the restaurants and a cat that refuses to relocate.

After the fire, Mr. Selvaggio and Ms. Dalgleish rented a house in the hills of
Santa Monica. That house, a stilted aerie of redwood and glass, is no longer
habitable because the quake shattered its huge windows, just yards from where
6-year-old Girogio was sleeping.

School and Church Destroyed

The family is now staying with an elderly friend, godmother to 4-year-old
Gianpiero, and looking for yet another place to rent. And their dislocation does
not end with housing: the Malibu school that the children attended was destroyed
in the fire, and the family's church in Santa Monica tumbled in the quake.

By contrast, Mr. Lee and his family were spared damage at their home in Arcadia,
a suburb east of Los Angeles, both during the earthquake and the earlier fires
and riots. But their business, the Elegant Lifestyle furniture store at the edge
of downtown Los Angeles, was ravaged in the riots that erupted in late April and
early May 1992 after a jury acquitted four white police officers on all but one
count in the beating of Rodney G. King, a black man.

While many other Koreatown merchants stood armed on the roofs of their stores to
ward off looters on the second day of the riots, Mr. Lee 42, huddled at home in
the San Gabriel Valley, far from the violence.

In his absence, rioters smashed the windows of his corner store, burned rugs and
sofas and stole the rest of the furniture, hundreds of huge pieces in all. Mr.
Lee said the property damage amounted to about $20,000 and the furniture was
worth $120,000.

A Refugee With Dreams

It was a terrible blow to Mr. Lee, a self-made merchant who fled Vietnam in
1977, making the treacherous passage across the South China Sea to Hong Kong in
a 36-foot boat with his wife, infant son and 60 other people. One of his
brothers, also with a wife and child, tried the same escape in another boat and
were lost at sea.

In the United States, Mr. Lee and his wife, Tina, found jobs within months, he
at the loading dock in a warehouse and she behind a sewing machine in a garment
factory. At night they went to a community college to learn English.

A few years ago, he bought the furniture store and a manicure parlor for his
wife. Then the riots shattered Mr. Lee's dreams.

For weeks afterward, he was too traumatized to work. Then he began repairing the
damage, replacing the merchandise and applying for Federal assistance.

The Federal Emergency Management Agency gave Mr. Lee $1,000 to pay one month's
rent at his suburban town house, but only after a long siege of haggling because
the building was in probate and proving ownership and tenancy was difficult.

"If I need more money, I have to submit more papers," Mr. Lee said, "so I forget
it."

'How Do I Fight Them?'

He also applied to the Small Business Administration for a loan. But his request
was denied because he had accumulated $40,000 in debts to replace his
merchandise and pay his family's day-to-day bills, and the agency doubted his
ability to repay a loan.

"They are the Government," Mr. Lee said. "How do I fight them?"

In those days, he said, the Good Samaritan in his life was the Bank of America,
which waived his $10,000-a-month mortgage payments for the six months it took
him to reopen the store.

Amid a stubborn recession here, and with business down more than a third since
the riots, Mr. Lee was buried in debt. Earlier this month, seeing no other
recourse, he rented his 8,000-square-foot store to his longtime manager, Jesse
Kim, who asked Mr. Lee to stay on as an employee.

Then came the earthquake. "I thought when Mr. Kim took over my responsibilities
would end," Mr. Lee said. "But I own the property. Now I don't know where to
find the money to repair."

Father's Death Recalled

His voice broke for the first time in a long conversation. Softly, he recounted
his father's death from a heart attack in 1975, shortly after the Communists
seized his plastics factory near Cam Ranh Bay.

"Now I know how my father felt at that time," Mr. Lee said. "You work for how
many years, and you lose everything."

But Mr. Lee and Mr. Selvaggio have mostly resisted self-pity.

"It hurts, sure," Mr. Selvaggio said. "There are moments of tears, of feeling
everything's unfair. But life is not supposed to be easy. It's been mostly a
smooth ride for us. So now there are bumps, but we'll continue."

Mr. Lee said essentially the same thing. "Even though I lost everything, I will
be working hard again," he said. "This country, if you work hard, you really get
somewhere. I am still young. There is time to go."

NAME: Piero Selvaggio; Hung Lee

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Piero Selvaggio and his wife, Stacy Dalgleish, looking at a
broken bottle of rare wine, which was one of 13,000 bottles damaged in his
restaurant during the earthquake. Hung Lee, right, whose furniture store was
stripped by looters in the 1992 riots, took a hard hit in last week's predawn
tremor. (Photographs by Monica Almeida/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 24, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Tough but Smart

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 685 words

DATELINE: SACRAMENTO, Calif.


Kathleen Brown wants to be the third California governor in the Brown family.
But she comes across as very different from her father Pat, an old-fashioned
liberal, and her brother Jerry, a cold futurist.

She is the essence of the New Democrat, pro-business, tough on crime and other
problems: "Tough but smart," she says repeatedly as we talk in her State
Treasurer's office.

"Contrary to some in my party," she says, "I support 'three strikes and you're
out.' " That is a proposal, likely to go to the voters here next fall, to put
anyone convicted of three violent felonies in prison for life without parole.

"What distinguishes me from Pete Wilson [the Republican Governor] is that he
plays on fears. I have affirmative plans: a 33-point plan on crime.

"We've had 12 years of tough talk on crime, 12 long years. And we've had a
rising tide of random violence that is different from anything I can remember. I
want to break the cycle of violence.

"I would not allow conjugal visits for prisoners, another position that is
upsetting to some of my friends. I have a pragmatic, tough outlook that reflects
my origins: Catholic, German, immigrant.

"We also have to do some smart things. For example, stop 'tagging' by gangs --
marking out their turf by spray-painted graffiti. It's a little like [Mayor]
Giuliani going after the squeegee guys: You get control of the small things.

"Your first offense, I say you do time. I want boot camps for first offenders,
90 days, so they learn there are consequences. We've got to move back to order
and accountability.

"I think this Governor is going to be vulnerable. My question is: Do you feel
safer today than you did four years ago?"

Ms. Brown is not as stern in manner as her words may sound. There are lots of
jokes in her conversation. She is 48 years old and the grandmother of twins, a
young-looking grandmother.

I asked her about immigration, the hot issue here after crime. Governor Wilson
has proposed a constitutional amendment to deny citizenship to American-born
children of illegal immigrants and keep them out of public schools.

"It's penny-wise and pound-foolish," she said: "Throw children out on the
street, deny emergency medical care. I have a tough position on immigration,
too, but you don't visit on children the sins of the parents.

"If we're serious about stopping illegal immigration, let's get serious on
employer sanctions. I want tamper-proof Social Security cards: for all of us,
not just immigrants, so we can enforce the law."

California used to have the sense of limitless possibilities. Even before the
earthquake, one felt a sourness, a pessimism about the low economy and social
problems. Could the optimism come back? I asked.

"Oh you bet it can," she said. "East Coast journalists wrote us off after the
Gold Rush, again after the 1906 earthquake, after World War II, Korea, Vietnam.

"In each of those we had devastating economic times and social upheavals. But in
each the spirit of California reasserted itself. I believe there is something
special about California. It attracts risk-takers. It's still the West. It's not
for the faintdhearted."

In an economic speech this week she will propose a tax moratorium for new
businesses. "As a signal that we want you here," she explained, "you'll pay no
income or corporate franchise tax in the first year, 50 percent the second, 75
percent the third."

Ms. Brown beat an incumbent to become Treasurer four years ago. The latest poll
shows her well ahead of her prospective opponent in the Democratic primary,
Insurance Commissioner John Garamendi. She leads Governor Wilson 46 percent to
38, down a few points from October.

Pete Wilson is famous for skillful and mean campaigns. Could she stand personal
attacks? I asked.

"You don't grow up in the Brown family without developing a thick skin fast,"
she said.

"Will I like it? Will it be fun?" Leaning forward, with a grin, she said: "At
times, yes. I love a good fight. I prefer fair fights, but I take them as they
come and I like to win.

"It will be very close. I never expected otherwise."

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 25, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Bonn Journal;
What's an Asia Hand Doing in Germany? Plenty!

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 998 words

DATELINE: BONN, Jan. 24


When President Clinton nominated Richard C. Holbrooke to be Ambassador to
Germany last summer on the same day he named former Vice President Walter F.
Mondale Ambassador to Japan, some German officials who knew that Mr. Holbrooke
was an Asia expert wondered whether they had won second prize.

They wonder no longer. Mr. Holbrooke, 52, has been an instant success in this
crucial American diplomatic post.

"I have never seen such an excellent relationship with an ambassador develop in
such a short time as with Richard Holbrooke," said Joachim Bitterlich, foreign
policy adviser to Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who will be in Washington this
weekend. Mr. Holbrooke will be in Washington this week to help the White House
and the State Department prepare for the visit.

What Mr. Bitterlich and other Germans say they like best is the new Ambassador's
informal and frank style. "We can talk openly with each other about the way we
see things -- we don't have to play diplomatic games with him," Mr. Bitterlich
said.

'The Unvarnished Truth'



"Tell me what's wrong with the relationship," the new Ambassador would tell him
and other German officials at dinner parties, not even pretending to make small
talk. "Tell me what you'd like to see fixed."

Dr. Beate Lindemann, an officer of an organization called the Atlantic Bridge,
which cultivates German-American cultural and political ties, said: "At this
point in our history, we needed somebody we could talk the unvarnished truth
with. Dick Holbrooke was exactly the right man at the right time."

On a table in the parlor of the big official American residence on the Rhine is
a picture of Mr. Holbrooke's grandfather, a Jewish businessman in Hamburg,
wearing the Prussian spiked helmet and the Iron Cross he won as a German soldier
in World War I. "I show it to German visitors as a symbol of what they lost,"
the Ambassador said.

His grandfather left Germany with Mr. Holbrooke's mother in 1933. Today his
mother, Trudi Moos Kearl, lives in New York City.

Mr. Holbrooke was a Foreign Service Officer until 1972 -- in Vietnam,
Washington, Paris and Morocco. And he was Assistant Secretary of State for East
Asian and Pacific Affairs from 1977 to 1981; before he came here, he was a
managing director of the Lehman Brothers investment bank in New York.

The ambassadorial residence in Bonn has ample evidence of his interests in other
parts of the world. It is filled with Thai, Cambodian and Vietnamese antique
sculptures.

Bonn, a small university town that will cease to be the seat of government at
the end of the century, is a place with few of the distractions and none of the
glamour of Paris or London. For a divorced man like Mr. Holbrooke, there was not
a lot else to do after he got here last September but talk politics, cultivate
contacts, and help shape American policy toward such an important European ally.

Getting close to movers and shakers is something Mr. Holbrooke does very well,
and his barely rudimentary German was no handicap. He brought in an old friend
and mentor, Fritz Stern, Seth Low Professor of History at Columbia University,
as an adviser to help him through his first few months, and was soon
entertaining Mr. Kohl at home. Mr. Stern returned to Columbia on Jan. 15 but is
continuing to work as a consultant to the embassy.

After his frank talks with German officials, one thing Mr. Holbrooke thought
needed to be fixed was the impression some Germans and other Europeans had that
the Clinton Administration did not think relations with Europe were as important
as they were in the cold war.

"Europe has lost none -- repeat none -- of its importance to the United States,"
he said in a speech in Potsdam soon after presenting his credentials in October.

Mr. Clinton made that clear himself during his trip to Europe this month. But he
will not make his first official visit to Germany until July. Mr. Holbrooke
pointed out to old friends in Washington like Mr. Clinton's national security
adviser, Anthony Lake, and his chief adviser on Russia, Deputy Secretary of
State-designate Strobe Talbott, that an earlier idea of having the President
come here in June, right after attending the 50th anniversary of the Allied
landings in Normandy, would not be such a good idea.

Since World War II, the bedrock of the American relationship with Germany has
been security, with more than 250,000 American troops here at the end of the
cold war. Now, Mr. Holbrooke believes, his task is to make sure that the
relationship remains strong on a new basis of commercial and cultural ties.

"The overarching goal," he said in an interview one recent weekend, "is to use
1994 to create the foundations for a bilateral relationship which is no longer
so dependent on the American military presence."

To do that, in Frankfurt, Ambassador Holbrooke persuaded the United States
Information Agency and the Commerce Department to open a business information
center on Jan. 18.

Partners, Yes, and Rivals Too



Mr. Holbrooke said he would also like to reopen the closed American consulate in
Dusseldorf, an important German business center, as a commercial office under a
Commerce Department officer.

Not all his subordinates appreciated his insistence on forcing the far-flung
bureaucracies to cooperate more closely. Nor, Mr. Holbrooke concedes, are
German-American relations without frictions. The United States remains irritated
by the extensive trade and political ties between Germany and Iran despite what
Washington sees as Iranian support for international terrorism.

"In Asia, we have common human-rights and political views, but we are destined
to be political and economic rivals," he said. "We accept this."

It also seems clear that this old Asia hand has no regrets about having taken on
a new challenge in Europe. "Germany is the key player in moving the cold-war
alliance into a new post-cold-war phase," he said, "and Clinton and Kohl are at
the heart of it."

NAME: Richard C. Holbrooke

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard C. Holbrooke in his office in Bonn, where he is
Washington's newest Ambassador. Until now, his strong specialty has been Asia.
(Oliver Ruther for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1048 words



International A2-9

U.S. MAY SEND MISSILES TO SEOUL
The United States is planning to send Patriot antimissile batteries to South
Korea, since North Korea has responded to pressure for nuclear site inspection
by threatening to end the Korean peninsula armistice.  A1

A NEW POWER IN RUSSIA
Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, a former Communist who was chosen as Russia's Prime
Minister during a revolt against reformers, has become increasingly influential
in the Yeltsin administration.  A6


U.N. PRESSED TO ACT ON BOSNIA
The United States, Britain and France urged the United Nations to open a Bosnia
airport needed for mercy flights, and they said that the agency already had the
authority to seek air attacks if needed.  A2

C.I.A. CHIEF SEES FLASHPOINTS
The Director of Central Intelligence, testifying on Capitol Hill, said his
greatest security concerns are inflation in Russia, political and ethnic
tensions in Ukraine and North Korea's military buildup.  A5

HARSH WORDS FOR MEXICAN LEADER
Mexico's President met with Indian and agrarian leaders who did not take part in
the uprising in the southern state of Chiapas, but they had harsh words for him
about the needs of the area's poor peasants.  A3

LOVE TRIANGLE SHAKES AUSTRIA
A public scandal over the Austrian President's wife, who announced that she is
leaving him, and his lover, whom he may give up, has embarrassed his country and
is threatening to destroy his career.  A6

CONFUSION OVER JAPAN REFORM
As the Japanese Prime Minister struggles to save his reform movement, it is
unclear whether the measures that have been proposed would actually end
corruption in the country's political system.  A8

NO PROGRESS ON TRADE TALKS
The latest round of trade talks between the United States and Japan ended with
no tangible progress, despite a warning by Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen that
Japan had to make more concessions.  D1

Fighting on Capitol Hill over whether to end the Vietnam embargo.  A9

The Senate voted to establish a new service: Radio Free Asia.  A8

Nicaragua's factions tried to end a political deadlock.  A3

Oka Journal: In Canada, Indian protests' aftermath.  A4

National A10-18

CLINTON ASSESSES STATE OF UNION
President Clinton delivered his first State of the Union Message, challenging
Congress to tackle the issues of health care and changes in the welfare system.
A1

G.O.P. ATTACKS HEALTH PROPOSAL
Republicans called the President's health care plan "a massive overdose of
Government control." A15

MORE U.S. AID SOUGHT FOR QUAKE
The President will seek at least $6.6 billion in emergency aid for the victims
of the California quake, making it likely that the disaster will be the
costliest ever for taxpayers.  A1

LOS ANGELES SCHOOLS REOPEN
The Los Angeles public school system limped back into session, but many schools
remained without water and others were too damaged to open at all.  A12

GETTING AROUND THE COMMUTING
Employees and businesses throughout the Los Angeles area are using a variety of
tactics to get their work done.A12

JACKSON SETTLES LAWSUIT
Michael Jackson, the superstar who was accused of molestation by an adolescent
boy, agreed to pay the youngster an undisclosed amount to settle a civil
lawsuit.  A1

NEW PATH FOR PENTAGON
News analysis: The different personal interests of Defense Secretary Les Aspin
and William Perry, the man chosen to replace him, foreshadow how priorities at
the Pentagon may shift.  A10

2 LIBERALS TO LEAVE CONGRESS
Two leading liberals in the House, Don Edwards of California and William Ford of
Michigan, both Democrats, said they would retire.  A13

EFFORT TO HALT CHILDREN'S DRUG
Doctors asked the Government to block final approval of a narcotic lollipop
intended to calm children before surgery.  A10

SPACECRAFT HEADS FOR MOON
In a joint military-scientific undertaking, an unmanned spacecraft was launched
on the first American lunar mission in 32 years.  A13

In a comic reminder of the times, Dick Tracy will face divorce.  A10

The jury in Lyle Menendez's case said it was deadlocked.  A13

Education Page A19

Does including students with special needs in regular classrooms work?

In Harlem, a public school that welcomes the family and is one.

Metro Digest B1

U.S. INQUIRY ON CROWN HTS.
Yielding to strong political pressure, Attorney General Janet Reno agreed to
take over the investigation of the murder of a rabbinical student during the
unrest in Crown Heights in 1991 and to seek Federal civil rights charges against
those who had killed him.  A1

POLICE REORGANIZATION
Mayor Giuliani and his new Police Commissioner began a top-to-bottom
reorganization of the New York City Police Department intended to give borough
and precinct commanders more authority to concentrate on quality-of-life
offenses. A1

Neediest Cases B5

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-8

For every ingredient there is a season.  C1
At lunch with Ed Koch: How's he doing? Fine. Just ask him.  C1
Channel surfers get a snack bar.  C1

Health Page C12

A new exercise therapy for dizziness owing to inner-ear problems.
Personal Health: Ending sleep deprivation.
Milk drinking may fight osteoporosis in women who drink coffee.

Arts/Entertainment C13-20

The Don Scardino era at Playwrights Horizons.  C15
Theater: "Day Standing on Its Head." C13
Film: "Blink." C15
Music: "Nozze di Figaro" at Met.  C15

Sports B7-13

Basketball: Knicks edge Phoenix.  B7
Column: Rhoden on New York City schools.  B7
Football: Concussions becoming a problem in N.F.L.  B7

Obituaries B5-6

Dr. William M. Hewlett, pioneering black physician.  B5
George K. Hirst, scientist.  B6

Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21

Editorials

"Health reform -- Now!"
Confronting a hate speech.
The "rescue" racket.
A big step for seafood safety.

Letters

Bob Herbert: Are we awake yet?
Anna Quindlen: A tale of two women.
David Reid: Where apocalypse is never far away.
Harvey Cox: The Bishop and the rebels.

Bridge C13

Chronicle A18

Crossword C19

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Civil Rights Statute Presents Legal Obstacles

BYLINE: By JAN HOFFMAN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 2;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 735 words


The law under which Attorney General Janet Reno will seek indictments in the
1991 killing of a Hasidic student, Yankel Rosenbaum, in Crown Heights is a
Federal civil rights statute that has previously been used against the killers
of a Jewish radio talk show host in Denver and against students who bombed
buildings to protest the Vietnam War.

Passed in 1968, the law was designed to permit Federal prosecutions of people
who interfere with others' civil rights in a wide range of activities, and may
be used only with the permission of the Attorney General.

Legal experts agree that Ms. Reno will have a difficult time obtaining an
indictment under the statute from a Federal grand jury, and an even harder time
prevailing at trial. She acknowledged as much in a letter to Charles J. Hynes,
the Brooklyn District Attorney.

In the state trial against Lemrick Nelson Jr. in the killing of Mr. Rosenbaum,
the prosecutor needed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Nelson killed
Mr. Rosenbaum. He was acquitted in October 1992.

Federal prosecutors will have to show not only that Mr. Rosenbaum was killed by
those indicted, but also that they killed him because of his religion and while
he was engaged in one of a list of "federally protected activities."

Legal experts said it was unclear precisely what protected activity Ms. Reno
would argue was involved. In her letter to Mr. Hynes, she wrote that "the victim
was enjoying the use of a public facility" -- presumably referring to the street
where he was walking -- and experts speculated that Ms. Reno would have to argue
that walking down a street is a protected activity under the law.

In addition to the legal hurdles, Federal prosecutors will face enormous
practical ones. "The trail is cold and if the evidence was poor last time, it
won't get any better with age," said Gerard E. Lynch, a former Federal
prosecutor who is now a law professor at Columbia University. "Someone who
already had the best shot at the case didn't succeed."

One potential problem that Federal prosecutors will not have to confront is the
question of double jeopardy, or whether Mr. Nelson can be tried a second time
for a crime for which he has already been acquitted. The situation is somewhat
analogous to that of the four police officers acquitted on state charges for the
Rodney King beating case and subsequently tried by Federal prosecutors last
year. Under what is known as the "dual sovereignty doctrine," Federal
prosecutors are not bound by state verdicts.

The four policemen were charged under another Federal civil rights statute,
which addressed their deprivation of Mr. King's rights in their capacities as
law-enforcement officers.

The Federal law that prosecutors will rely on, Section 245 of Title 18 of the
United States Code, was passed in 1968 as a modern addition to
Reconstruction-era civil rights criminal laws. "We don't have a comprehensive
bias crime statute in the Federal system," Mr. Lynch said, "so this is the next
best thing we've got."

Burt Neuborne, a professor at New York University Law School who has written on
the statute, said it was devised to allow the Government to prosecute
individuals who interfered with someone's exercising their civil rights, such as
voting. Earlier laws covered the prosecution of law enforcement officers and
conspirators who interfered in those activities.

In the late 60's and early 70's, he said, it was applied against people
attempting to prevent integration by bombing school buses, and against students
who protested violently against the Vietnam War.

In recent years, the law was used to prosecute the killers of Alan Berg, the
radio talk show host in Denver. The law was applied in that case because Mr.
Berg was killed in large measure because he was Jewish, which addressed the bias
provision, and because of his employment, which was considered to involve
interstate commerce, a federally protected activity.

The law has also been applied against an Alabama member of the Ku Klux Klan for
interfering with demonstrators in a civil rights parade.

Norman Siegel, the executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union,
praised Ms. Reno's decision to make what he described as a "good faith effort to
bring to justice the killers of Yankel Rosenbaum."

But he, too, prescribed caution. "The question becomes," he said, " 'What
evidence do they have?' "

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH  ; NEW YORK CITY;

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Capitol Hill Fight Erupting Over Ending Vietnam Curbs

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 9;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 911 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 25


As President Clinton makes tentative moves toward lifting the trade embargo on
Vietnam, a fight has broken out on Capitol Hill over the politically sensitive
issue, with some Republicans proposing to create strict conditions before the
embargo can be removed.

Senator Robert C. Smith, a New Hampshire Republican, says he is likely to
introduce a measure designed to force President Clinton to maintain the embargo
by setting conditions on Vietnam that are considerably stricter than those
President Clinton set forth in September.

Opponents of the embargo fear that Senator Smith's amendment could pass because
it includes several conditions that could be politically difficult to oppose.

Seeking to defuse Senator Smith's measure, which is to be introduced this week,
Senator John F. Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat, announced today that he had
concluded on his trip last week to Vietnam that it was time to lift the embargo.
He said he was convinced that Vietnam had gone to great lengths to cooperate on
accounting for the missing Americans.

Seen as Hurting Economy

Mr. Kerry, a decorated Vietnam veteran who was chairman of the Senate Select
Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, becomes one of more than a dozen Senators
who favor lifting the embargo, many of whom argue that it is hurting the
American economy more than Vietnam's.

Senator Smith's proposal comes as the Clinton Administration has tiptoed toward
lifting the embargo after a consensus emerged within the Administration last
month on the issue. But Administration officials say the President will lift it
only after taking political soundings on the embargo, acknowledging that it is
an especially sensitive issue for him because of his avoiding military service
in the Vietnam war.

Under Senator Smith's measure, an amendment to the State Department
authorization bill, the President could lift the embargo only after he
determined that Vietnam had resolved as fully as possible cases involving
prisoners of war and servicemen missing in action where American intelligence
indicates Hanoi has additional information.

Lawmakers who support lifting the embargo said it might be hard for many
lawmakers to oppose Senator Smith's amendment because it appears sensible to
demand that Hanoi provide the fullest possible accounting.

Seeking Information

Last July, President Clinton established more lenient criteria, suggesting that
he would lift the embargo if Hanoi cooperated in providing information and
documents about the 2,238 Americans missing in Indochina. The President called
on Vietnam to provide documents, remains of dead American soldiers and
information on Americans last seen alive and on Americans missing in Laos.

Although the Senate Republican minority leader, Bob Dole, is said to support Mr.
Smith's efforts, Republican lawmakers are by no means unanimous in wanting to
maintain the embargo. A half dozen Republican senators have called for lifting
it, arguing, like some Administration officials, that the best way to insure
continued cooperation from the Vietnamese is to lift the embargo.

"If we lift the embargo, we will develop a larger presence in Vietnam and that's
the way you obtain more information," said Frank H. Murkowski of Alaska, who is
the ranking Republican on the Senate Committee on Veterans' Affairs.

Senator Smith said he was convinced that Hanoi continued to withhold some
information about American missing. He has repeatedly argued that the best way
to pry more information from Hanoi was to place stricter conditions on improved
relations.

20,000 Documents Cited


 Senator Smith said in an interview, "The question is, What do they have access
to that they can provide to our Government about our 2,200 plus missing. Anyone
who thinks they have provided us with everything they've got is either
misinformed or ignoring the facts."

In an interview today, Mr. Kerry talked of how Vietnamese officials have turned
over more than 20,000 documents and artifacts over the last two-and-a-half
years. He also said Hanoi's cooperation had helped resolve 123 of the 196
"discrepancy" cases about Americans last seen alive, such as pilots who were
seen opening their parachutes after their planes were shot down. He said
interviews with former Vietnamese soldiers and others have helped provided
conclusive evidence that these people died.

"This is the most complete cooperation on accounting after a war in the history
of humankind," Senator Kerry said. "The point Americans need to understand is
there has been a remarkable journey traveled in the past two-and-a-half years
and we've been getting answers."

He acknowledged that Vietnam had probably not turned over all documents, saying
that there might be incriminating documents that Hanoi did not want to disclose
because that could imperil its efforts to have the embargo lifted. Mr. Kerry
said it was more likely such documents would be disclosed after the embargo was
ended, not before.

Senator Kerry is doing a headcount of how many Senators support lifting the
embargo, and one of his aides said so many senators favored lifting the embargo
that he might introduce a State of the Senate resolution urging the President to
lift it.

Opponents of the embargo argue that it is hurting the American economy more than
Vietnam's economy because the Vietnamese are able to buy whatever they want from
Europe and Japan, while American companies are left without sales.


LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 27, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Exploring the Body and the Mind

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 914 words



They Whisper
By Robert Olen Butler
333 pages. Henry Holt & Company. $22.50.

"If you're an artist, you have to live completely in your body," Fiona Price
tells Ira Holloway at Coney Island on their first date, near the opening of
Robert Olen Butler's new novel, "They Whisper." She adds, in language too raw to
be quoted here, that you have to tell your mind to stay out of it.

Although Ira is a public-relations man and no artist, he has always followed
Fiona's prescription for creativity, not only living in his own body but also in
those of the many women he has loved: childhood crushes, teen-age petting dates,
Vietnamese prostitutes and numerous others.

And they live in him and whisper to him. As he recalls in a typical passage,
"All of this seemed mildly interesting but there was jasmine trellised along the
veranda and its smell distracted me," so "I felt open to the future, to all the
women who were far away from this empty landscape before me, who were moving
through their lives unaware that in a year, 5 years, 10, 20, they would lie down
with me and we would whisper all that we knew to each other." Throughout the
novel, these whispers are recorded in italicized passages.

Alas, Fiona, whom Ira meets on a street in the East Village after returning from
Army duty as an interpreter in Vietnam, can almost read Ira's thoughts about
other women, can almost hear their whisperings. Her perceptions drive her into
jealous rages whose unspoken words Ira also can hear: "How much more would this
man put me through how much more of this swelling of every drop of blood in me
my blood pushing outward like some terrible weight." Before Ira sees how serious
Fiona's problem is, he proceeds to marry her. And before he realizes that she is
traveling a road to madness, she conceives a child by him.

Mr. Butler's portrait of Fiona is masterly, up to the strongest material in "A
Good Scent From a Strange Mountain," the collection of stories that won him last
year's Pulitzer Prize for fiction. As soon becomes apparent in her own
italicized whisperings, Fiona as a child was sexually molested by her father:
"when he holds me against him his hand slides up the back of my legs, my thighs,
and I can feel it very clearly, his hand inside my nightgown."

Her memories not only fill her with furious self-loathing and an unquenchable
need for reassurance, but they also drive her back to the Roman Catholic Church
of her upbringing, and back to the sacrament of penance, which she insists that
Ira and their young son, John, also participate in.

As Fiona's fanaticism extinguishes Ira's sexual desire for her, he is left with
an all too common dilemma. Does he leave John alone with Fiona to have "a
terrible self" created. "That was one choice, and the other was for me to stay
and to stay and to live two lives with my son, one to keep Fiona sane and one to
whisper to my son all the things that I felt deeply were true. To stay and to
lose the fullest moment of my sexuality." Given Ira's commitment to his
sexuality, his dilemma seems very nearly tragic.

Now if you step back and consider Mr. Butler's plot while ignoring the message
of his prose, you may find "They Whisper" as powerful a case against living in
the body without using the mind as can possibly be imagined. You might even call
it an argument for professional matchmaking and the tradition of arranged
marriage.

But Mr. Butler's language here is often compelling, if occasionally soporific. A
hybrid of Molly Bloom and Faulkner, it gets drunk on "and" sentences and finds
sex everywhere. In one typically striking passage, Ira recalls a future lover's
lips: "They did not whistle, with me there. I watched them, though, and they
were full and they began the morning painted that bright poppy red, but Rebecca
and I spoke and worked and with each thoughtful moue and pucker of her lips the
paint grew fainter, and not once did she go off to refresh her lipstick but she
let it go, and the paint grew fainter still and it was as if her lips were
slowly undressing for me and their own true color -- their pale, labial pink --
began to show through, and then at last her lips were naked. It would be a long
while, though, before I would kiss them."


In a far less playful spirit, Ira recalls that early in their courtship Fiona
quoted Yeats's remark that "only two topics can be of the least interest to a
serious and studious mood -- sex and the dead." These subjects are charmingly
linked in the narrative's opening passage, where Ira remembers how as a
10-year-old he achieved intimacy with a girl by showing her the bones of her
foot in a shoe-store X-ray machine.

But the themes take a grimmer turn when Ira recalls the self-immolation of a
young woman in Vietnam: "her dark peasant's skin had been burned away and there
was this other skin beneath, and she seemed unutterably naked, and I wept then,
the smoke was still swarming invisibly in my eyes but I knew my own tears . . .
and I wept from desire, from a vision of a nakedness I dared not touch but that
I yearned to touch, to touch and then to say, Is this what you wanted me to
see?"

By the end, the dance of sex and death have taken center stage. The whiteness of
burning desire, the compulsion to purify by confessing, the desired purification
of death: these themes weave and tangle and knot so intricately in "They
Whisper" that against all common-sensical judgments you trace them to the
novel's harrowing end.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Olen Butler (Joshua Butler/Henry Holt & Company)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SENATE URGES END TO U.S.  EMBARGO AGAINST VIETNAM

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1356 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 27


In a strong bipartisan vote intended to make it easier for President Clinton to
end decades of rancor with a former enemy, the Senate voted today to urge that
the trade embargo against Vietnam be lifted soon. The White House had supported
the measure behind the scenes.

After an emotionally charged debate about the lessons of the Vietnam War and the
fate of missing servicemen, the Senate, by a 62-to-38 vote, agreed with the
bill's chief sponsor, John F. Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat and Vietnam
veteran, who said it was time "to put the war behind us."

Although the resolution is not binding, Administration officials said today that
it would certainly make it easier for Mr. Clinton to take the politically
sensitive step of ending the 19-year embargo, closing a chapter on a war in
which 58,135 Americans died.

'A Seminal Event'

"The vote will give the President the kind of political cover he needs to lift
the embargo, and I expect that relatively soon," said Senator John McCain, an
Arizona Republican and a sponsor of the bill, who was a prisoner of war in North
Vietnam for five and a half years. "I think it's a seminal event in
U.S.-Vietnamese relations."

A consensus emerged among senior Administration officials last month to lift the
embargo, but they decided that action would be put off to take political
soundings around the country and determine how much backlash there would be.
Administration officials acknowledge that this is a particularly sensitive issue
for Mr. Clinton because he, like thousands of Americans in his generation,
avoided military service during the Vietnam War.

2,200 Americans Missing

Today's resolution aimed to show the President that lifting the embargo has
widespread political support and is not a betrayal, as some veterans groups
argue, of servicemen missing in Vietnam. Forty-two Democrats and 20 Republicans
voted to lift the embargo; 14 Democrats and 24 Republicans voted against.

Last summer, President Clinton indicated he would lift the embargo if Vietnam
cooperated in providing the fullest possible accounting for the more than 2,200
Americans missing in Indochina.

Now, the question in the Administration is not whether the embargo will be
lifted, but how soon, though some officials say the President needs to do some
more explaining to veterans' groups and families of missing servicemen.

The White House regarded the vote as useful in calling attention to the progress
that Vietnam has made in meeting the conditions set by the Administration,
officials said. But they said they did not expect Mr. Clinton to follow the
Senate recommendation immediately.

Dee Dee Myers, the White House spokeswoman, said, "We certainly welcome the
Senate's sentiment." But she said the Administration was still considering
whether Vietnam had made sufficient progress toward providing information about
P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s and on other fronts for full relations to be restored.

Many veterans' groups and family groups opposed today's resolution, arguing that
Vietnam has not done enough to resolve the cases of missing Americans.

American Legion Opposes Move

"The American Legion is both disappointed and concerned," said John F. Sommer
Jr., the executive director. "However we are not going to give up the fight.
Vietnam has not cooperated by a long shot."

Defying the intense lobbying by these groups, the Senate approved a resolution
that said Vietnam's cooperation has increased significantly over the last three
years in resolving the cases of missing Americans. The resolution also noted
that senior American military officials feel that lifting the embargo will
accelerate efforts to account for prisoners or war and missing servicemen.

Republicans in the Senate split almost evenly on the vote, with some convinced
that Vietnam was making strenuous efforts to provide information on missing
servicemen. Other Republicans appeared ready to use lifting the embargo as
political ammunition against the Democrats.

Complaints From Businesses

Many companies have quietly told Republicans and Democrats that the embargo is
hurting American business as Vietnam opens its economy to the outside world.

Senator Robert C. Smith, a New Hampshire Republican who has been a strong
opponent of lifting the embargo, said today: "We should not reward Vietnam with
improved relations until we know they have unilaterally provided all the
documentation they can from their archives. At this time, they have not even
come close."

Demonstrating how emotional the issue is, he called today's vote "immoral and
incomprehensible."

The bill's sponsors argued that Vietnam might stop cooperating if President
Clinton did not lift the embargo.

'Incentives to Respond'

"You cannot expect the Vietnamese to go on and on helping us forever and
receiving nothing in return but the cold shoulder of two decades of wholesale
embargo," Senator Kerry said. "In the last two years, Vietnamese cooperation on
the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue has accelerated dramatically because we engaged them and
because we offered them incentives to respond."

Rejecting suggestions from some service families that supporting the resolution
was unpatriotic, the bill's backers noted that the main sponsor, Mr. Kerry, was
wounded three times in Vietnam and was awarded a Silver Star and a Bronze Star;
the other principal sponsor, Mr. McCain, was a P.O.W. Another sponsor was
Senator Bob Kerrey, the Nebraska Democrat and Medal of Honor winner who lost his
right leg below the knee in Vietnam.

Senator Kerry and Administration officials vigorously denied that the
Administration had stage-managed today's vote with the aim of clearing the
President's way to lift the embargo.

Links to White House

Administration officials and supporters of today's resolution said Senator Kerry
was in regular contact with the White House's political staff on the resolution.
A senior White House official said President Clinton had not sought to dissuade
Senator Kerry when he told them he planned to bring the matter to a vote. But he
said the White House had nothing to do with initiating the gambit.

Senator McCain said, "The White House staff felt it was very important to pass
this, given the problems that the President's lack of military background gives
him on this sort of an issue."

Today's resolution also sought to press Vietnam by stating that as Washington
and Hanoi move toward normalizing relations, Vietnam should "demonstrate further
improvements in meeting internationally recognized standards of human rights."

The resolution was proposed as an amendment to the State Department
authorization bill.

In defending today's resolution, Senator McCain said he was relying on the view
of two well-positioned military officials -- Adm. Charles R. Larson, Commander
of United States forces in the Pacific, forces, and Gen. John W. Vessey Jr.,
former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Mr. Clinton's envoy to Vietnam.

Mr. McCain said they believed that "lifting the embargo will enhance their
ability to make progress on the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue."

Senator Kerry noted that the Vietnamese have turned over 67 sets of remains last
year -- the most since the war ended in 1975. He also noted that investigators
have been given access to Vietnamese archives.

"The time has come for us to replace the hostility and mistrust of the last 19
years with reconciliation and reconstruction," Senator Kerry said.

Supporters of the embargo argued today that removing it would leave no levers to
press Hanoi to continue cooperating. But Senators Kerry and McCain argued that
there are many ways to press Hanoi, like continuing to withhold diplomatic
relations or threatening to restore the embargo.

Last year, the Administration took several steps toward improving relations with
Vietnam. In July, it gave the green light for the International Monetary Fund
and other international institutions to lend money to Vietnam. In September, it
began allowing United States companies to bid for contracts financed by loans
from the I.M.F. and other international organizations.

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1033 words



International A3-10

SENATE VOTES ON HANOI EMBARGO
In a strong bipartisan vote, the Senate urged the Administration to end its
trade embargo against Vietnam soon. The vote is intended to make it easier for
President Clinton to take that step and end decades of rancor with a former
enemy.  A1

EXICO ADOPTS ELECTION REFORM
Bowing to pressure for political change after a peasant uprising in the south,
Mexico's governing party agreed to lower campaign spending limits by almost 80
percent and allow a more impartial choice of election authorities.  A1


WO VIEWS OF BOSNIA'S MUSLIMS
News analysis: The war of words between Washington and Paris reveals a
fundamental difference in the way they view the Muslim-led Government of Bosnia.
A6

Serbian forces are said to be massing near two Bosnian towns.  A6

BELARUS TRIES TO CALM ENVOYS
After the ouster of the country's reformist leader, the Government of Belarus
called in diplomats to reassure them that commitments to nuclear disarmament and
a market economy are unchanged.  A6

HOSOKAWA TURNS TO THE PEOPLE
Opening a counterattack, Japan's leader appealed for popular support to force
Parliament to endorse a broad realignment of the electoral system by Saturday.
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa is struggling to salvage his Government and its
proposals for political reform.  A10

BASQUE SEPARATISTS LOSE STEAM
After 25 years of violence that has taken more than 800 lives, hopes of peace
are stirring in the Basque region of northern Spain. The police are gaining, and
many people are disenchanted with the separatist movement's violent tactics.  A3


RUSSIAN SCIENTIST ON TRIAL
In a case closely followed by human rights groups, a Russian scientist who wrote
about Moscow's chemical weapons program has been arrested. He has refused to
testify at his own trial on charges of divulging state secrets.  A5

Israel welcomed overtures from King Hussein of Jordan.  A8

An Italian media magnate entered the political fray.  A8

Salahaddin Journal: From a mountaintop, a plea for the Kurds.  A4

National A12-20

JUSTICE OFFICIAL RESIGNS
The No. 2 official at the Justice Department, Philip B. Heymann, announced his
resignation in an abrupt departure that added to personnel problems plaguing the
Clinton Administration.  A1

NORTH ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL
Six years after he infuriated lawmakers with tales of lying to Congress to keep
the arms-for-hostages deal secret, Oliver North formally began his bid to win
the Republican Senate nomination in Virginia.  A1

AN ELECTRIC CAR SETBACK
General Motors hopes California will postpone or scrap the 1997 deadline for
"zero-emission" vehicles because the auto maker's electric car has come up short
of expectations.  A1

WRESTLING OVER A POWER LINE
In one example of a nationwide debate over where to put energy projects,
residents of a Florida county are fighting a power company over its plan to
string 40 miles of high-voltage power lines.  A12

3D TRIAL IN EVERS SLAYING
Thirty years after he was first tried in the slaying of the civil rights leader
Medgar Evers, Byron De La Beckwith, older but no less a white supremacist, went
on trial for the third time.  A12

BOOM IN BUSINESS AFTER QUAKE
With damage estimates from the earthquake as high as $30 billion, and Angelenos
still edgy over the aftershocks, businesses from drywall contractors to massage
therapists are being besieged.  A16

City officials are worried about the quake's impact on tourism.  A16

Thousands of people have moved out of the emergency tent cities.  A16

WHITE HOUSE TOUTS PROJECTIONS
The White House seized on a new set of Congressional projections showing
shrinking budget deficits to argue that there is no need for a Constitutional
amendment requiring a balanced Federal budget.  A18

COLLEGE ACCREDITING CONSIDERED
The leaders of six regional accrediting organizations are meeting to consider
the future of the entire accrediting process for universities and colleges.  A19


Law Page B18

A "crazy idea" about a corporate firm works for two black lawyers.

Four hundred jobs a lawyer can do when a lawyer does not practice law.

At the Bar: The selling of the "devil made me do it" defense.

Metro Digest B1

KELLY DEFENDS HIS MANAGEMENT
Former Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly defended himself against a week of
attacks from the Giuliani administration, which has labeled the department as
lethargic and one of its cornerstones, community policing, as mismanaged.  A1

COLORFUL MEMORIALS TO THE SLAIN
The violence that has taken thousands of young lives in New York City has some
physical reminders: in wall murals throughout the city commemorating the dead.
A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-27, D17

Reality reeling in age of pundits.  C1
The new world of pinball.  C1
For Children C18
Theater: On Stage, and Off C2
"No Man's Land." C1
Film: Surprises at Sundance.  C5
"Living Proof." C8
"Bad Girls." C8
"Golden Gate." C10
"The Scent of Green Papaya." C15
Music: A new cello concerto.  C3
Celebrating Mexico.  C16
Restaurants C22
Art: Art in Review C19
Inside Art C23
Photography: Gestures.  C17
Television: Home Video D17
DuPont-Columbia awards.  D17

Sports B8-16

HARDING LEARNED OF ATTACK
Tonya Harding admitted she found out "that some persons that were close to me"
were involved in the attack on Nancy Kerrigan, but that she delayed in telling
the police.  A1

Baseball: Abbott and Yanks agree.  B9
Column: Berkow on Harding and the Olympics.  B9
TV Sports B11
Figure Skating: Harding will get Olympic spot.  B9
Tennis: Martin ousts Edberg.  B9

Obituaries B7

Claude Akins, actor.

Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27

Editorials

The Mayor's badly aimed ax.
Defense time bomb.
Gerry Adams's visa.
A million Mrs. Bobbitts.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Police and prisons.
Anthony Lewis: Whistling past Weimar.
Simon Fass: Blessings from Papa Doc.

Chronicle B6

Crossword C24

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Walls, Memories of the Slain Are Kept

BYLINE: By RICK BRAGG

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1879 words


Somewhere between one more killing in the inner city and the obscurity of the
grave is a wall in Brooklyn.

Khem Hubbard recorded her brother's name there last week, in big silver letters.
Now Kyle Rasheim Hubbard, 19, shot to death on Jan. 6, 1990, will be remembered
in a New York neighborhood where the dead disappear in the crowd.

The memorial wall at the corner of Crown Street and Bedford Avenue in the Crown
Heights section of Brooklyn is like the ones in Bedford-Stuyvesant, the ones in
the South Bronx, the ones in Harlem. They hold the names of dead children,
innocent bystanders, stone-cold killers, untrue lovers and fallen angels.

They are remembered with elaborate murals that plead for a stop to the senseless
killing, or just a few thin lines scrawled by a friend with a felt-tip pen and a
broken heart. They tell us that PAPA RESTS IN PEACE, and that Kiki has found
God.

No one is sure how many walls there are in New York, or how many inner-city
victims have taken their place on the lists of the dead that decorate the sides
of dry cleaners, clinics and corner stores. People who live beside the walls
guess that there are hundreds scattered around the city, embroidered with
thousands of names. Around the nation are thousands more, from Atlanta to Los
Angeles.

The dead have been carried off to cemeteries outside the inner city, but people
here like to believe their spirit is still in the neighborhood and that is where
the shrine should be. People leave flowers in Dr. Pepper cans. They touch the
names and pray for souls. The murals, some with hundreds of names, are almost
never desecrated. The respect Kiki and Papa, Rasheim and the others couldn't
find in life is now theirs.

"I don't have the power to save their lives," said Richard Green, a community
organizer in Crown Heights and a caretaker of the Brooklyn walls. "But I can
keep their spirit close."

In Philadelphia, they make little shrines for the dead in the back windows of
cars. In Miami, Haitians and Dominicans place plastic flowers and a cup of rum
where the dead fall. Here in New York the sidewalks are decorated with
spray-painted crosses or ankhs, the ancient Egyptian symbol for life, where a
person was killed. On some corners it is difficult to step without walking on
hallowed ground.

But the wall is the final benediction to urban violence. Without it, few people
would know or care that 19-year-old Dion (Raisin) Maczyk died over a $1 bet in a
dice game in June 1993, or remember how Darkeesha Foster's 16-year-old brother,
Troy, was shot through the neck at a party on Classon Avenue last Halloween.

"I walk by and see the names and think about those people in life," said Ms.
Hubbard, 29, who lives in Crown Heights. "I want people to do that, when they
see my brother's name. And I want them to remember how he died, and care about
it."

People have been painting the names and faces of the dead on walls in the city
for decades, but in smaller, more personal murals. But the blackboard-type
listings of the dead on murals began appearing in the mid-80's, said Joseph
Sciorra, an urban folklorist who has just finished a book on the walls.

In the last few years, they have spread rapidly through the city, mostly in
black and Hispanic neighborhoods.

"It is people being honored in a public way for a death that was in most cases
also public," he said.

As the killing has become more obvious, more common, so have the memorial walls,
said Mr. Green, who, as chief executive of the Crown Heights Youth Collective,
works to save young people from violence.

"I had a friend who died in Vietnam. I couldn't go to his funeral," said Mr.
Green, a former Marine. "Later, I went to the wall, the Vietnam War Memorial,
and saw his name.

"That name, there was still power in it."

Some walls were commissioned by gangs and drug lords to honor fallen soldiers,
and are used by police to track gang members, said Detective David Carbone of
the New York Police Department. Police also watch for changes on neighborhood
walls, to piece together a recent history. "We get lots of information there,"
he said.

Most neighborhood walls were started by friends, families, churches and business
or civic groups, the names added over time to murals painted by a neighborhood
artist. Angels fly across some walls, the names written between the wings.

There are no rules as to who can be added to most of these walls, or when.
Sometimes, people dead for years appear in fresh paint.

"The Jews have their Wailing Wall," said Syl Williamson, a Brooklyn businessman
who has commissioned work on several murals. "We have this."

Soon, Ali Abuwi will paint his son's name on the dark-green wall at the corner
of Bedford Avenue and Crown Street, a bowling alley on the inside but a
neighborhood icon outside. His son, Kyma Kenyatta, 16, was shot in June 1990.

Mr. Abuwi stood on the sidewalk and watched as Khem Hubbard finished her
dedication to her brother, just as a small boy and his father walked
hand-in-hand around the corner.

"Daddy, I want to put my name there," said the little boy. His father jerked his
hand, almost swinging the boy off his feet, and walked a little faster.

Mr. Abuwi stared at the sidewalk until they were past.

"No," he said to the ground, "you don't."

The Corner
Respect in Death If Not in Life

Richard Green has an undertaker's voice, the sad, smooth kind that carries
images of polished pine and satin pillows. He goes softly through a litany of
the dead:

"Raisin, Pappy, Kiki, Shah, Twin, Dion . . . there was James Willis, he died in
my arms across from the school on Union Street. James had been shot, but it was
cold, so he didn't bleed a lot. That was '86, I think."

If an outsider comes looking for the source that feeds these walls, Mr. Green
can take them there.

It is a bitter-cold Saturday morning, and the 46-year-old Mr. Green is on his
way to witness the signing of a name to the wall at Bedford Avenue and Crown
Street. First, he has to stop off and paint an ankh on the sidewalk where
another young man died. He said he does these things out of respect.

As he weaves through the ice and traffic he points to this corner or that
corner, and tells who died, and when. He sees a young girl on the street.
"Darkeesha -- we call her Keesha. I buried her brother."

It continues until he pulls into a space at the corner of Franklin Avenue and
Lincoln Place, one of those intersections where the danger is something you
feel, like cold. Young men crowd the corners, faces partly hidden by hooded
sweatshirts. Look in their eyes, and there is nothing there.

"I hate this corner," Mr. Green says.

This is where Raisin died. Mr. Green puts down a wooden stencil and sprays the
ankh, which has a broken arm to symbolize the death. One of Raisin's friends,
Charles Richards, watches from a few feet away. Five of his best friends were
killed.

"Their names are on the wall because they stepped on someone's sneakers, or
because they looked at somebody hard," Mr. Green said.

He said it is young men like them who make up most of the names on the walls.
They are between 16 and 25, some in gangs and in the drug business, others just
trapped in neighborhoods that consume them. If the walls were reserved for
spotless souls, most of that space would be blank, Mr. Green believes.

"The life they lived when they still walked, that's wiped away now," he said.
"These young people deserve the maximum respect we can give them, and these
walls elevate them to that."

Mr. Hubbard's wings dragged in the dust a long time ago. He went to jail at 14
for robbery, then sold drugs -- one of thousands who begin the day by sliding a
semiautomatic in the waistband of their jeans.

He was trying to change, his sister said, and had taken a test for a job with
the phone company days before he died. He was killed in an argument with a
16-year-old, who shot him seven times.

"Look at you now," his killer said, and walked off.

A letter came from the phone company a few days later. Mr. Hubbard had passed
his test.

The Rev. Paul Chandler of the Fellowship Baptist Church in Crown Heights is
troubled by all the dead children on the wall. But he said there is no denying
the murals have woven themselves into the fabric of the neighborhoods, and the
city.

"They have become a place to heal," he said, and that is the tragedy of it.

"Where are all the live heroes?" he said.

The Tombstones
A Fallen Officer Still on the Beat

The white face on the wall at Bedford Avenue and Temple Boulevard in Crown
Heights is out of place in this part of Brooklyn, where there is fierce pride in
things African and the Jesus on the wall of a Baptist church is prone to be a
black man.

The eyes of the mural are bright blue, and they are painted so that they seem to
look right at you, no matter where you stand.

Even in death, Jeff Herman watches over Crown Heights.

Officer Herman, pride of the 71st Precinct and a hero here because he treated
people with respect, was killed when he answered a call about a domestic dispute
in June 1989. A man using a woman as a shield shot him.

He is buried in Pine Lawn National Cemetery in Long Island, about 45 minutes
from here, but his mother, Bebe, and sister Jill don't visit him much there.
They come to his wall.

'I Feel His Presence'

"I went to the grave site for the first few months, but I don't feel any
connection to Jeff there," said Jill Herman. "This is the place he worked, where
people knew and respected him. I feel his presence here."

Some days Bebe Herman just sits in her car and watches the people pass by. Now
and then one will stop and read a poem on the mural that the neighborhood
children wrote for him.

The mural has never been desecrated. Most walls in this part of Brooklyn have
not been touched.

"That would be signing your death warrant," said Detective Carbone.

In a place where the taking of a life is quick and easy, there is profound
respect for the dead, said Mr. Chandler.

"They do tell the legacy, they tell the history, of our community," he said.
"And that is young people who did not live out their potential. Like
tombstones."

Darkeesha Foster has her brother's name written in a secret place. She goes and
sits with him, sometimes.

"I think about him, and it makes me feel good," she said.

Just off Fulton Street in Bedford-Stuyvesant is a massive wall intended to honor
Yusuf Hawkins, the 16-year-old who was surrounded by a gang of 30 white youths
in Bensonhurst on the evening of Aug. 23, 1989, then shot twice in the chest.

One old man who lives there, John Rashid, calls it "Our church."

Over time, countless names have been added to it. But it is hard to tell who is
being memorialized and who is just signing their name to wish Mr. Hawkins and
the other dead a peaceful rest. The living and the dead all run together.

"Well," said Mr. Rashid, "the ones alive are not far from being up there for
real."

Mr. Green wants to take his respect for the dead young people one step further.
He is planning an eternal flame in a park in the Fort Green section of Brooklyn.

"It would be lit for all the young people who have died in this holocaust," he
said, in his undertaker's voice.

Someone has to sit up with the dead.


LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Graffiti on a wall at Nostrand Avenue and Park Place memorialize
people who died violent deaths in Crown Heights, Brooklyn. (Michelle V.
Agins/The New York Times) (pg. A1); A growing number of memorial walls pay
homage to the victims of inner-city violence. Just off Fulton Street in
Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, a wall honors Yusuf Hawkins, the 16-year-old who
was surrounded by 30 white youths in Bensonhurst in 1989 and shot twice in the
chest. Khem Hubbard recorded her brother's name at the corner of Crown Street
and Bedford Avenue in Crown Heights, Brooklyn. Police Officer Jeff Herman,
killed when he answered a call about a domestic dispute in 1989, is also
memorialized in Crown Heights. (Photographs by Michelle V. Agins/The New York
Times) (pg. B3)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Gets Loan

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 12; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 55 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Jan. 27


The World Bank has approved an interest-free loan of $96 million for Vietnam to
develop its agricultural and rubber industries and increase farmers' incomes,
the bank said today. The 40-year loan is the third to Vietnam by the World Bank
since last October. Two other loans totaling $228 million were for highways and
education.

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Fred Friendly Honored In Broadcasting Awards

SECTION: Section D; Page 17; Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 375 words


A Gold Baton, the highest honor in the Alfred I. duPont-Columbia University
Awards, was presented to Fred W. Friendly, the former CBS News producer, for
lifetime achievement in broadcast journalism in a ceremony last night at the
university.

The annual awards, given for outstanding reporting in television and radio news,
included 12 winners of Silver Batons for work in 1992-93. Among those winners
were CNN for its coverage of fighting in Bosnia, the ABC News program "20/20"
for a report that reconstructed an Army surgeon's efforts to save the life of an
American soldier wounded in the Vietnam War, and the PBS series "Frontline" for
a report on the financing of Presidential campaigns.

A second PBS series, "The Pacific Century," about the growth of economic power
in Asia, also won a Silver Baton.

Two independent productions were also honored: "Fallen Champ: The Untold Story
of Mike Tyson," produced by Barbara Kopple and broadcast on NBC, and "Harry
Bridges: A Man and His Union," about the leader of the Longshoremen's Union,
produced by MW Productions

5 Decades in Television

Mr. Friendly was honored for his five decades of contributions to broadcast
journalism, including more than 80 televised seminars on the media and society
produced by Columbia University. Mr. Friendly remains the Edward R. Murrow
Professor Emeritus at the Columbia School of Journalism. Mike Wallace of "60
Minutes" was the host of the event.

Christiane Amanpour, a correspondent for CNN, was singled out for her coverage
of Bosnia and accepted the Silver Baton for the network.

Five television stations and one radio station also were awarded Silver Batons.
KRON-TV in San Francisco won for a documentary on the 10th anniversary of the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial. Wisconsin Public Television was honored for a special
broadcast on women and the 1992 election.

WTVJ in Miami won an award for its extensive coverage of Hurricane Andrew. WBFF
in Baltimore was honored for three programs on urban violence. WPLG in Miami was
awarded a prize for eight reports on a secret anti-Castro group operating in the
Florida Everglades.

WBAI/Pacifica Radio won the single radio honor for a program based on the
massacre of Timorese by Indonesian troops.

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Incremental Changes in a Peaceful World, Saigon 1951

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 556 words


"The Scent of Green Papaya" was shown as part of the 1993 New York Film
Festival. Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in
The New York Times on Oct. 11. The film, in Vietnamese with English subtitles,
opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema, Broadway at 63d Street.

"The Scent of Green Papaya" is Tran Anh Hung's tranquilly beautiful film about a
lost Vietnam, a peaceful, orderly place not yet touched by wartime. The film
begins in Saigon in 1951, in a household safely insulated from the first
rumblings of trouble. The family in question has more personal problems, since
these people are still mourning the death of a young daughter several years
earlier, and since the husband (Tran Ngoc Trung) has a history of disappearing
for long periods with his family's money. The wife (Truong Thi Loc) endures
these desertions with the stoicism the film generally ascribes to Vietnamese
women.

Into this family comes Mui (Lu Man San), a lovely 10-year-old servant girl and a
contemporary of the daughter who died. The camera watches Mui contemplatively as
she learns her new duties and does her hard-working best to keep her masters
happy. Mui is someone who smiles knowingly at the sight of ants lifting heavy
burdens, and who communes effortlessly with the natural forces all around her.
The film works hypnotically as it gazes upon the leaves, birds, frogs and
insects that are welcome parts of Mui's world.

Despite Mui's status as a servant, she manages to enjoy a life of more constancy
and quiet joy than do those around her. The film chronicles the series of small
changes that rearrange the life of the family, all the while sustaining the
rhythm of womanly work that shapes Mui's existence. Mr. Hung's view of placid,
spiritually elevated Vietnamese womanhood poses its problems, since Mui is so
often seen scrubbing floors or shining shoes. Fortunately, this misplaced
romanticism is well outweighed by the film's haunting visual loveliness.

"The Scent of Green Papaya" takes its title from a childhood memory of the
director's. Mr. Hung, who was born in Vietnam and grew up mostly in France, has
said that "the smell of green papaya is for me a childhood memory of maternal
gestures." The papaya also provides a useful metaphor, since in its green state
it is apparently considered a vegetable, and it is thought to blossom into a
fruit later on. Mui herself follows a similar evolution as the film unfolds.

During the latter part of the film, Mui is seen as a quiet, graceful 20-year-old
(Tran Nu Yen-Khe) who needs a new position once her original employers' lives
have changed. She winds up as a devoted servant to the handsome musician she has
gazed at admiringly since her girlhood. This musician, seen at his Steinway
playing Gershwin-like melodies and engaged to a thoroughly liberated Vietnamese
glamour girl, is part of a world Mui has barely seen before. But she does her
wordless, gracious best to accommodate him. The film's idea of what might
ultimately liberate Mui is every bit as nostalgic as its other memories.

"The Scent of Green Papaya" marks a luxuriant, visually seductive debut for Mr.
Hung, whose film is often so wordlessly evocative that it barely needs dialogue.
Reaching into the past for its precisely drawn memories, it casts a rich,
delicate spell.


LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tran Nu Yen-Khe. (First Look Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 29, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1030 words



International   2-5

AGREEMENT ON JAPAN REFORM

Japan's political parties reached an agreement on a somewhat watered-down
version of a plan for broad alignment of its electoral system, saving the Prime
Minister's job and his reform movement.  1


HOPE AND IMPATIENCE

The Japanese regarded the package of electoral reform bills on which the parties
agreed today with both hope and skepticism, but many were anxious to move on to
other problems, such as the economy.  4

HUMAN RIGHTS PRESSURE ON CHINA

News analysis: the Clinton Administration pressure on China, if successful,
could result in changes in freedom of expression and other basic rights as
significant as the economic revolution already under way.  1

CONDITIONS FOR U.S. PEACEKEEPING

The Clinton Administration has completed work on a new policy that would set
tough minimum conditions for United States involvement in United Nations
peacekeeping operations around the globe.  1

PAST PRISMS ON FOREIGN POLICY

Four former Secretaries of State met with Secretary of State Warren Christopher,
and each had his own perspective on how to approach today's foreign policy
issues.  5

BOSNIA ACCUSES CROATIA

The Bosnian Government accused Croatia of invading its territory and asked the
United Nations Security Council to take action. A confidential United Nations
report appeared to support Bosnia's contention.  3

The U.N. leader said he is prepared to order Bosnia air strikes.  3

PROGRESS ON THE P.L.O. PACT

Both sides hope for a breakthrough as Israel prepares to meet again with the
P.L.O. about Palestinian self-rule, and officials said that despite some
sticking points, much progress has been made.  5

St. Petersburg Journal: Remembering the siege of Leningrad.  2

National   6-9

MISTRIAL IN 2D MENENDEZ CASE

The six-month trials of Lyle and Erik Menendez for the murder of their parents
has ended in two mistrials with badly fragmented juries, leaving unresolved a
tangle of legal, emotional and moral questions.  1

TURMOIL AT JUSTICE DEPT.

News analysis: For a year now, the department has been drifting indecisively.
Whether the replacement of the No. 2 official will improve the situation is
uncertain. Some officials there say a major part of the problem may be the
managerial style of Attorney General Janet Reno.  6

RIFLE PRESENTED AS EVIDENCE

The high-powered rifle that is believed to have been used to kill the civil
rights leader Medgar Evers was one of the few remaining pieces of physical
evidence from the original trial.  6

QUAYLE HAWKS POTATO CHIPS

Dan Quayle is hawking Frito-Lay potato chips during the Super Bowl, as the
marriage of Madison Avenue and politics continues.  6

EXPERIMENTS WITH DYING PATIENTS

Dying patients have become the subjects of choice for research in studies that
may help future patients but have very small chance of benefiting the subjects.
7

GOVERNMENT SPEEDS HOUSING AID

When the Government cut through red tape to help poor people who lost their
homes in last week's earthquake in Los Angeles, it gave some people a quick
windfall.  8

QUAKE FOOD STAMP EFFORT ENDS

Concerned about fraudulent claims for earthquake relief, disaster officials
closed a program that provided food stamps, on the spot, to any poor person
professing to be an earthquake victim.  8

DEMOCRATS PONDER NEXT MOVE

More than 100 House Democrats ended their annual retreat after two days of
pondering how to pass and sell an ambitious domestic agenda topped by health
care.  9

FIRST LADY SPEAKS ON HEALTH CARE

At a meeting of doctors in Nevada, Hillary Rodham Clinton disputed the argument
increasingly popular among Republicans that there is no crisis in health care.
9

Pope John Paul II called television a major threat to family life.  9

Metro Digest   21

FRIGID TO WARM, SUDDENLY

After weeks of blizzards and brutal cold, the fickle Winter of '94 played
another diabolically nasty trick on the New York region, delivering springlike
temperatures and a pounding rain that melted snow, flooded roads and homes,
delayed travelers and made life a muddy, miserable mess.  1

GIULIANI PLANS JOB CUTS

Faced with a $2.3 billion gap in the next fiscal year's budget, Mayor Giuliani
plans to eliminate 14,000 to 18,000 city jobs over the next year and a half by
offering inducements to certain workers to quit, administration officials said
yesterday.  1

DEATH-ROW DOG SAVED

Taro, the death-row dog, was saved from execution by order of the Governor of
New Jersey but condemned in the same breath to live the rest of its life outside
the Garden State.  1

Business Digest   35

Arts/Entertainment   11-15

Comic-book festival in France.  11

Music: Swervedriver.  11

Rorem's new concerto.  11

Junior Brown.  15

Dance: Douglas Dunn.  13

City Ballet's Vienna.  13

Obituaries   26

LEVITTOWN DEVELOPER DIES

William J. Levitt, the Long Island developer who built the prototype for the
suburbs that would lure middle-class Americans out of cities by the millions
after World War II, died at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 86.  1

Reuben Mattus, the founder of Haagen-Dazs.  26

Ivan Warner, a judge on the State Supreme Court in the Bronx.  26

Claude Akins, actor.  26

Sports   27-32

Baseball: Yanks sign Ojeda.  31

Column: Rhoden on Gilchrist.  27

Football: Turner is in demand how.  27

Levy a scholar and coach.  29

Hockey: Islanders shut out.  32

Tennis: Graf breezes in Australian final.  31

Editorials/Op-Ed   18-19

Editorials

Learning from Russia's reverse.

Justice in disarray.

Senate's green light on Vietnam.

New York's crumbling schools.

Letters

Anna Quindlen: A woman scorned.

Russell Baker: Soother of the beast.

Mario M. Cuomo: "Three strikes and you're out" -- harsh, but fair.

Mimi Silbert: "Three strikes" is the wrong way to get tough.

Rozanne Gold: The Giulianis' front burner.

Bridge   15

Chronicle   20

Crossword   14

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 29, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

The Senate's Green Light on Vietnam

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 382 words


This week the Senate staged a pre-emptive strike -- a 62-to-38 non-binding vote
urging an early end to America's long economic embargo against Hanoi. The
senators deserve praise for taking another step back from the bitterness of that
war.

Vietnam is now giving all the cooperation Washington has asked for in the search
for information about Americans lost in the Indochina wars. That deserves
official recognition. And flooding Vietnam with U.S. businessmen may be the best
way to flush out further information on the few remaining cases.

The bipartisan Senate effort was led by two Vietnam veterans -- John Kerry, a
Democrat, and John McCain, a Republican -- with White House encouragement. The
Clinton Administration concluded last month that Hanoi's actions justified
lifting the embargo. But, sensitive to President Clinton's own avoidance of
military service, it first checked the political waters. Thursday's Senate vote
should have provided all the encouragement needed.

Opponents of economic ties cite human rights problems concerning Vietnamese
citizens, ambiguous evidence of past deception on U.S. prisoners and the less
than 100 remaining "discrepancy cases" involving Americans who may have survived
capture but never returned.

The Administration responds that other forms of leverage, like diplomatic
recognition, can be used on human rights; that allegations of deception concern
long-ago events and are not sustained by hard evidence; and that while every
discrepancy case needs to be aggressively pursued, Vietnamese cooperation has
brought the remainder down to a very low number compared with other wars.

Those arguments will never persuade some Americans still angered by the loss of
a loved one, humiliated by the outcome of the war or otherwise embittered
against Hanoi. But many Americans personally touched by the Vietnam debacle,
like Senators Kerry and McCain, have wisely concluded that it is time to let go
of the past. Few Americans have any quarrel with the Vietnamese people; and
Vietnam's Government is moving toward many goals Americans would approve of,
including a market economy. It is no longer in America's best interest to
isolate Vietnam. May the White House now quickly proceed to order an end to an
outdated and pointless embargo.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 29, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Let's Normalize Relations With Vietnam

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 435 words


To the Editor:

In "Tie Vietnam Status to Rights Reform" (letter, Jan. 15), Viet D. Dinh is
right to cite Hanoi's abuse of the human rights of its citizens in answer to
your Jan. 6 editorial call for lifting the United States economic embargo
against Vietnam. But to say that Buddhism is persecuted goes, I believe, beyond
the evidence. The state's attack is against those Buddhists who want a church
independent of state control.

However, Mr. Dinh is wrong to state that Hanoi is "desperate to have the embargo
lifted." All of our major capitalist rivals, with the addition of Australia,
have not only unencumbered trade and investment with Vietnam, but full
diplomatic relations as well. Small and medium-size high-tech products of the
United States are readily smuggled into Vietnam by Asian middlemen.

If the United States adhered to Viet Dinh's excellent standards of human rights,
we would never have had relations with the Soviet Union or with South Africa,
and would not now have them with China.

We need full diplomatic relations with Vietnam to show Hanoi that we have truly
ended our war against the Vietnamese. It is only when we make peace with Hanoi,
and guarantee respect for Vietnam's territorial integrity, that we gain the
right seriously and properly to pursue human rights issues with the Vietnamese.

One surely hopes that once United States recognition is established, we can then
present a united diplomatic front of democratic states for human rights.

I regret, however, that Viet Dinh was not able to mention problems affecting
Christians and the highland ethnic minorities of Vietnam.

The Southern highland peoples, with their increasing attraction to Christianity,
suffer thrice over, as cultural-linguistic minorities. Christians, and those
who, in considerable part, resisted the Communist takeover after 1975. (In the
1960's, they fought the Saigon regime for independence and, later, autonomy.)

No outside church groups or international human rights agencies have been
permitted extensive contact with these Deqa peoples since 1975. Hanoi
acknowledges that there have been serious ecological and economic problems in
the highland regions, as lowland, ethnic Vietnamese have been settled there, and
Northern highlanders were encouraged to move to some Southern upland areas.

Plans being made for the enormous Ta Bu Dam threaten the Thai speakers and other
peoples in northwest Vietnam.

ROBERT FRANCOIS
Greensboro, N.C., Jan. 20, 1994

The writer is a researcher on the world indigenous rights movement who worked in
southern highland Vietnam in 1966.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Business Diary: January 23-28

BYLINE: By Hubert B. Herring and Frederik Eliason

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1525 words



THE ECONOMY

Pleasant Economic Surprises
The good economic news just keeps coming. On Friday, the Commerce Department
said the economy grew at a 5.9 percent pace in the fourth quarter of 1993 --
better than the already upbeat projections of most private analysts. It was the
best quarterly performance for the gross domestic product in six years. Perhaps
as good as the strong and broad-based gain was that core inflation grew just 1.3
percent in the quarter, the best since 1967. Economists are predicting that
growth in coming months will not be as powerful as last quarter's rate, but it
should be strong enough to keep consumers upbeat about the future. In 1993 over
all, the G.D.P. grew 2.9 percent. It was the best rate since 1988 and a better
annual rate than in any year during the Bush Administration. Understandably, the
number delighted the Clinton Administration.


CBS Skates Near the Edge
Let's face it. With the possible exception of those guys bumping helmets today
on a frightening number of television screens, figure skating is now the hot
sport. It already is the Winter Olympics' glamour sport, but when you mix in a
bitter rivalry that leads to a nasty conspiracy, everyone pays attention. But
this creates an interesting problem for CBS. In ads promoting its coverage of
the Games, it's dying to capitalize on the Kerrigan-Harding drama, but if it
gets too sordid, it will turn people off. That would not please advertisers
paying $250,000 or so for 30-second spots, like Coca-Cola, I.B.M. and Sears. The
solution, for now: Skating will still figure big in ads, but CBS has dropped one
that focuses on Nancy Kerrigan and will devote more attention to Ukrainian and
German skaters.

Helping L.A. to Its Feet
Los Angeles took quite a hit in the Jan. 17 earthquake -- officials now say the
quake just might become the costliest natural disaster in American history,
exceeding the $30 billion tab for Hurricane Andrew in 1992. So last week
President Clinton asked for a quick $6.6 billion in emergency aid -- just tack
it onto the budget, he said; don't play games trying to find spending cuts to
balance it. And he asked California to match just 10 percent of it, not the
normal 25 percent. Only cynics would whisper that there is any link between this
gesture and California's 54 electoral votes.

Shifting Sands on Health Care
Nobody in Washington seems able to get a grip on this health business. President
Clinton vowed in his State of the Union speech to veto any bill that does not
include universal coverage. Then Lloyd Bentsen said more companies might be
allowed to bypass the huge purchasing groups. But they've said all along that
unless most Americans belong to these groups, the whole thing won't work. And
the No. 1 dart-thrower seems adrift too. Bob Dole devoted much energy last year
to a Republican effort at radical health reform. But then after Mr. Clinton's
speech he came up with a new line: There is "no health care crisis" -- although
84 percent of Americans say there is. What does this all add up to? One view is
that the problem is so vast the politicians are addled. Then again, there's such
momentum for change that political zigzagging can't stop it.

Of Clean Air and Cold Cash
 Clean-air advocates are forever promoting mass transit, but most commuters
continue to vote with their gas pedals. Now, the Clinton Administration is
including a proposal in the Federal budget that would use a most direct argument
for taking the bus or train: cash. Where employers pay their workers' parking
fees at non-company lots, the companies would be required to offer cash to
workers who forgo the free parking. But it is far from certain that Congress
will validate this parking bill. And even if it did, one benefits expert said,
workers who do not get free parking would ask employers to cut their taxable
income and provide tax-free parking instead.

INTERNATIONAL

Faith in Japan From Afar
Tokyo's stock market can't seem to decide whether the political turmoil is
something to worry about. For more than a month, prices have risen, mainly
because foreign investors have decided that despite a local recession and shaky
Government, this is where they want their money. This momentum was jolted Monday
when the market plunged nearly 5 percent, a reaction to Prime Minister
Hosokawa's loss of a crucial vote the previous Friday. But it regained 2 percent
by week's end, again fueled from abroad. Outsiders seem to think that East Asia
is the place to invest and that Japan offers the bargains. Only time will tell
whether the local or global view is right.

Tangled in a Spanish Mess
 The affairs of Banco Espanol de Credito, the big Spanish bank that was seized
by the Government a month ago, provide yet another example of how the investing
world has shrunk. An investment partnership set up by J. P. Morgan, the New York
banking company, held an 8 percent stake in Banesto. And the U.S. Central Credit
Union, which provides financial services for thousands of American credit
unions, acknowledged this week that it had $255 million deposited in uninsured
accounts in the bank. Just as American mutual fund investors are buying more and
more foreign stocks for flashy returns, financial institutions have gone abroad
looking not only for better yields but also simply for diversity.

Limiting Tiny's Vast Reach
 Roland W. Rowland is nicknamed Tiny, but he stands well over 6 feet tall. He
heads a publicly traded British company, Lonrho P.L.C., but he has not bothered
to meet with securities analysts in two decades. He now says he is an absolute
equal with his co-chief executive, Dieter Bock, but nobody else seems to believe
it. Lonrho announced that four allies of Mr. Rowland were retiring from its
board, and Mr. Bock is believed to be eager to get rid of many of the 700
companies that Mr. Rowland, 76, has accumulated over the years.

Flying High in the Mideast
 The F-15 fighter jet emerged from a fierce dogfight with an order from Israel
of about $2 billion for McDonnell Douglas. The loser in the battle for one of
the biggest foreign arms orders in years was Lockheed, even though the company
campaigned heavily in Israel.

Ready to Remove an Old Barrier
The embargo against trade with Vietnam has endured for nearly two decades, but
it now seems certain to be lifted within months, if not days. The way has been
eased for the President by a bipartisan Senate vote urging an end to the
embargo. An official at the United States-Vietnam Trade Council estimates that
American companies might share in as much as $9 billion of trade and investment.


COMPANIES

Greed at Green Point?
The whole idea of a "mutual savings bank" is that the little people own it -- a
piggy bank here, a modest nest egg there. So when one such institution, Green
Point Savings Bank, of Queens, outlined a plan to convert to stockholder
ownership, it disturbed some depositors that executives and trustees stood to
gain millions. Last week the New York State Banking Department, equally
disturbed, barred the lucrative payments but said the conversion could go ahead.
Then a Federal judge stopped the offering, but a panel overruled him. On Friday,
the stock was sold, in the largest such sale in 20 years. Federal regulators
said they were drafting rules to protect depositors in such situations.

Conde Nast Names Brit
Top American editors often speak with a British accent: Tina Brown at The New
Yorker, for instance, and Harold Evans at Random House. Now, Conde Nast has
named James Truman, 35, the editor of Details, to succeed Alexander Liberman,
81, as editorial director of Vanity Fair, Vogue and 11 other magazines.

Big Blue's Good News
A few short years ago, when I.B.M. reported profits, everyone yawned and said,
"How many billions this time?" In 1990's fourth quarter, say, it earned $2.46
billion. Gone, long gone. Last week I.B.M. turned a profit in the mere millions,
and it was big news -- because the $382 million it made in 1993's final quarter
was its first profit in more than a year. "We are making progress," said Louis
V. Gerstner Jr., chairman of this humbled giant, whose payroll is off by 45,000,
to 256,000, in the past year. But the stock, which ran up on Monday after a
favorable Barron's article, slipped on the news anyway, from $58.625 before the
earnings report to $57.75 at week's end.

Big Buy for BankAmerica
For decades after World War II, the nation's largest banking company was
BankAmerica, based in San Francisco. But in 1982, the New York-based Citicorp
ascended to the top spot, and soon its total assets had far surpassed its
closest rivals. Last week, however, BankAmerica said it would pay $1.9 billion
to acquire Continental Bank of Chicago. It is the largest acquisition ever
involving big money-center banks in different states, although the price is less
than half of the $4.7 billion BankAmerica paid for Security Pacific in 1991. By
the time BankAmerica digests Continental, its assets are expected to be above
$200 billion, not far behind Citicorp's $216 billion.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Cleaning up in Santa Monica (Associated Press); McDonnell
Douglas's F-15 (United Press International)

Graphs showing daily closes of the Nikkei index of 225 stocks in January
(Source: Datastream), annual change in gross domestic product from 1981 to 1993
(Source: Commerce Department) and daily closes of IBM in January. (Source:
Datastream)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

At Work;
Crashing, Temping, Coping, Sneering

BYLINE: By Barbara Presley Noble

SECTION: Section 3; Page 25; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1137 words


IN the opening pages of "Career Crash: America's New Crisis and Who Survives"
(Simon & Schuster, $21), the book's sociologist-author Barry Glassner takes note
of research revealing that a startling, and disproportionate, number of baby
boomers are depressed. Well, of course they are. Janis Joplin is dead and
Crosby, Stills and Nash are alive and playing gigs. It is not a just world. Who
wouldn't be depressed?

But Mr. Glassner is no fan of Occam's razor, the philosophical imperative to
explain phenomena as simply and elegantly as possible. He attributes the
boomers' lack of joie de vivre primarily to dissatisfaction over work, and a
tendency, as he calls it, to "crash out of their careers." Crashing, Mr.
Glassner asserts, is not the same as burning out, being furloughed, fired or
early-retired and it is not quite the same as having a midlife crisis, which
many baby boomers are of an age to do. A crash seems to occur when a series of
small unhappinesses and unfulfilled expectations become a pile of misery,
causing the boomers to want to bolt careers most normal people would kill for.

A skeptical reader might view the so-called career crash as another instance of
the baby boomer penchant for elevating common, everyday, even if challenging,
experience to existential crisis. Only the experiences of Mr. Glassner's Vietnam
veterans rise above the garden variety life hitch. If there is such a thing as a
career crash, why won't Crosby, Stills and Nash have one?

Once mainly a domain of actors, musicians, macrame artists and other assorted
free spirits, temporary work now beckons -- or snares -- people who don't really
mind having a day job. For a while in the last couple of years, temporary work
was the only lively growth sector of the economy, as employers learned the
beauty and efficacy of the transitory worker, at all levels of employment.
Hence, the two new titles considered here: "Workstyles to Fit Your Lifestyle:
Everyone's Guide to Temporary Employment," by John Fanning and Rosemary
Maniscalco (Prentice Hall, $11.95), and "Temp: How to Survive and Thrive in the
World of Temporary Employment," by Deborahann Smith (Shambala Publications, $9).

"Workstyles" emphasizes the new, 90's kind of temp, the flexible, independent
professional who can parachute into a job, work effectively and then disappear,
before qualifying for any benefits, with a hearty "All in a day's work." The
authors spend so much time arguing in favor of temping's legitimacy that readers
must wonder if they are not protesting a bit too much. For many professionals,
to temp is to turn a lemon into lemonade and nothing more. On the other hand,
job hunting, like dating, is an arena in which unused skills atrophy. The
detailed directions in "Workstyles," from what to expect from the temporary
agency interview to how to assess opportunities, take the mystery out of the
brave new economy.

Less frantically in pursuit of respectability is Ms. Smith, whose "Temp"
emphasizes the Nietzschean, or will to power, dimension of temping. Her book
appears to be written for the classic temp, a person who works to live, is not a
refugee from a corporate downsizing and might, but most likely, doesn't want the
temp job to evolve into something permanent. A person like her friend Sue, about
whom Ms. Smith reports: "If someone asks what she does for a living, she says,
'I am a traveler, wandering through life.' "

No, leave "Siddhartha" on the back of the bookshelf. The advice in "Temp" is
sound and in many ways more useful than lists of the benefits of temping, a la
"Workstyles." Say yes when possible, say no when necessary. Get information up
front. Hold the client to his or her assignment description. Be polite. Don't
burn bridges. Bend an assignment to your advantage, using down time to learn new
skills, or to job hunt, or whatever. The author wrote five children's books
during one long assignment -- with the knowledge and support of her temp
employer. In other words, in temping, as in much of life, at-tee-tude is all.

Indeed, almost everything a working mother needs to know, and a few things some
working fathers need to know, are in "Everything a Working Mother Needs to
Know," by Anne C. Weisberg and Carol A. Buckler (Main Street Books, Doubleday,
$14.95). The book niftily surveys the early terrain of having a first child: the
shift in identity, the evaporation of free time and the sometimes disconcerting
responses at work. What, for example, does, "What will we do without you?" mean
if you weren't planning to take much time off?

It advises impending mothers to learn the details of company leave policies
before announcing the pregnancy, and it contains a survey of the various local,
state and Federal protections for pregnant workers and their families, as well
as discussions of finding child care and making flexible work arrangements. The
book's anecdotes are especially good at revealing the pressures and ambivalence
that drive pregnant women and new (and not so new) mothers bananas.

"Everything" does not -- cannot -- prepare you for the day -- and it will come,
oh yes, it will come -- when your three-year-old tells you a story about a good
mommy and a bad mommy. The good mommy plays "Hi Ho! Cherry-O" and brings books
home from the bookstore. The bad mommy goes to work. How long until adolescence?

There is only one appropriate response to "Coping With the Male Ego in the
Workplace": Must we? "The male ego is that manifestation of behavior that is a
result of a strong need to maintain a sense of superiority and control," contend
the authors, Sandra Grymes and Mary Stanton in this Long-
meadow Press book ($15.95). Coping with it, the book's anecdotes suggest,
involves a great deal of tapdancing around a great many incivil men, most of
whom would seem to need a sharp smack on the head from Miss Manners.

The authors take the fashionable position that men and women are different, and
that women, who they say tend to be collaborative and cooperative, are more
naturally constituted to lead in the diverse, late-20th century fin de siecle
workplace. If the book encourages women to stop acting wussy and speak up for
themselves, it may be useful.

The "white, male and worried" kind of worker is not much in evidence in
"Coping." Read instead Michael Crichton's cynical new film treatment,
"Disclosure" (Knopf, $24), a nightmarish vision in which all the women are
dweebs or tramps, all the men were hired when there were standards and the only
hint of wit comes when the wronged exec and his lawyer encounter the Cruella de
Ville-ish villainess in a restaurant and order pasta puttanesca. You want a
nightmare, guys? Starting now, Madonna is your CFO! Roseanne Arnold is head of
human resources! Lorena Bobbitt is in charge of downsizing!

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Jan. 23-29;
Putting the Vietnam War to Rest

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The United States Government wants the best possible accounting
of the more than 2,200 Americans missing in Indochina before ending the trade
embargo against Vietnam. U.S.-Vietnamese excavation teams made the 27th field
search for servicemen's remains at a crash site in central Vietnam last week.
(Reuter)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Washington City Full of Prozac

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1265 words

DATELINE: WENATCHEE, Wash., Jan. 27


If the people in this valley of big pears and blushing apples seem inordinately
happy -- or at least less prone to crankiness -- it may be in no small part
because of Dr. James D. Goodwin.

Dr. Goodwin and the drug Prozac arrived here about the same time, bringing a
whole new approach for treating depression to a place that calls itself the
"Apple Capital of the World." A clinical psychologist and Vietnam War veteran
with a get-to-the-point attitude from years in the military, Dr. Goodwin soon
became known as the "Pied Piper of Prozac," the antidepressant drug now used by
more than six million Americans.

Since he started private practice in this Columbia River town of 21,000 in 1989,
Dr. Goodwin says, he has seen more than 600 people with symptoms of depression,
and for almost all of them, his treatment has included Prozac. Dr. Goodwin, like
most psychologists, is not a medical doctor, so he refers patients to physicians
who prescribe Prozac in conjunction with his therapy.

Dr. Goodwin says he can sometimes make a diagnosis in minutes after seeing a
client. And he seems to get results: Many of his clients say he is the best
thing to happen to Wenatchee since they figured out a way to keep apples looking
fresh year round.

Dr. Goodwin may be to psychology what the drive-through contact lens dispenser
is to optometry; he has made it quick and relatively easy to get help for an
affliction that has long been treated by years of talk therapy, or in severe
cases with slow-acting drugs that also had troublesome side effects. As such, he
could represent the retail future of psychotherapy.

But to some of his professional peers, and the Washington State Board of
Psychology, Dr. Goodwin is a serious threat. In a rare action filed last month,
the board has brought a formal complaint against Dr. Goodwin that could result
in the loss of his license.

Dr. Goodwin is accused of being too quick to diagnose patients and of overuse on
Prozac as a therapeutic tool. The accusations, filed last month, say that Dr.
Goodwin may pose "a threat to the public health, safety and welfare."

Threat Seen to Competitors

To Dr. Goodwin and his supporters, the only threat he poses is to psychologists
whose approach to treating depression is years of costly counseling.  Many of
his patients are farm workers and mechanics, people who say they have neither
the money nor the inclination to spend months or even years in therapy.

"We have had a revolution in mental health in the last five years, and many of
my colleagues are afraid of it," said Dr. Goodwin, who has a small office in
this town three hours east of Seattle. "Money is the bottom line. They don't
like the fact that you may be able to diagnose and treat somebody relatively
quickly."

Other therapists say that long-term depression is still too complex to be
treated like a common ailment, and that Dr. Goodwin's approach is simplistic and
possibly harmful.

"Depression is not something you can figure out simply with a diagnostic
dip-stick -- 'Oh, you're down a quart; better take Prozac,' " said Doug Fizel, a
spokesman for the American Psychological Association, which represents 118,000
members.

Prozac, with its allure of offering a simple solution to an often debilitating
condition, is driving a wedge among mental health professionals nationwide.
Although many people rave about the positive results from the drug, a number of
side effects have also been reported, included reduced sex drive and insomnia.
Some experts also fear that Prozac is being handed out like a happy pill, a
palliative for the normal bumps of daily life.

Great Growth Potential

But patients are demanding it, and providing much new business to therapists who
will recommend it. Dr. Goodwin, who says his practice has been lucrative,
typically goes through a client's family doctor for a Prozac subscription.
Prozac, "is a good tool, like a computer," he said. "I am not pro-Prozac. I'm
pro-psychotherapy. I mix medicine with therapy."

Because nearly half of all Americans who suffer from some form of depression do
not now seek any treatment, according to the National Institute of Mental
Health, the potential for therapists like Dr. Goodwin is enormous.

Among the many things that make Dr. Goodwin different from other psychologists
is his admission to patients on their first visit that he suffers from
depression himself and that he has been using Prozac for years. Making himself a
role model in this way bothers other psychologists.

Dr. Goodwin, who grew up in various New York City suburbs, was a marine in
Vietnam in the late 1960's; later he joined the Army and became a psychologist,
obtaining his doctorate in psychology from the University of Denver. Dr.
Goodwin, 46, is one of seven psychologists who are practicing psychotherapists
in the town. His clients speak of him in glowing terms.

"He's ahead of his time, and suffering a backlash because of it," said Fred
Arnson, a 53-year-old Wenatchee hospital maintenance engineer. Mr. Arnson has
been plagued by depression for years. He tried medical doctors and other
psychotherapists, to little avail. Then, last June he started seeing Dr. Goodwin
and taking Prozac, something he was initially reluctant to do.

"Dr. Goodwin gets people out and back on the road again," Mr. Arnson said. He
said he did not want to spend a lot of time talking about his problems with a
psychotherapist, which he thought would be costly. Still, he attended about 10
sessions with Dr. Goodwin, for a total cost of about $1,000.

If the medical board suspends or revokes Dr. Goodwin's license, "It will be a
great loss for this town," said Susan Barker, of the Wenatchee Chamber of
Commerce. Ms. Barker has been treated by Dr. Goodwin for nearly a year. After a
lifetime of depression, she said, Prozac has allowed her to live a normal life.
She said Dr. Goodwin was being subjected to a "witch hunt" because he is the
town's Prozac pioneer.

"It's a witch hunt," she said of the state investigation. "He poses a threat to
other psychologists. He admits his depression, he makes people better, and they
don't like that."

Although neither officials of the state psychology board nor the psychologists
who complained to the board about Dr. Goodwin responded to interview requests,
the board's documents on file in Olympia outline the case against him.

The 15-page account says that that four psychologists met with Dr. Goodwin in
Wenatchee nearly two years ago, trying to persuade him to change his method of
treating clients. They cited "incompetent treatment of clients" with Prozac,
according to the psychology board document.

His response was that they "just don't understand," the document says.

Some national experts say it possible to diagnose depression in a patient
quickly, and that Prozac may be ideal in such cases. But they are uncomfortable
with expediting treatment.

"I would agree that an experienced person can diagnose many cases of depression
pretty quickly," said Dr. Frederick Goodwin, director of the National Institute
of Mental Health, who is no relation to the Dr. Goodwin here. "But suspicion is
raised if someone always makes the same diagnosis and always applies the same
treatment."

Dr. Goodwin said he would be vindicated at a full hearing on the charges, which
has not yet been scheduled.

"I take great pride in making a lot of noise," he said. When asked if he
considered himself a martyr, as some of his clients have characterized him, he
laughed. "Martyr?" he replied. "I'm a martyr all the way to the bank."


NAME: James D. Goodwin

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. James D. Goodwin, a clinical psychologist in Wenatchee,
Wash. Since 1989, he has treated some 600 people for depression and has
recommended the drug Prozac for most of them. (Jeff Green for the New York
Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Jan. 23-29: Kerry and McCain;
Clinton Gets Political Cover To End Vietnam's Embargo

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 163 words


Two decades after United States forces ignominiously pulled out of Vietnam, the
war still rankles many Americans, largely because of the suspicion that Hanoi
has never been fully forthcoming about the fate of missing American servicemen.
That is why it took the leadership of two decorated Vietnam veterans last week
to push through a bill in the Senate forgiving the onetime enemy. The
non-binding amendment -- sponsored prominently by Senator John F. Kerry, a
Massachusetts Democrat, and Senator John McCain, an Arizona Republican and
former prisoner of war -- calls for lifting the trade embargo on Vietnam
"expeditiously."

The bill, passed by a vote of 62 to 38, was welcomed by President Clinton --
long faulted for avoiding military service during the Vietnam War -- because it
gives him the political cover he needs to lift the embargo in the interest of
his trade-driven foreign policy. The question now is not whether he will, but
when.   STEVEN GREENHOUSE

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: January 30, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1454 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   2   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A
                computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss
                and is accused by her of sexual harassment.

 2      2  77   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 3      3  13   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 4          1   FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of
                mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a
                sylvan Vermont town.

 5      6   2   BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent
                deaths.

 6          1   HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B. Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) Three
                American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German activities
                in Buenos Aires in 1942.

 7      4  42   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 8      5  46   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 9      7  23   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 10     9  16   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                and a poem.

 11    10   7   THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A
                collection of stories about American men and the strains of
                contemporary life.

 12    12   8   THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of
                Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the 1967 war.

 13         1   GRAND PASSION, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $22.) A romantic
                encounter between a small-inn keeper and the man behind a large
                hotel chain.

 14*    8  12   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery
                writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined
                to kill him and take his place.

 15    13   6   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &
                Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates
                a child's mysterious death.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction


 1      1  38   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2      2   6   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 3      4  11   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More
                comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 4      3  23   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 5      7  21   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 6      6  17   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 7      8   9   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                100, reflect on their lives.

 8     12   3   SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A
                psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.

 9      5  15   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 10    11  17   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 11*   10  77   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 12        26   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 13         2   FLY FISHING THROUGH THE MIDLIFE CRISIS, by Howell Raines.
                (Morrow, $22.) A journalist looks at middle age through the
                prism of his favorite sport.

 14     9   8   LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The
                country singer's memoirs, with an account of her relations with
                daughters Wynonna and Ashley.

 15*   13   3   A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Knopf, $27.50.) The
                development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years in Judaism,
                Christianity and Islam.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  14   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.

 2      2  27   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 3      3  36   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.

 4      4   2   MAGIC EYE, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when
                scrutinized at length.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 15, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear In Mind
(Editor's choices of recent books of particular interest)

BEYOND DESPAIR: Three Lectures and a Conversation With Philip Roth, by Aharon
Appelfeld. (Fromm, $17.50.) The Israeli novelist argues that literature can and
must deal with the Holocaust or give up its pretensions to be a vehicle of
spiritual apprehension.

THE BINGO PALACE, by Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $23.) Three decent people
look for love on a windblown prairie in this novel whose daily life is enriched
by supernatural events and the presence of Indian spirits.

A DRINKING LIFE: A Memoir, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Mr. Hamill's
drinking is the organizing theme for the 37 years covered here, but the more
fundamental matter is a fine portrait of the emerging artist, boy and man, in a
New York that is no more.

FRAUEN: German Women Recall the Third Reich, by Alison Owings. (Rutgers
University, $24.95.) Ms. Owings hoped, by interviewing German women 70 and
older, to find they had been nobler than German men in the Nazi era. They
weren't, but the excursion is fascinating.

A FROLIC OF HIS OWN, by William Gaddis. (Poseidon, $25.) Mr. Gaddis's fourth
novel, easier to like than his previous work, constructs a harsh, misanthropic
but hilarious comedy from the language of law and litigation.

GOING NATIVE, by Stephen Wright. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) A road novel
that explodes the conventions of the genre as a weird, dangerous shape-shifting
protagonist remakes his identity on the way to California.

JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES. Volume 2: The Economist as Saviour 1920-1937, by Robert
Skidelsky. (Allen Lane/Penguin, $37.50.) How Keynes reshaped the world's
economy, made a lot of money and married a ballerina, by an economics professor
whose mastery of many subjects seems to match Keynes's own.

LEAVING HOME: A Memoir, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $22.95.) What he's really
trying to do with his humor, Mr. Buchwald says, is get even for a dark,
poverty-stricken childhood. Most readers would agree his revenge is complete.

LIVE FROM THE BATTLEFIELD. From Vietnam to Baghdad: 35 Years in the World's War
Zones, by Peter Arnett. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A lean, engrossing memoir of
reporters and war by a correspondent who was among the first to arrive and the
last to leave in Vietnam, and virtually the only voice from Baghdad during the
gulf war.

PADDY CLARKE HA HA HA, by Roddy Doyle. (Viking, $20.95.) This luminously written
Irish novel, winner of the 1993 Booker Prize in Britain, is about the life force
incarnate in its narrator, an unforgettable 10-year-old boy in the brilliantly
realized world of 1960's Dublin.

SARAJEVO: A War Journal, by Zlatko Dizdarevic. (Fromm, $19.95.) A lament for
Bosnia and for civilization, by a newspaper editor who celebrates the endurance
and heroism of ordinary people caught in an insane conflict.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 30, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 856 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     1   RUBY, by V.C. Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) A young woman seeks
           to discover the dreadful secrets of her family's past in
           New Orleans.

 2     2   WINTER MOON, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The
           policeman Jack McGarvey on the trail of a serial killer in
           Los Angeles.

 3     4   SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied
           Poland.

 4    50   THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A
           law student investigates the murder of two Supreme Court
           Justices.

 5     5   DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine,
           $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent
           novelist.

 6     1   THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.)
           The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.

 7     6   THE INVITATION, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) A famous
           daredevil pilot finds romance when she returns to her
           Colorado hometown.

 8*    1   PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of
           murders in a small California town vexes a temporary
           district attorney.

 9*   10   ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Warner, $5.99.)
           Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a serial killer in
           Washington.

 10   94   A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.)
           Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged
           with murder.

 11*   1   DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) An
           ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a
           series of mysterious deaths.

 12    1   THE BELOVED SCOUNDREL, by Iris Johansen. (Bantam, $5.99.)
           Abduction, seduction and romantic surrender in Regency
           England.

 13   21   INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine,
           $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."

 14    9   DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A
           woman tells about killing her husband nearly 30 years
           earlier.

 15   11   MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) Three
           couples' lives are strained by the problems of having
           children.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    534  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 2     3   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.

 3    20   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket,
           $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.

 4    50   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

 5     7   OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the
           television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.

 6    120  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France.

 7    13   RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photos (by
           Walter Iooss Jr.) and observations.

 8    13   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as
           seen through the A.A. Milne character.

 9*    9   EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A
           woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of
           murders.

 10   35   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.)
           Menopause and today's women.

 11*   3   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 12*  134  YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine,
           $10.) The different languages men and women speak.

 13*  24   UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on
           life's commonplaces.

 14*   9   GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the
           physicist Richard Feynman.

 15*  14   YOUNG MEN & FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of
           Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a
           Montana forest in 1949.

 16*   1   WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ... AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and
           Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A three-day
           battle in Vietnam in 1965.

 17*   9   THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects
           of Taoist philosophy.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     7   BOTTOMS UP! by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.99.) Exercises
           for women to achieve good health and fitness.

 2     1   A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (Harper
           Perennial, $12.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with
           feelings of love in daily life.

 3    150  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles to practice in the
           pursuit of success.

 4     5   THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1994. (World
           Almanac/Funk & Wagnalls, $8.95.) The latest edition of the
           reference work.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 15, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
David Rabe Plays a Double Part: Writer-Director

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1184 words


Somehow David Rabe, the playwright, has turned all the haunting, ponderous bulk
of the past itself into a character in his new play, "Those the River Keeps."
And somehow David Rabe, the director, will get this character to dance tomorrow
night, darkly fox-trotting him forth onto the New York stage from the underworld
where Mr. Rabe would plumb the dreadful depths of memory's claim on people.

"When I wrote it, I knew it would be. I just came upon it," Mr. Rabe explained,
with a bit of inexplicable wonder at the fox-trot scene. He talked during one of
the final rehearsals of the play, which opens tomorrow Off Broadway at the
Promenade Theater. The dance is unusual for the fact that two men -- a cynical
hoodlum and a hyperkinetic escapee from the underworld past of the two -- come
together half casually and half fearfully in a moment of morbid nostalgia as the
old doo-wop tune "Angel Baby" thumps out from the stage.

The chance to invest such a risky moment with live actors and fresh language is
at the heart of Mr. Rabe's love of the theater and of his persistence in seeing
his work done in New York across a full generation of time. It has been that
long since he wrote his first big New York hit, "Sticks and Bones" (which won a
Tony Award), and was hailed as the playwright laureate of the Vietnam War
turmoil, being the author also of "The Basic Training of Pavlo Hummel" and,
later, "Streamers."

A decade ago, he offered "Hurlyburly," writing from a different locale of
netherworld ruination about a group of middling Hollywood strivers fixated on
ego and drugs and bloated intimations of creativity, all glinting funny-sad with
Mr. Rabe's shards of chances lost. In that play, which had a healthy run of
better than a year at the Promenade and on Broadway, Mr. Rabe had created a
self-destructive, candidly emotional character named Phil, fleeing his hoodlum
past. He came to haunt the playwright well beyond that play for not being
realized well enough on stage in the first place, in the playwright's view.

It reached the point where Mr. Rabe decided he had to test this as a director,
sensing that he could energize a different Phil, one more like his invention.
Then, as writer, he extended Phil back into life and set him as the heart of
"Those the River Keeps." Thus is Phil being pressed to fox trot finally with his
antagonist past, leading or being led by Sal, Mr. Rabe's Faustian wiseguy, who
embodies the seductive treacheries of memory that Phil would escape.

"The idea of the river being that which pulls you back," Mr. Rabe explained of
the play's metaphoric title, which is rooted in underworld lore that a corpse
slit open remains deep under water. "Are there wounds in the past so strong that
they'll pull you back no matter what you do? How do they seep into you
unconsciously in indirect ways where you think you're doing one thing but really
doing something else? What's the cutoff point where you can't get out?"

These ideas on river-memory's grasp are five years old now, since the first
teasing notion struck him. In those years, Mr. Rabe trimmed and polished the
play while directing two out-of-town versions. As a writer, Mr. Rabe was well
known for resisting cuts in his work, but as director of himself he has trimmed
without complaint. He also presented his own "Hurlyburly" in a 1988 production
well received in Los Angeles. There, he directed the Phil he first imagined in
the writing; tomorrow he unveils the latest manic, hopeful, frightening Phil,
daring love and doom.

Paul Guilfoyle plays Phil, with Jude Ciccolella as Sal, Annabella Sciorra as
Susie, Phil's younger wife, baby-craving in their tottering California life, and
Phyllis Lyons as Susie's best friend and Phil's worst critic. Oh, and there is a
diapered teddy bear that Mr. Rabe the playwright put in as a smallish symbol
that Mr. Rabe the director now finds has become a virtual fifth cast member,
tugged and hugged as it is amid the domestic angst of Phil and Susie.

"I had no idea the bear would have such a physical presence," said Mr. Rabe,
smiling. At the age of 53, he is a tall, husky, white-thatched man who offers
the world a gentle gaze and rip-edged dialogue and seems to almost enjoy not
having ready answers in an interview. "The bear's been like a continuation of
the writing process. I introduced the idea to Paul that he was free to talk to
the bear and we sort of worked it together. That's the real fun." He keeps
learning more about the play he wrote. "Sometimes it's learning how the play
wants to function, rather than imposing something on it. For me, that's the
thrill in directing."

What Mr. Rabe the director offers Mr. Guilfoyle, according to the actor, is a
kind of creator-direct resource. "This play is laden with David's subconscious
language and he is right here to put us in synch, to make us authentic," said
Mr. Guilfoyle, who has appeared in Mr. Rabe's "Basic Training of Pavlo Hummel."
"We've eliminated the middleman. He's the actual manufacturer selling me the
straight goods."

One of the producers, James B. Freydberg, has experience in backing
playwright-directors, and for him the critical test of Mr. Rabe came in the
tryout productions of this new play, in Princeton, N.J., and Cambridge, Mass.,
when it proved overly long. Mr. Rabe discovered his own creation had to be
trimmed and energized more, with close to an hour of running time cut, much of
it by making the Sal character leaner and more archetypal.

"The critical question was would David be able to trim the play to the level it
should be," Mr. Freydberg said. "Past history proved he was not able," he said.
"But he keyed in on the problems as director and was most brutal about the
author."

For Mr. Rabe, the director, "the hardest thing of all is not getting impatient."
He said he could sense early the need for faster pacing but learned to let the
actors work through their own process, knowing that "extracurricular emotion"
could be gently jettisoned through something less than rude confrontation.

"They do this thing inside themselves which I don't quite understand," he said
rather lovingly of his cast. "They build all this emotional life to work with,
and you have to let them have the time to do it."

Mr. Rabe pays great tribute for learning about directing to Mike Nichols, who in
1984 staged the "Hurlyburly" that, in the playwright's view, misrepresented the
original Phil and cut some of his role and his humanity.

"I felt the play had been turned on its head," he said. "But I always said that
working with Mike was like getting a Ph.D. in directing. I spent months trying
to figure out what he had been able to do: who's standing, who's walking, who's
up or down, taking a drink right before speaking. I feel like that's the name of
the game."

Whatever the debate over those past artistic strokes, this director is intent
now on showing what he learned from them. His Phil was far from done back then.
David Rabe hopes that will be demonstrated fully when he directs Phil back
onstage to wrestle anew with fate and fox trot with Sal.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Annabella Sciorra in Mr. Rabe's play "Those the River Keeps" --
The teddy bear, the author says, has joined the cast. (G. Paul Burnett/The New
York Times)(pg. 36); David Rabe -- Memory, he says, is like a river that won't
let go of you, just as it will not float a corpse that has been slit open. (Sara
Krulwich/The New York Times)(pg. 5)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

A Book in Search of a Buzz: The Marketing of a First Novel

BYLINE: By Michael Norman; Michael Norman, a former reporter for The New York
Times, is an associate professor of journalism at New York University and the
author of "These Good Men," a memoir of American troops in Vietnam.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 4737 words



This essay is the first of two parts about the marketing of a first novel and
the beginning of a writer's career. Part 2 will appear next week.

Put aside all your strict ideas about what is worthy and what is unworthy. . . .
Just make it a matter of business."George Gissing "New Grub Street" (1891)

IT is a warm day in the early summer of 1992 and a young writer from the Old
South is hustling down Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, late for a meeting with his
editor. His first novel, still in manuscript, is nearly a year from the
bookstore shelves, but the process of promoting it, and him, has already begun.

He walks south sweating in the sun, hope and history at his heels. He aims for
something big. Not the Great American Novel, exactly -- he has no ambition, yet,
to encompass the culture, rewrite the idiom. Instead, he aims for something
literary: a book to anchor a career, a road that might lead to a writing life.

Down Fifth Avenue he goes, then through the main entrance at No.  666, up to the
20th floor and over to an amiable receptionist.

"Hi," he says. "I'm here to see Nan Talese."

"Hello," says the amiable receptionist. "And you're. . . ?"

"Oh, I'm Mark Richard."

He is 36 years old, with shrewd eyes and a shock of dark hair, a sturdy man of
medium height somewhat hobbled by congenitally bad hips. Late of Virginia and
now of New York, he has worked as a fisherman, a photographer, a private eye, a
manager for a political candidate. He's lived high, dining at the table of
well-to-do friends, and he's lived low, so strapped he's slept beside a highway.

At first glance, he seems poised for success. His short stories have appeared in
Esquire, Harper's Magazine and The New Yorker, and in 1989 Knopf collected 10 of
them in "The Ice at the Bottom of the World," which won the PEN/Hemingway prize
and led to a Whiting Foundation grant. His editor, Nan A. Talese of Doubleday,
publishes, among many others, Margaret Atwood and Pat Conroy, the former long a
critical success, the latter a best seller. And his agent, Georges Borchardt,
has counted among his many clients Beckett and Sartre, Jane Fonda and Tracy
Kidder.

But in the catchpenny world of commercial publishing, where "value" frequently
has meaning only at the bottom of a balance sheet, all this can add up to very
little. In the counting rooms of modern American publishing houses, the past is
measured in sales and returns, and Mark Richard's thin collection made almost no
impression in the marketplace. So today he has come to his new publisher,
Doubleday, hoping to find a way to make his next book -- his first novel --
sell.

Of course, no author or book is typical. But the story of Mark Richard
(pronounced ree-SHARD) and "Fishboy" is instructive in illustrating the fate of
a first novel. The author was selected as the focus of this essay not because he
is the most promising writer of his generation, or because he is this season's
young-man-about-fiction, but because he has an interesting writing style and
because he had the forbearance to sit through more than 50 interviews spread
across nearly two years.

Mark Richard is a late-20th-century writer, which is to say that, like it or
not, he takes a hand in selling his product. These days the most ardent apostles
for art roll up their sleeves, hold their noses against the meretriciousness of
the marketplace and practice a little economic determinism. Even Cormac
McCarthy, Don DeLillo and William Gaddis -- eminent novelists who are
notoriously shy when it comes to publicity -- have surrendered to the exigencies
of modern publishing and agreed to be the subjects of magazine articles.

Some first novelists lend themselves to the hard sell. Such was the case with
Donna Tartt and her 1992 book "The Secret History," a hefty campus novel that
won its author commercial success and celebrity. But the publicity and marketing
machine that put Ms. Tartt on the best-seller lists (and has so far, according
to its publisher, netted over 200,000 copies in hard cover alone) will not grind
nearly as hard for Mark Richard. "Fishboy" is not the sort of book to inspire
gossipy feature stories. Narrow and oblique, it is an unexpected tale told in an
unexpected way. What is more, the author does not have the kind of profile that
suggests literary success. He attended Washington & Lee University, a small
school in the South, not a well-known graduate-school writing program like that
at the University of Iowa. He studied journalism, not the esthetic laws, as John
Gardner called them, that writing programs purvey.

In the end, Mark Richard will discover what most authors discover: at some
point, after all the angst and effort -- the editor's grand plan, the
publicist's pitch, the salesman's best show -- the fate of any book, but
especially a first novel, is often beyond reckoning.

"Fishboy" is a story -- a myth, really -- about a young grotesque, looking for
redemption, who goes to sea on a trawler crewed by misfits and murderers. The
plot is oblique, the characters bizarre, the language so rich it is sometimes
impenetrable. Such a book is a tough sell, and not just to a general readership.

Long before it is sent out to fight for a place on the bookstore shelves,
"Fishboy" will have to win friends inside the publishing house that releases it,
especially among Doubleday's sales representatives, who pitch the company's list
of titles to the nation's 30,000 bookstores. No sales rep has the time to tout
every title on the list. Instead, a sales rep pushes the books he or she thinks
will sell -- or, sometimes, the ones that seem of personal interest. If Mark
Richard's editor, Ms. Talese, can't convince Doubleday's sales force that
"Fishboy" deserves at least a mention when they're out peddling the company's
products, then the book -- and the career that rides on it -- could end up in
the jaws of a pulp machine.

Most publishers divide their offerings into two main lists, fall and spring.
Six to eight months in advance of each season, the sales force and marketing
crew gather at a series of meetings to review the upcoming list; the decisions
that are made at these sessions -- closed to outsiders -- can make or break a
book. Major houses like Doubleday publish between 100 and 150 titles a season.
Profit margins are too thin to promote aggressively each item on such a large
list, so at their sales and marketing meetings the companies practice a kind of
literary triage. They decide who gets the full treatment -- the six-figure print
run, the lavish book jacket, the pressure on the news media, the 10-city tour,
the television interviews, the advertisements, the four-color posters and
bookstore displays -- and who is left to rely on luck.

The editors who are invited to attend the sales and marketing meetings are given
only a few moments to present each of their books. "I'd say we get an average of
26 seconds to represent five years' worth of an author's work," said a senior
editor at a major publishing house (one of many consulted for this essay who
insisted on anonymity). And, said another editor, if an editor's pitch is flat
or oblique, "if the sales force yawns or says, 'We don't get it,' then chances
are there'll be no tour or promotion budget. Your little novel becomes just
another couple of lines in the company's catalogue."

SALES people, of course, speak the language of commerce, not culture, so a
clever editor tries to give a book the cachet of a best seller. "At sales
conference you never bore the reps with a plot," said Gerald Howard, an editor
at W. W. Norton. "The easiest way to present fiction to them is by analogy; you
say, 'This book is a Chicano "Ordinary People" or a Yugoslavian "Joy Luck Club"
or "Catcher in the Rye" displaced to California.' "

Then again, an editor can try pitching the author, not the book. Nan Talese has
decided that the campaign for "Fishboy" will turn in large part on Mark Richard.
The story of his eclectic life should make good copy for Doubleday's publicists
and, as a former radio disk jockey, Mr. Richard acquits himself so well in front
of a microphone that Ms. Talese plans to let him address the sales reps directly
-- by way of a videotape that will be sent to them with proof copies of the
book.

And thus it is that Mr. Richard finds himself at the offices of his publisher
this fine summer day, fussing in front of a camera as he prepares to tape a
short pitch.

"Maybe," says Ms. Talese, doing a little coaching before the camera goes on,
"maybe you can say, 'This is a ghost story,' so it has sort of a sense of
mystery." (There is indeed a ghost in "Fishboy," but a ghost story it's not.)

The author is anxious, sweating through his polo shirt. "I want the reps to know
that I'll do anything to make this book a success," he says. "Will they know who
I am? Should I mention my first book?"

All at once the lights go on and the cameraman signals he's ready.

The author clears his throat:

" 'Fishboy' is the story of a discarded boy who has become a ghost. It is a
story of murder and fratricide and patricide, but there also are some lighter
moments and I hope even a love story thrown in. . . . I'm willing to go all
across the country to give readings, to do whatever it takes to get this book
out in front of the public. . . . I understand that you are the best at what you
do. I would love to make this book such a success that the previous publisher
will be very angry with themselves for letting this book go. Thank you, and it's
nice to be with Doubleday."

"Great," says Ms. Talese.

"Very friendly," says the associate marketing director, John Pitts. "Very warm."

For his part, Mr. Richard seems uncomfortable. A postulant to literature, he has
just painted his ambitiously unconventional work as conventional -- yet another
tale with sex and violence -- just so he can win over his publisher's sales
agents. (Much later, after a few beers, he will ask, "I wasn't too unctuous, was
I?")

Now, however, back in the office of his editor, he encounters a more immediate
problem.

"Did you bring the manuscript?" Ms. Talese asks.

The room grows quiet. He was supposed to have delivered his revisions today.

"No," says Mr. Richard, clearly diffident. "But it's O.K. I know we're on
deadline."

"I know you know," says Ms. Talese.

"It's going to be better," Mr. Richard goes on. "I'm telling you it's going to
be a lot better."

"When will I see it?"

Mr. Richard shifts in his seat. "I'm, ah, going south on the 17th."

"I think," says Ms. Talese, "that you should leave 'Fishboy' here -- before you
go."

"I need to turn up the volume."

"You need to work."

Doomsayers of American culture have been forecasting the death of serious
literature since that day in the early 19th century when the Harper brothers
opened their little shop in Manhattan and ushered in the era of modern American
commercial publishing. True or not, it is painfully apparent today that
technology, demographics and particularly the interest in increasing dividends
and profits seen in the last two decades have had a profound impact on American
literature. The world of letters has been changing, and these changes raise a
number of disquieting questions:

Has the printed word lost its power to shape society? Who's driving modern
culture -- Toni Morrison and Alfred A. Knopf or the Beastie Boys and Bart
Simpson? Is a great publisher still measured by a sense of taste and a
willingness to defy convention, or only by its ability to survive in a
marketplace where an average of 45,000 new titles a year -- including perhaps
some 4,000 works of fiction -- compete for shelf space? And what about the
modern editor? Is he or she nothing more than a bibliographic procurer, a deal
maker who thinks of books not as culture but as a share of consumer spending? Or
is the editor still the front-line critic, culling out the common and raising up
the rare, helping us, as the 19th-century critic Margaret Fuller put it, to
"catch the contagion" of art? What kind of balance can be struck between
literary fiction and commercial fiction? What is product and what is art? Can a
book be both? Is it fair when the critic Denis Donoghue says that "a work of
literature concentrates on being a work of literature at any cost"?

American publishers insist they "support" literary fiction, but their record
suggests something else. Today, the big conglomerates that have spent the last
30 years buying up most of the country's major publishing houses want big books
with big sales to justify their big investments -- and books that need time to
find their audience, books that might bolster a backlist a decade hence, tend to
get lost in the process. This hunger for immediate sales, for best sellers,
Thomas Whiteside says in his 1981 book "The Blockbuster Complex," has stripped
away the veneer of gentility that once made the profession of publishing seem so
noble. True, publishers have always aimed at the bottom line. (John Tebbel's
1987 history of American publishing, "Between Covers," is filled with tales of
the mean and niggardly. As the 19th-century publisher Fletcher Harper told his
contemporary George Palmer Putnam, after Putnam complained that Harper had
pirated one of his editions, "Courtesy is courtesy and business is business.")
But, inside the business and out, there used to be a sense that America's
bookmen and bookwomen were the country's curators of culture.

No more. Now the voice from the editor's office is filled with censure and
shame. "On the bad days," Gerald Howard wrote in an uncompromising essay in the
summer 1989 issue of The American Scholar, "the days when another venerable
American house is neutron-bombed by the mindless conglomerate . . . I decide
that literature is the very last thing that publishing is about. I decide that
publishing is about power and money and ego and sharp practice." Books are
products, units, goods; this is a state of mind that corrodes culture. "There
are houses these days where they are telling their editors not to edit, that
it's not an efficient use of their time," said one veteran editor of literary
novels. "You want those manuscripts to come in and get out there making money."
Ted Solotaroff, who spent a career of several decades editing at three major
publishing houses (most recently HarperCollins), has said there is a chill in
the industry. And that chill has become a bit deeper just in the past month,
with the announcements that Houghton Mifflin would close its Ticknor & Fields
division and that Atheneum would no longer exist as a Macmillan imprint after
this spring, and with the firing of half of Harcourt Brace's New York trade
publishing personnel. "The conglomerateer," Mr. Solotaroff wrote in a 1987
article in The New Republic, "has bred an atmosphere of fear, cynicism,
rapaciousness and ignorance."

Mark Richard is walking in his sleep.

Eleven months have passed. Through the summer and fall, the publisher has been
busy. An artist designed an appealing deep-blue cover and Nan Talese began to
oversee a marketing and publicity plan for the book. Ms. Talese has approved
lists of authors who might provide prepublication quotations, book critics to
cajole, and booksellers to receive advance copies (called bound galleys, these
are early proofs in paper covers, usually sent out months before publication in
very small quantities but occasionally released en masse, as promotional
"reading copies"). She has also signed off on lists of newspapers, magazines and
radio stations that might give "Fishboy" space or play.

Meanwhile, Mr. Richard has struggled with the revisions -- Ms. Talese had found
sentences that went awry, gaps in the story, characters that weren't well
explained -- and he has been late in delivering them. "Every time I talked to
Nan on the phone, I could hear her pencil tapping on the desk." Then he polished
the galley proofs and met with Marly Rusoff, a vice president and associate
publisher at Doubleday, to help plan a series of readings and promotional
appearances.

Now, in early April 1993, "Fishboy" is on its way to the bookstores, and Mr.
Richard is so nervous -- "scared, really" -- that he wakes up in the middle of
the night standing by his desk or in front of his refrigerator. For the first
time since he arrived in New York eight years ago, he has his own apartment.
Spread out on his bed is a map, along with a travel schedule. In a month he'll
be on the road, first on a publicity tour planned by Ms. Rusoff -- a quick run
through Miami, San Francisco, Seattle and Toronto -- and then, starting the
second week in June, on an automobile trip that he and Ms. Rusoff organized
together: 28 signings and readings from Texas to Virginia. He can't, of course,
drive his way onto the best-seller lists -- "No one, including me, expects this
book, an odd book, to have a broad appeal," he says -- but he hopes to build an
audience for his work, for this novel and the next, out on the road, town by
town, bookstore by bookstore, one group of readers at a time. That, in any case,
is the plan.  SOMETIMES a first novelist bolts from obscurity into the
limelight: Ralph Ellison with "Invisible Man," Joseph Heller with "Catch-22," J.
D. Salinger with "The Catcher in the Rye." Since critics know the mythology
well, they are often attracted to first novels. "I've had first novels compared
to Dante and Faulkner," said Jane von Mehren, the executive editor of Penguin
Books. Prodigality aside, when a new voice gets noticed, she said, "that's
exciting."

As literary truck, however, first novels find their way into print for other
reasons. "The hope," said Ms. von Mehren, "is that the person will go on to sell
40,000 or 50,000 copies with their next book or the one after that." Such hope,
on the part of publishers, represents a very small, very acceptable risk. Most
first novels have advances against royalties that are less than $10,000 and
print runs of 5,000 copies or fewer. The production costs of a first novel run
roughly $2 a book. Publishers gamble a lot of these $2 chips, hoping one will
hit. And some see this gambler's mentality as the undoing of the industry.

"The editor tells the author, 'We're crazy about your book and we want to
publish you,' " says Ted Solotaroff. "Then, after publication, what happens in
most cases is that nothing happens: no tour, no money for ads, virtually
nothing. The mind set that involves acquiring a first novel is the fear that you
may be missing something, the next Robert Stone or Ann Beattie."

These days, however, publishers are not a patient lot and tend to gamble on an
author only once. "They want a sure thing," said Edward Burlingame, who for many
years had his own imprint at HarperCollins, where he published, among others,
Donald Barthelme, Colin Thubron, Roxana Robinson and Ron Hansen. "They don't
have the courage to publish a book about which there's really a reason to be
excited. If Joe Smith's first novel sells, say, only 6,000 copies, then the next
time his editor goes to the publisher or marketing director, the reaction will
be, 'Oh, my God, here comes Mary with another Joe Smith book.' "

No one knows how many people in America read serious literature. Last year
Philip Roth estimated that "maybe there are 120,000" serious readers in America,
and by readers he meant "people who when they are at work during the day think
that after dinner tonight and after the kids are in bed, I'm going to read for
two hours." Tom Jenks, the former associate fiction editor of Esquire, thinks
about half that many people buy serious books. And Nan Talese is convinced that
there are only 4,000 readers who "keep up with reviews of literary work, then
will actually go into the store to buy the book." And what they do with it at
home, she added, "only Heaven knows."

Such small numbers leave an ambitious unknown writer struggling against large
odds. Publishers can afford the gamble, but authors can't -- which explains Mark
Richard's nocturnal strolls.

"I'm sure," he says, surveying his map, "in several places on the tour, I'm
going to get there and only two people will show up for the reading -- and one
of them will be there for the wine and cheese."

The eyes are bright, the voice clipped, the conversation, as always, filled with
recognizable names.

"I was with Mona Simpson the other night," says Nan Talese, "and she said that
writing is about the soul and publishing is about the ego."

In fact, publishing is about profit, as Ms. Talese, a banker's daughter, well
knows. For the last 30 years she's worked as an editor, at four houses. At
Doubleday she has her own imprint (her name goes on the book's title page and on
the spine), which, in effect, is like having a publishing house within a
publishing house. She has some autonomy in acquiring books; below a certain sum,
probably in the neighborhood of $150,000, she can offer advances without
checking with the company president. She also oversees the design, marketing and
publicity of each book she acquires. She publishes some 12 to 15 books a year;
among them have been the fiction of Ian McEwan, Mary Morris, Gita Mehta, Robert
MacNeil and three winners of Britain's Booker Prize, Ben Okri, Thomas Keneally
and Barry Unsworth.

Bantam Doubleday Dell, which is owned by the German corporation Bertelsmann, is,
according to a Publishers Weekly estimate of gross sales, the second largest
publishing company in the United States. (Random House is the largest.) Part of
Doubleday's success comes from its blockbuster authors, most notably John
Grisham, whose law-firm melodramas exceed a million copies in their first
printings and have sold over 4.5 million copies in hard cover alone. "We could
make our operating expenses on just one of his books," said one Doubleday
editor. As at other major publishers, commerce is in command at Doubleday. A few
years ago Jack Hoeft, the chief executive officer of Bantam Doubleday Dell, told
a room full of students at a summer publishing institute, "I pay editors to be
able to smell out a book. 'But Jack,' some say, 'this is literature.' I say,
'How many will it sell?' "

The more publishers rely on formula fiction to fatten the bottom line, the less
likely they are to commit resources to the rest of the list. About 15 years ago,
Stanley Elkin was unhappy about Dutton's plans for his novel "The Living End."
The catalogue described the book and listed the price, but there was no mention
of an author tour or cooperative advertising. "The Living End," which John
Irving reviewed in The New York Times Book Review and called "a fine and daring
novel," was to be just another $2 chip. Mr. Elkin, a longtime and critically
well-regarded novelist (who is, by the way, still published by Dutton), decided
to exorcise his disappointment in a characteristically irreverent letter to his
agent, Georges Borchardt:

"There's been an awful lot of talk about this being my breakthrough book," the
author wrote. "(It even says that in the ad.) Sure, I could sell upwards of
3,500 copies. (I can't stop being sarcastic, Georges, I'm afraid I'll hurt
myself if I do.) I'm getting these failure vibes, Georges. I'm going to get more
good reviews and nobody is going to make a penny. Dutton will be able to say,
and probably will, how they done real good by literature, taking a chance on me.
I seem to be good for the image, Georges, a feather in the cap of free
enterprise, a kind of artsy loss leader. . . . Couldn't they at least have said
something like WORD OF MOUTH AVAILABLE ? These vibes, Georges, these vibes. And
you want to know something? Having said all this, I don't even feel better."

GEORGES BORCHARDT became Mark Richard's agent after the young writer was sent to
him by Esquire's Tom Jenks. Mr. Borchardt sent "Fishboy" to Nan Talese in the
fall of 1991. She'd admired the author's earlier work and, after reading the
manuscript, began to think about making an offer. "Fishboy" was then in its
nascent form, "an experimental novel," she thought, "slim, difficult for a
reader to grasp." She couldn't pay much for just one book, but when the author
told her he had another novel in the works and enough stories for a second
collection, Ms. Talese put together a deal: about $120,000 (no one will say for
sure) for the hard-cover and paperback rights to all three books. (When all is
said and done, if Mr. Richard's annual income for the length of the contract is
$15,000, he'll be doing better than most journeyman writers.)

In the late summer of 1992, "Fishboy" was presented to the Doubleday sales
force. (Along with proof copies, Doubleday sends its sales reps a videotape on
which editors -- sometimes along with authors -- introduce their books for the
coming season.) Ms. Talese tried to convince them that "Fishboy" was "really a
phantasmagoric dream and you're carried along by the beauty of the language."
Many, however, were not convinced. They sent back word that they found the book
too difficult to read. "That's fine," Ms. Talese replied, "it's not for
everyone, but I believe it will get tremendous press coverage and attention
because critics like to discover someone new." And then she announced that she
was thinking of a first printing of 10,000 copies, many more than the customary
number for a first novel, a clear signal to the sales reps that she considered
"Fishboy" more than just another $2 gamble.

The marketing campaign for "Fishboy" began a year ago this month, four months in
advance of publication. Nan Talese mailed bound galleys to 1,100 independent
bookstores, places that had been identified across the years as good outlets for
literary fiction. She hoped the work would speak for itself, though she included
a letter extolling the author's virtues, his unusual background and her
conviction that the work would get good reviews.

Before reviews appear in the popular press, the industry's trade publication,
Publishers Weekly, and its major previewing rival, Kirkus Reviews, offer their
opinions. Both sources are read by bookstore owners, librarians, newspaper book
editors and arts editors across the country. A good review in both can prompt
the stores to file larger advance orders. The reviews in Kirkus are consistently
more captious than those in Publishers Weekly. If "Fishboy" could win plaudits
in Kirkus, then it might break out early, as they say in the industry, and take
on a buzz.

The review appeared in the March 1 issue: "The promise of Richard's story
collection is only fitfully apparent in his surrealistic first novel. . . . The
transition from short story to novel has proven difficult for Richard, and his
incantatory style, thrilling at the start, looks too effortful over the long
haul."

Orders were slow, so Ms. Talese dispatched a second letter to her 1,100
independents:

"It is not often one reads a manuscript and has the instinct that it is the work
of a young writer who will be significant in American letters. I remember when
editors said that of Cormac McCarthy in the 1950's. I saw that in the work of
Mark Richard. . . . The figures registered in our computer show that all
independents have ordered only one or at most two copies of 'Fishboy.' I fear
that if you do not have more than that when the reviews appear readers will not
find 'Fishboy' and we know they rarely return later. I hope Richard will not
have to wait 25 years as McCarthy did."

As a marketing conceit, it was both clever and ironic: it traded on the
reputation of a man who takes little part in publishing except to write his
highly acclaimed books and it implied, without any evidence whatsoever, that a
buzz had already begun.

It is now the first week in May, the official publication date. The major
reviews -- from The New York Times, The Washington Post, The Los Angeles Times
and The Chicago Tribune -- ought to appear soon. The critics, of course, might
dislike "Fishboy" -- or, worse, simply ignore it. But at least it is in the
stores, on the shelves.

Nan Talese is sitting at her desk, staring at an elegant arrangement of tulips
in a crystal vase. "Publishing literary novels is like sailing a small craft,"
she is saying. "Either you catch the wind or you have to paddle very hard."

Next week: "Fishboy" is published, the reviewers weigh in and Mark Richard takes
to the road to sell his book.

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 20, 1994, Sunday

CORRECTION:
An essay on Jan. 30, about the market ing of a first novel, misidentified the
current publisher of the novelist Stanley Elkin. It is Hyperion, not Dutton.




GRAPHIC: Drawing (pg. 3)
Photo: Mark Richard. (BILL HAYWARD/DOUBLEDAY)(pg. 23)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 31, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final


International   A2-9

ISRAELI-P.L.O. ACCORD NEAR

Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, meeting in Switzerland, said
that they were close to breaking their deadlock on the details of Palestinian
self-rule for the Gaza Strip and Jericho.  A1

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 872 words


ARAFAT'S FACTION LOSING GROUND

Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the P.L.O., continues to lose support among
Palestinians even as he negotiates with Israel. Loyalists feel it is important
to reach agreement to halt the slide.  A6

CZECH REPUBLIC THRIVING

The Czech Republic has low unemployment and impressive economic growth as it
moves from communism to capitalism, while many of its neighbors are struggling.
A1

U.S. APPROVES IRISH LEADER'S VISA

The United States said it would issue a visa for the head of the Irish
Republican Army's political wing to attend a conference in New York, citing his
recent conciliatory comments.  A1

Britain and Ireland are hopeful on peace for Ulster.  A7

BOSNIA INTERVENTION REPORTED

A Bosnian intelligence report appears to support observations by United Nations
officials that troops from Yugoslavia and Croatia are intervening in Bosnia.  A9


CONGO'S DEMOCRACY THREATENED

A promising transition from Marxism to democracy in Congo is threatened, with
economic problems and violence stemming from longtime ethnic rivalries.  A3

DEBATE ON VIETNAM EMBARGO

As the United States moves toward removing the trade embargo on Vietnam, the
most wrenching question remaining is whether Vietnam has done enough to return
the remains of Americans missing in the war. A2

Separatists were winning elections in Crimea.  A8

Algeria's Defense Minister was named transitional President.  A3

Cartagena Journal: Colombia's corner in the Caribbean.  A4

National   A10-14

NEW RULES FOR CLEANING DUMPS

The Clinton Administration is about to propose a major revision of the Superfund
law that would ease the requirements for cleaning up some toxic waste dumps.  A1


HISPANIC GROWTH IN FLORIDA

The county immediately south of Orlando, Fla., had the largest increase in its
Hispanic population in the nation from 1980 to 1990, becoming a haven for Puerto
Ricans.  A10

NEW FACE FOR LOS ANGELES VALLEY

The San Fernando Valley was long thought of as a white, middle-class suburb of
Los Angeles. But the recent quake revealed a valley undergoing radical change in
its racial and socioeconomic identity.  A11

Five people suspected of trafficking in food stamps were arrested.  A11

The pornography industry was set back by the quake.  A11

CLINTON HEALTH PLAN DEFENDED

Hillary Rodham Clinton argued in an interview that the uncertainty over the
President's health care plan was misplaced.  A12

DEFENSE NOMINEE'S CAMPAIGN

A priority of William Perry, the Defense Secretary nominee, is to revise the
Pentagon's cumbersome system of acquiring arms. His comfortable relationship
with industry may give a boost to his effort.  A12

REHABILITATING A BLACK CADET

A South Carolina senator has introduced legislation to commission posthumously a
black West Point cadet who was found unconscious and beaten a century ago.  A10

NEW ROCKET TO BE KILLED

A rocket that takes off and lands vertically, and may greatly cut the costs of
going into space, is about to be canceled by the Pentagon.  A13

MENENDEZ JURY SPLIT BY SEX

A battle between men and women on Erik Menendez's jury doomed the chances for a
verdict, a group of female jurors said.  A13

KEVORKIAN PUSHES BALLOT EFFORT

Dr. Jack Kevorkian began his ballot drive for a doctor-assisted suicide
amendment, telling an audience, "What this is all about is the right not to have
to suffer." A13

Indiana Journal: Jimmy Stewart's hometown starts a museum.  A14

Metro Digest   B1

A CONSERVATIVE MAVERICK

It was a Herbert London kind of crowd: middle class and discontented. He meets
with such groups in New York weekly as he campaigns for the Republican and
Conservative gubernatorial nomination.  A1

Business Digest   D1

Arts/Entertainment   C13-17

Theater: "Hello Again." C13

Film: Critic's Notebook.  C13

"Car 54, Where Are You?" C16

Music: "Street Scene" in Houston.  C13

Stewart Copeland and friends at Town Hall.  C14

Books: "How We Die." C17

Television: Double exposure for Bill Cosby.  B6

Sports   C1-12

Baseball: Properties chief may be out.  C11

Basketball: Cal beats No. 1 U.C.L.A.  C10

Minnesota embarrasses St. John's.  C10

Knicks back in stride.  C8

Brown's role on Nets expanding.  C8

Boxing: Chavez rues first defeat.  C9

Columns: Anderson on the Bills C2

TV Sports C4

Super Bowl: Cowboys send Bills to 4th straight defeat.  C1

Thomas's fumble the turning point.  C5

Horse Racing: Holy Bull wins Hutcheson.  C9

Olympics: Harding's participation up to U.S.O.C.  C7

Tennis: Three Slams in row for Sampras.  C10

Obituaries   B8

Aleksandr Adamovich, Belarussian author and political activist.

Bahjat Talhouni, Prime Minister of Jordan.

Editorials/Op-Ed   A16-17

Editorials

Right on the money.

Community policing.

Washington's secret garden.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: Running the gantlet.

William Safire: Who lost Russia?

Richard P. Nathan: Welfare, work and the real world.

Chronicle   B6

Bridge   C14

Crossword   C17

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 31, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Veterans Challenging the View Hanoi Helps Fully on the M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 832 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 30


As the Clinton Administration moves toward lifting the trade embargo on Vietnam,
it is still embroiled in a dispute over the most emotionally wrenching issue in
the debate: whether Hanoi has done enough to return the remains of Americans
missing from a war that ended nearly 20 years ago.

At issue in particular are 67 sets of remains that Vietnam has turned over to
the United States, an act that won high marks from Administration officials.

"That's the third highest number since the war ended two decades ago -- that
shows real cooperation," said a senior Administration official who monitors the
issue. But veterans groups insist not only that Vietnam continues to withhold
many remains but also that many of the remains that have been returned might not
even be those of Americans. The groups even assert that some of the remains
might belong to Vietnamese soldiers or animals.

President Clinton has repeatedly said that he will end the trade embargo only
after Vietnam cooperates in giving the fullest possible accounting of the fate
of more than 2,200 American missing from the Vietnam War. Indeed, several
senators praised Hanoi's cooperation in the debate before the Senate voted, 62
to 38, on Thursday to urge an end to the embargo.

The resolution, which is nonbinding, now awaits a decision by Mr. Clinton, White
House officials say.

Top Administration officials decided last month that the embargo should be
lifted, but held off on deciding when to do so as they sought to protect
themselves from any political backlash. That need for political support was the
impetus for the Senate resolution, but Administration officials have said they
hope to win over the veterans groups and families of missing Americans -- or at
least soften their opposition -- before going ahead.

Dolores Apodaca Alfond, chairwoman of the National Alliance of Families for the
Return of America's Missing Servicemen, asserted in an interview on Saturday
that the Administration was exaggerating the extent of Vietnam's cooperation
because it was eager to end the embargo to help American business.

"Only 3 sets of the 67 remains have been positively identified," said Ms.
Alfond, the sister of a missing serviceman. "When the Administration says: 'We
have 67 sets of remains. Isn't that wonderful?' they're embellishing the truth.
The Vietnamese are absolutely not cooperating as much as they can."

She put little stock in the identification process, saying that when the
Pentagon sent her family a package containing what were said to be her brother's
remains, it contained some animal bones.

A spokesman at the Pentagon's Central Identification Laboratory, which is
responsible for identifying the remains, noted that its anthropologists and
other experts were able to distinguish between the bones of Americans and those
of Vietnamese and that they could easily tell the difference between human bones
and animal bones.

It usually takes one to four years to make a positive identification of remains
once the United States receives them, say Administration officials, who add that
focusing on the three positively identified sets of remains underestimates the
recent progress.

The spokesman confirmed in a telephone interview in Hawaii that of the 67 sets
of remains received last year, 3 have been positively identified and returned to
the next of kin. The spokesman, who insisted on anonymity, said the laboratory
and a board of consultants had made provisional identifications on 9 more sets
of remains and were waiting for a final review in the identification process.

In addition, he said, the laboratory has made recommendations on identifications
for 25 sets of other remains, a step that is just beginning to wind its way
through the review process. Since the Vietnam War ended two decades ago,
Pentagon officials have made positive identifications of 345 sets of remains.

"We feel pretty confident that there will be an identification on these," the
spokesman said. "But the other 30 sets of remains are indeterminate. It's a
meticulous, very scientific process."

In identifying remains, the laboratory relies on things that include dental
records, DNA samples and records of crash sites and of where American servicemen
were last seen.

Some Groups Unpersuaded

But despite the laboratory's work and expertise, many veterans groups remain
underwhelmed by the results. In an interview today, John F. Sommer Jr.,
executive director of the American Legion, said: "They've been saying what a
great year 1993 was. But they have only identified 3 of the remains. So how can
they call this great progress."

Some supporters of lifting the embargo acknowledge that Vietnam is probably
withholding some incriminating documents and remains -- perhaps those of some
American prisoners of war who were executed two decades ago. These people say
that Hanoi will not turn over these remains now out of fear that this may spoil
its chances of getting the embargo lifted.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 31, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Running The Gantlet

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 735 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Though he had no ground for complaint himself, Bobby Inman had a point. It is
true that men and women named to high government office these days are often
savagely abused. We ought to think about what has gone wrong.

Lani Guinier, one of the victims, said on National Public Radio recently that
what was said about her made her feel like Alice in Wonderland -- who was so
transformed after she fell down the rabbit hole that she hardly knew who she
was. The people who advised her on the confirmation process, Professor Guinier
said, spoke "with a cynicism and a despair that were truly frightening."

The Guinier episode shows the main elements of the problem. Attacks are made on
nominees, for reasons of ideology and politics, with a zealotry that knows no
bounds of truth. The attackers are in both the press and the Senate. Nominees
are ordered not to reply, and those who should defend them are too often inept
or craven.

The Wall Street Journal led the attack on Professor Guinier by calling her a
"quota queen." That was a straightforward lie; she did not favor racial quotas.
Then Republicans called her anti-democratic because she had written about
assuring minorities political weight by using a form of proportional
representation, which most democratic countries do, instead of creating
gerrymandered black-majority districts.

Professor Guinier was ordered by the White House to remain silent, as a courtesy
to the Senate, until she had a confirmation hearing. But the chairman of the
Senate Judiciary Committee, Joseph Biden, let the attacks build up without a
prompt hearing. And then President Clinton, ducking for political cover, dumped
her.

That was a travesty of the constitutional confirmation process. The public,
Professor Guinier said recently, was denied a genuine "robust debate about ideas
and policies."

A few weeks ago The Wall Street Journal had a long editorial deploring a weirdly
gerrymandered black-majority Congressional district drawn in Louisiana. The
criticism was right, but the editors might have had the decency to mention who
was the prime critic of such districts: Lani Guinier.

More recently there was the case of Morton Halperin, a widely respected and
notably hardheaded national security expert nominated to be an Assistant
Secretary of Defense. Because he had turned against the Vietnam War, as many or
most Americans did, and because he had made sound criticisms of the C.I.A.,
Senator Strom Thurmond and others on the right attacked Mr. Halperin. With the
change in Defense Secretary the appointment died -- though he may get another
job in the Administration.

A victim of slow confirmation torture is William B. Gould 4th, a Stanford law
professor who was nominated by President Clinton last June to be chairman of the
National Labor Relations Board. More than seven months later, he is still caught
in a snarl caused by Republican partisanship and White House ineptitude.

The surprising attacker in this case is Senator Nancy Kassebaum -- surprising
because she is not usually so partisan or unfair. She has called Professor Gould
"radical," though in fact he is a moderate labor-law expert respected by both
sides.

Senator Kassebaum's real interest apparently is to dictate the choice for a
Republican N.L.R.B. seat. The White House could probably have worked things out
quickly, but it fiddled. A deal may finally be near now.

Of course politics has always played a part in confirmation. But the process is
nastier now. Republicans and the right-wing press are out to harass President
Clinton as if to deny the legitimacy of his election. The President, for his
part, has been slow on appointments and weak in defending his choices.

When Robert Fiske Jr., an eminent New York lawyer and former U.S. Attorney, was
named as counsel to investigate Whitewater, The Wall Street Journal questioned
the choice. Though Mr. Fiske had represented Clark Clifford, the editorial
conceded that he was entitled to do so. Though Republican senators had attacked
him for his role on the American Bar Association's Judiciary Committee, it said,
he had actually been good there. But why, the editorial concluded, appoint
someone facing such questions?

If we want good people in government, decent politicians and editors are going
to have to restrain their partisan zealotry. That has done more harm than the
much-criticized press invasions of privacy.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 1, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Washington at Work;
Pentagon Lawyer Quietly Gets Notice As a Rising Star in the Administration

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1550 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 31


First she was preparing Bobby Ray Inman for his confirmation hearings as Defense
Secretary. Now she's preparing William J. Perry. No matter. The issues remain
the same, if not the nominee, and Jamie S. Gorelick, the Pentagon's general
counsel, has been through a lot bigger upheavals than the Aspin-Inman-Perry
reshuffling in her year as the Pentagon's chief legal troubleshooter.

Ms. Gorelick, who left private practice in Washington to head the Pentagon's
army of 7,000 lawyers, will see how well Mr. Perry has taken her advice when the
nominee appears before the Senate on Wednesday.

She similarly coached Janet Reno when the Administration was taking no chances
on its second nomination for Attorney General. Ms. Reno was so impressed that
Ms. Gorelick is now on the short list of candidates to replace Philip B.
Heymann, the Justice Department's No. 2 official, who resigned last week.

The word that Ms. Gorelick was being considered was rare public notice for
someone who has quietly been at the center of some of the military's bigger
recent tempests. For instance, last year it was Ms. Gorelick (pronounced
go-REL-ick) who headed the effort to turn President Clinton's policy on
homosexuals into detailed guidelines.

Coming up with a code under which troops could tread the fine line between
private and public conduct at the heart of the new "don't ask, don't tell"
policy was a mammoth task. One meeting involved 30 lawyers from the various
service branches wading through case studies and drafts of the regulations that
the Pentagon finally put forward.

'A No-Nonsense Type'

As a 43-year-old woman with a civil liberties background, Ms. Gorelick might
seem miscast for her job in the male-dominated military. But her skills as a
tactician and problem-solver have impressed not only Defense Secretary Les Aspin
and Mr. Perry, currently Mr. Aspin's deputy, but also the most curmudgeonly
generals and admirals.

"She'd make a good marine because she's a no-nonsense type who gets right to the
bottom line," said Arnold Punaro, the staff director of the Senate Armed
Services Committee and a one-star general in the Marine Corps Reserve.

But Ms. Gorelick's involvement with politically sensitive issues has also made
her a target of criticism by both conservatives and liberals. The conservatives
say they did not like what they saw as her high-handed manner on the nomination
of Morton H. Halperin for a peacekeeping job at the Pentagon. The liberals say
she should have pushed harder on behalf of President Clinton's effort to allow
homosexuals into the military.

Before Ms. Gorelick came to the Pentagon, lawyers in Washington knew her as the
affable president of the 60,000-member District of Columbia Bar. She advised
Michael S. Dukakis's 1988 Presidential campaign on criminal justice issues. But
many Administration officials caught their first glimpse of Ms. Gorelick in
action when she was coaching Ms. Reno.

"I went in with some skepticism because here I'd put all this trust in some
person's hands and I didn't even know her," Ms. Reno said in an interview
recently. "But Jamie has a marvelous ability to analyze an issue, size it up and
give extraordinary judgment."

In 18 years as a lawyer in Washington representing clients like National Public
Radio and General Electric, Ms. Gorelick has amassed an armada of contacts in
the capital's legal establishment. Many of those friends now fill top jobs in
the White House Counsel's office and at the Justice Department, allowing Ms.
Gorelick to slice through the bureaucracy when a particularly tough legal issue
arises.

"To the extent I can pick up a phone and get something cleared that would
otherwise take more time, or speak frankly to someone because we have a
pre-existing relationship, I think that's been helpful," Ms. Gorelick said.

Accused of Arrogance

It is the Halperin matter that has prompted the most criticism from conservative
lawmakers. They say she did not respond fast enough to requests for information
about Mr. Halperin, who withdrew his name from consideration after his biggest
supporter, Mr. Aspin, announced he was resigning and after lawmakers assailed
Mr. Halperin's work for the American Civil Liberties Union as well as his
foreign policy stances.

"She handled the Halperin nomination with the arrogance and condescension I
haven't seen in my 11 years in Washington," said Senator John McCain, an Arizona
Republican on the Armed Services Committee.

Ms. Gorelick says Mr. McCain's criticism is unfounded, contending that the
Pentagon met all senators' requests as fully and quickly as possible.

Some liberals, meanwhile, say Ms. Gorelick failed to fight hard enough inside
the Pentagon to defend Mr. Clinton's pledge to allow homosexuals into the
military.

"She represented quite well the interests of the military but not the best
interests of the President," said Chai Feldblum, an associate law professor at
Georgetown University who was legal director for the Campaign for Military
Service, a coalition of gay rights group.

Ms. Gorelick said she had done the best she could within the constraints of a
policy that had largely been written by the time she joined the Pentagon last
May.

Anti-War Marches

The barbs from liberal groups are particularly stinging to Ms. Gorelick, given
her upbringing. Her father, an orthodontist, and her mother, a painter, were
Russian Jewish immigrants who instilled liberal intellectual values in their
children.

Reared in Great Neck, L.I., in "a family with a real social conscience," Ms.
Gorelick was taken by her parents to Washington to attend civil rights marches
and anti-war protests in the 1960's.

"I had a positive view of the military itself, and was much more angry with
President Johnson and the people making the policy" on Vietnam, said Ms.
Gorelick, who as a teen-ager helped recruit young supporters for Robert F.
Kennedy's Presidential effort in 1968.

After college, she applied for a Fulbright scholarship largely because she was
angry that the other major fellowships at the time did not consider women. When
she won the Fulbright, however, she chose to go to law school instead.

Although she says she has not been treated any differently as a woman at the
Pentagon, Ms. Gorelick relates one telling example of the attitudes women there
still face.

"You see that in the very honest way people, whether or not they're thinking
about it, respond to a direction from me by saying, 'Yes, sir!' " said Ms.
Gorelick. "They pause for a moment and recognize they shouldn't be addressing me
as a 'sir.' "

Orderly Manner

In a Pentagon whose top echelons have been criticized as having sloppy
management, Ms. Gorelick is a case study in organization. She is a habitual list
maker. Even in casual conversations, Ms. Gorelick speaks in the orderly way
legal briefs are written, ticking off her arguments, one, two, three.

Among Mr. Aspin's earliest appointments last year, Ms. Gorelick has wrestled
with legal issues ranging from aid to the former Soviet republics, the Air
Force's troubled C-17 cargo plane and antitrust questions facing a Pentagon that
now buys from fewer military contractors. "She's had possibly the most difficult
portfolio of any of us at Defense," said Mr. Aspin.

But Ms. Gorelick is most recognized for her appearances before Congressional
committees and the news media on the issue of homosexuals in the military. The
new regulations will take effect on Saturday.

"I honestly don't think it'll be that hard," she said of translating policy into
practice. "A lot will be left up to the services, but we're hoping to give it a
jump start. One reason it was so important to insure the services were fully on
board is that it won't work unless they have their hearts and minds in it."

When asked if she agreed with the new policy she helped to shape, Ms. Gorelick
was taken aback. She said that as a lawyer she was not used to being asked her
personal opinion. A day later, she called a reporter back with a more complete
response:

"My perspective from outside the Defense Department was similar to President
Clinton's coming in," said Ms. Gorelick. "I had come out of the civil rights
community and that was the group I identified with. On the other hand, I had to
be mindful of the deep concerns expressed here by people entrusted with the
military services."

Ms. Gorelick has had to make other adjustments in her new job. As a partner at
the Washington firm of Miller, Cassidy, Larroca & Lewin, specializing in
criminal and civil litigation, Ms. Gorelick took a big pay cut to join the
Government, giving up a $435,000 salary for $115,700.

She was one of four women considered for the Pentagon general counsel's job (no
men were interviewed).She was also mentioned as a candidate for Attorney General
and the White House counsel. "I was flattered, but didn't think it was
realistic," she said of the Attorney General's job.

Ms. Gorelick lives in a Maryland suburb with her husband, Dr. Richard Waldhorn,
the chief of pulmonary medicine at Georgetown University Hospital, and their two
young children. For now, she says she has no firm plans after her Pentagon job.
"Someone may have a grand career plan for me, but I don't know about it," she
said.

NAME: Jamie S. Gorelick

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In a year as the Pentagon's general counsel, Jamie S. Gorelick
has impressed her superiors through a series of upheavals and is now on the
short list of candidates for the Justice Department's No. 2 post. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times)

Chart: "Jamie Shona Gorelick"

BORN: May 6, 1950, in Brooklyn

FAMILY: Married to Dr. Richard Waldhorn; children: Daniel, Dana.

EDUCATION: Great Neck South (L.I.) High School; B.A., Radcliffe College; J.D.,
Harvard Law School.

CAREER HIGHLIGHTS: 1975-93, lawyer and partner, Miller, Cassidy, Larroca & Lewin
law firm; 1979-80, Assistant to the Secretary and Counselor to the Deputy
Secretary, Department of Energy; 1992, president, District of Columbia Bar
Association.

HOBBIES: Tennis, cycling, gardening.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 1, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Pierre Boulle, Novelist, Is Dead; Author of 'River Kwai' Was 81

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GRIMES

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 408 words


Pierre Boulle, the author of "The Bridge Over the River Kwai," "Planet of the
Apes" and other novels and short stories, died on Sunday in Paris, The
Associated Press reported. He was 81 and lived in Paris.

Mr. Boulle was born in Avignon. After earning a degree in electrical engineering
at the Ecole Superieure d'Electricite in Paris, he spent two years in France as
an engineer before moving to Malaysia in 1938 to oversee a rubber plantation
near Kuala Lumpur.

In 1939, Mr. Boulle joined the French army in Indochina. After the fall of
France, he fled to Singapore, where he joined the Free French and became a
secret agent. Posing as an Englishman named Peter John Rule, he helped organize
resistance to the Japanese in China, Burma and Indochina.

An Arranged Escape

In 1943, while trying to float down the Mekong River on a raft and make his way
into Hanoi, he was captured by the Vichy French and sentenced to life at hard
labor. While in prison, he began keeping a diary on scraps of paper.

In 1944, with an Allied victory looming, authorities at Mr. Boulle's prison in
Saigon arranged for his escape. He returned briefly to his plantation, but then
returned to France to begin a career as a writer.

His wartime experiences led to several books, the most famous being "The Bridge
Over the River Kwai" (1954), about Allied prisoners of war at a Japanese camp in
Southeast Asia who are forced to build a bridge for their captors that becomes a
target for Allied commandos.

Last Book Was in 1992

The novel was made into the 1957 film "The Bridge on the River Kwai," directed
by David Lean and starring William Holden and Sir Alec Guinness.

Mr. Boulle's other books, many of them tales of adventure or espionage that
dealt with moral problems, include "William Conrad" (1952), "Face of a Hero"
(1956), "The Test" (1957), "A Noble Profession" (1960) and "Ears of the Jungle"
(1972). His novel "Planet of the Apes" (1963), the story of a world where
talking apes have power over man, was made into a movie in 1968 starring
Charlton Heston.

He published two books of memoirs, "My Own River Kwai" (1967), about his wartime
experiences, and "L'Ilon" (1990), about his childhood.

His most recent book, "A Nous Deux, Satan," was published in France in 1992.

Mr. Boulle was an officer of the Legion of Honor, and a recipient of the Croix
de Guerre and the Medal of the Resistance.

No immediate family members survive.

NAME: Pierre Boulle

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Pierre Boulle (1973)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CLINTON REPORTED TO BE READY TO END VIETNAM EMBARGO

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1565 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 1


President Clinton plans to lift the 19-year trade embargo on Vietnam within a
few days, senior Administration officials said today.

While the President has not yet formally signified his assent, a senior
Administration official said Mr. Clinton had concluded that the time had come to
begin normalizing relations with Vietnam by taking the highly sensitive step of
resuming trade. Mr. Clinton's avoidance of military service during the Vietnam
War adds to the political peril.

A second senior official said: "It's a done deal. The President has made up his
mind."

It could not be learned whether the United States had informed the Government of
Vietnam of its decision.

No White House Confirmation

The President is also expected to approve the opening of a formal liaison office
in Hanoi to help American business ventures there, a senior State Department
official said. The United States has only a very low-level diplomatic office in
Hanoi now and a recently opened military mission to deal with the issue of
service personnel missing since the Vietnam War.

White House aides refused to provide confirmation of the end of the embargo, and
other Administration officials said there was a reluctance to make an
announcement until veterans' groups and others opposed to the decision had been
briefed.

John Sommer, executive director of the American Legion, called the impending
decision a betrayal of Mr. Clinton's past promises to veterans and family
groups.

A Betrayal, Legion Says

"If the President decides now to lift the trade embargo on Vietnam," he said,
"he will have broken the promises made to the American Legion, the family
members of missing servicemen and other Vietnam veterans, and he will have
betrayed those who are missing and their families.

"As a candidate for President, he told the delegates to the 1992 national
convention of the American Legion, in essence, that he would not lift the
embargo or move toward normalization until the fullest possible accounting of
our P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s had been received."

Announcement Within Days

Administration officials said tonight that Mr. Clinton hoped to make his
announcement by the end of the week. But they cautioned that it could slip until
early next week, depending on how long it takes to consult with opponents of the
move.

"It's just a timing thing," an Administration official said.

The reported decision follows months of debate within the Administration on
whether Vietnam had cooperated fully in determining the fate of more than 2,200
United States service personnel who are still officially listed as missing in
the war, which ended in 1975.

At a meeting at the White House in late December, senior officials reached a
broad consensus that the embargo should be lifted. But Mr. Clinton held off
making a final decision until his Administration could take the political
temperature of Capitol Hill and public opinion.

Senate Resolution Helped

Mr. Clinton's decision was made much easier when the Senate voted Friday, at the
Administration's urging, to ask that the embargo be lifted. The vote was 62 to
38.

After an emotionally charged debate about the lessons of Vietnam and the fate of
the missing, a majority agreed with the bill's chief sponsor, John F. Kerry, a
Massachusetts Democrat and Vietnam veteran, that it was time "to put the war
behind us."

Although the resolution is not binding, it enjoyed broad bipartisan support and
gave the President sufficient political cover to close a chapter on the war, in
which more than 58,000 Americans died.

Mr. Clinton, who has made the economic security of the United States a pillar of
his foreign policy, had come under increasing pressure from business executives
to end the embargo so they can compete with Europeans and Japanese who have been
scrambling to secure business in Vietnam.

'Time to Move Forward'

Senator John S. McCain, an Arizona Republican and a navy pilot who was shot down
over Vietnam and imprisoned for almost six years, said tonight that ending the
embargo would be "a natural consequence of the vote in the Senate, which gave
the President sufficient political cover to move forward."

"And I think it's appropriate," Senator McCain went on. "I think it's an
appropriate time to move forward and I think it's in the United States' national
interest to have an economically strong Vietnam as a counterweight to the
growing economic and military strength of China.

"I think it will help rather than hinder our efforts to obtain further
accounting of the M.I.A.'s. And more importantly than that, perhaps, the
Vietnamese are in compliance with the road map that the Bush Administration laid
down for them."

'It's Wrong'

But Senator Robert C. Smith, a New Hampshire Republican who has made the cause
of the missing service personnel the focus of his Senate career, said it was
wrong to lift the embargo.

Mr. Smith, one of the most outspoken Senators on the issue, said: "We do not
have a full accounting, we have not been provided all the information that the
Vietnamese can unilaterally provide us. Now it's 'lift and hope,' hope that the
Vietnamese by their good graces will give us that answer. I do not agree with
that.

"I just think that it's wrong to reward the Vietnamese for the 20 years of
intransigence, when they have grudgingly given us 200 sets of remains, when all
the intelligence we have shows that they're holding back. I just don't think
that the Vietnamese should be rewarded for that.

"He wanted to do it all along," Mr. Smith said of the President. "Now he has the
political cover.

"I think it's a mistake and I regret it, but I lost the fight and I know when
I'm whipped. The only problem is I think the families lost as well."

Political To and Fro

After the Senate vote, it became only a matter of time before the President
would make the announcement.

The Administration had debated lifting the embargo since Mr. Clinton came into
office. During the debate, the Administration offered Vietnam incentives to for
its cooperation on the M.I.A. issue, while pressing for still more assistance in
finding air crash sites, remains and documents related to the missing.

For weeks, White House officials have made no secret that Mr. Clinton was
leaning toward lifting the embargo. But they had also expressed concern about
opposition from veteran's groups, and acknowledged that Mr. Clinton's avoidance
of military service could leave him open to particularly harsh criticism.

But the mood changed sharply after Winston Lord, the Assistant Secretary of
State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, returned from Vietnam in December with
a favorable report on Hanoi's increased cooperation.

In a Dec. 21 briefing, a senior State Department official said Mr. Lord's trip
had proved that "Clinton's policies have paid off and we have made progress."

A Year's Worth of Pressure

Referring to the situation since Mr. Clinton came into office, the official
added, "We have had a high degree of cooperation from Vietnam, whether it is
measured in the numbers of remains returned, which is about the third-highest
since the war; the documents that we have been provided, the files we haven't
gotten to before."

While some officials urged that the White House take more time in sounding out
likely critics, the stronger view among Mr. Clinton's advisers was that he
should move quickly.

Among the gestures Mr. Clinton made toward Vietnam was ending Washington's
opposition to development loans by the World Bank and modifying the embargo to
allow United States companies to bid on projects.

Even after the Senate vote, in which 42 Democrats and 20 Republicans voted to
end the embargo, the White House was cautious on predicting what the President
would decide.

Always, the M.I.A. Issue

Asked about the vote last week, Dee Dee Myers, the White House spokeswoman,
said, "We welcome the Senate's sentiment on that," but added that the
Administration was still considering whether Vietnam had made sufficient
progress toward providing information about M.I.A.'s.

And Mr. Clinton put himself into a political box by telling family members of
service personnel still unaccounted for that their fate was a "moral" issue.

As recently as Dec. 10, Mr. Clinton wrote to Senator Smith, the New Hampshire
Republican, that he was "deeply committed to resolving the cases of all
personnel missing since the Vietnam war."

"For this reason," the President wrote, "I have made achieving the fullest
possible accounting for our P.O.W./M.I.A.'s the test of our relationship with
Vietnam. Like you, I seek an honorable solution to this issue."

But that was before Mr. Lord made his tide-turning trip to Vietnam.

A Final Warning

A senior Administration official cautioned that the lifting of the embargo did
not mean that Washington would rush to restore diplomatic relations, which he
said would not enjoy widespread domestic support and would not be an appropriate
signal to send to the Vietnamese.

"No one is talking about normalization,"the official said.

The United States imposed the embargo against North Vietnam in 1964 and extended
it to cover all of Vietnam after the fall of the South Vietnamese Government on
April 30, 1975. The President of the United States has always had the authority
to lift it by executive order.


LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Two Vietnamese shoeshine boys under a newspaper poster in Hanoi
yesterday heralding the collapse of the American trade embargo. Later, President
Clinton was reported to be near to announcing plans to end it. (Reuters) (pg.
A8)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1030 words



International A2-9

VIETNAM EMBARGO ACTION NEAR
President Clinton plans to lift the 19-year-old trade embargo against Vietnam
and will do so within the next few days, officials said.  A1

ATTITUDES TOWARD VIETNAM THAW
Twenty-one years after the United States pulled out of Vietnam, attitudes are
changing in the state of Washington, which is poised to make billions of dollars
trading with the former enemy.  A8


I.M.F. FAULTS RUSSIA ON AID
The International Monetary Fund said it is being made a scapegoat for Russia's
failure to achieve economic reform, but that the fault lies with Russia for
being unwilling to carry out new economic policies.  A1

VISA DECISION CALLED POLITICAL
Both the State Department and the American Embassy in London opposed giving a
visa to the head of the Irish Republican Army's political unit, but it was
approved for political reasons, officials said.  A1

I.R.A. SPOKESMAN'S CONDITIONS
The head of the Irish Republican Army's political wing, speaking in New York,
said he cannot reach conclusions about a peace proposal for Northern Ireland
without clarifications from Britain.  A6

PRESSURE ON U.S. OVER BOSNIA
Both the British Foreign Secretary, visiting Washington, and the United Nations
leader put pressure on the United States to take an active role in negotiating
peace for Bosnia.  A6

U.S. PRESSES CHINA ON RIGHTS
The Clinton Administration, in its annual human rights report, issued a strong
critique of human rights in China and said it would have to make many
improvements to maintain its favored trade status. A9

An Ecuadorean was named to a new U.N. human rights post.  A8

DASHED HOPES IN MEXICO
Government handling of the coffee industry in southern Mexico contributed to the
recent rebellion, and the fading of hopes for the industry symbolizes the
failure of the Government's policies.  A3

Israel dampened hopes for a breakthrough in P.L.O. talks.  A2

Berlin Journal: A neo-Nazi has a change of heart.  A4

National A10-13, D19

CLINTON FIGHTS FOR HEALTH PLAN
The Administration has mounted an intense lobbying campaign to derail a
potentially damaging show of support by a leading business group for a competing
health care plan.  A1

STATES REQUEST TOUGH AIR RULES
In a decision that could decide the kind of cars sold at the turn of the
century, 12 East Coast states voted to have the Federal Government impose
California's tough emission standards on them.  A1

INQUIRIES INTO CLINTON DEAL
The House and Senate Banking Committees agreed to hold hearings this year on the
failure of an Arkansas savings and loan tied to President Clinton's investment
in the Whitewater real estate deal.  A10

REVISING CLEAN WATER ACT
The Administration and Senate Democrats spelled out ambitious proposals to
revise the Clean Water Act, broadening it to include farm runoff and other
previously unregulated pollution.  A12

FILLING TOP JUSTICE POSTS
The Administration has tentatively decided to appoint the Pentagon's top lawyer
as the second-ranking official at the Justice Department and has named a
little-known lawyer as its civil rights chief.  A13

PROFILE OF CIVIL RIGHTS CHIEF
Man in the news: At age 37, Deval L. Patrick will need all the survival skills
and pragmatism he can muster for what has become one of the toughest jobs in
Washington, the Assistant Attorney General overseeing the civil rights division.
A13

NEW WITNESSES IN EVERS TRIAL
The prosecution of the man accused of shooting Medgar Evers to death 30 years
ago wound up dramatically, with two new witnesses who testified that Byron de la
Beckwith boasted of killing the civil rights leader.  A10

NASA will save an experimental rocket from Pentagon cuts.  A12

A study shows no connection between hair dyes and cancer.  A10

Smoking increases chances of colon cancer, two studies show.  D19

Education Page D20

STUDENT LOANS AND POLITICS
After five hearings exposing misuse of Federal student-aid by colleges and trade
schools, the Education Department knows how to regain fiscal control, but does
Congress have the political will to do it?  A1

Metro Digest B1

Neediest Cases B4

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-10

Kitchen computer: Promising steak, serving burgers.  C1
Celebrating with John and Bonnie Raitt.  C1
If the food can move, it's probably not done.  C1
Metropolitan Diary C2
Off the Menu C2
Eating Well C3
It's not yellow journalism, but red, white or rose.  C8
Wine Talk C10

Health Page C13

Experts offer less cautious guidelines for pregnancy workouts.
Personal Health: Benefits of exercise during pregnancy.

Arts/Entertainment C15-20

Kirov Opera is glum despite success.  C15
Efforts to rebuild Barcelona opera theater begin.  C16
Philharmonic announces 1994-95 season.  C16
Finnish pianist wins Gilmore award.  C17
A little Dvorak festival in Brooklyn.  C20
Film: "Between the Teeth" C15
"Fiorile." C20
Books: A biography of Josephine Baker.  C18
Television: "Homicide" actor plunges into Shakespeare.  C15
Lingering fallout over nuclear tests in Nevada.  C20

Sports B6-12

GILLOOLY PLEADS GUILTY
Tonya Harding's ex-husband, Jeff Gillooly, pleaded guilty in the assault on
Nancy Kerrigan and said Harding approved of the plot.  A1

Basketball: Knicks undress the Celtics.  B7
Columns: Vecsey on Tonya Harding.  B7
Araton on Charles Oakley.  B8
Figure Skating: Skating panel undecided on Harding.  B7
Golf: Once a near champion, Mike Donald is begging to play.  B7

Obituaries D21

Howard R. Leary, ex-New York City Police Commissioner.
Benjamin Ginsburg, antiques dealer.

Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15

Editorials

Beware the three-strike laws.
J. R. and Bobby, part II.
Shortchanging the teachers.
Safeguard all plutonium now.

Letters

Bob Herbert: Joe Willie's world.
Anna Quindlen: With perfect timing.
Zlatko Dizdarevic: Deaths from natural causes.

Bridge C20

Chronicle B5

Crossword C20

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 19 words


"The passion is gone."   LEO THORSNESS, a former P.O.W.. who no longer opposes
trade with Vietnam. [A8:1.]

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Justice Officials Expected to Drop Inquiry Into Brown's Tie to Hanoi

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 587 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 1


Justice Department officials said today that Federal prosecutors had decided to
close their investigation of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown without taking
action on accusations that he had accepted a $700,000 bribe to help Vietnam end
the United States trade embargo.

Justice Department aides said the decision would be reviewed soon by top Justice
Department officials. They said that if officials here agreed, the prosecutors
would take the unusual step of making a public announcement because of the
publicity surrounding the investigation.

The end of the case would comfort not only Mr. Brown but also the Clinton
Administration, which had found the accusations a double problem. Not only did
it raise the possibility of influence-peddling, but it also complicated the
Government's deliberations on normalizing relations with Hanoi.

Past Denials by Brown

Mr. Brown could not be reached for comment tonight. But he has said on several
occasions that he never participated in any Administration deliberations about
lifting the trade embargo.

Law enforcement officials said they had found the case against Mr. Brown shaky
from the start because it rested largely on accusations by a Vietnamese
expatriate who had only second-hand knowledge of the alleged bribe.

But the accusation got wide attention because it was filled with many seemingly
accurate details. Also, before joining the Government, Mr. Brown had worked for
years as one of the capital's most prominent lawyer-lobbyists, sometimes for
foreign governments.

Two months after his confirmation as Commerce Secretary last January, law
enforcement authorities began an investigation into the accusations, made by a
Vietnamese businessman in Florida, Ly Thanh Binh. Mr. Binh said he learned of
the bribe from a business associate, another Vietnamese expatriate, Nguyen Van
Hao.

The accusations received a burst of publicity in the fall, when Mr. Brown
acknowledged that earlier statements from his aides that he had never met Mr.
Hao were untrue.

A Commerce Department spokesman had said that Mr. Brown "did not recall meeting
this man." But in September Mr. Brown's lawyer, Reid H. Weingarten, issued a
statement saying that Mr. Brown had met three times with Mr. Hao, a former
Vietnamese official, and that they had discussed the resumption of trade between
Hanoi and Washington.

3 Meetings With Vietnamese

The first meeting was in Florida in November 1992, when Mr. Brown was widely
reported to be under consideration for a Cabinet post but had not yet been
nominated. He then met with Mr. Hao two more times, including once after he was
confirmed, at which time Mr. Brown gave him a tour of the Commerce Department.

In acknowledging the meetings and the earlier false statement, Mr. Weingarten
said that Mr. Hao had sought advice on trade issues and had sounded out Mr.
Brown about starting a company that would provide advice to American concerns
hoping to operate in Vietnam.

But Mr. Weingarten said that the two never discussed any payment and that once
he had been nominated to the Cabinet, Mr. Brown told Mr. Hao that he could not
help him.

Mr. Binh's story got further support last fall when law-enforcement authorities
said they found evidence suggesting the Vietnamese were preparing to establish a
bank account in Singapore. Mr. Binh told the authorities that Mr. Hao had told
him that $700,000 was to be deposited there for Mr. Brown.

Mr. Hao denied the accusations before the Federal grand jury in Miami.

NAME: Ronald H. Brown

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 601 words



Companies

The two bidders for Paramount Communications, QVC Network and Viacom, sweetened
their rival offers. But the new bids did not provide a clear-cut winner in the
takeover battle. [Page D1.]

Spectrum Information Technologies, breaking nearly a week of silence after
disclosures that the company is being investigated by the Securities and
Exchange Commission, said Spectrum's chairman, John Sculley, was negotiating
acquisitions or joint ventures with several companies. It did not identify the
companies. [D1.]

The chief of Neiman Marcus said he would resign to head the merchandising office
of Federated Department stores. [D3.]

Shareholders of ICN Pharmaceuticals rejected a proposal to replace the board
with a six-member slate that included Rafi M. Khan, a stockbroker who has feuded
with the company. [D3.]

Harold A. Poling, the former Ford chief, is one of three new partners at
Metapoint Partners, an investment buyout firm. [D3.]

Shares of Banco Espanol de Credito resumed trading after plans for a bailout of
the Spanish bank were presented. [D4.]

A former chief executive of Du Pont Merck Pharmaceutical will head Pharmacopeia,
a tiny start-up. [D4.]

The New York State Insurance Department sent letters to 147 life insurance
companies in the state warning them to control their agents and stop improper
advertising. [D9.]

The Economy

Twelve Eastern states agreed to have the Federal Government impose California's
tough auto emission standards on them. [A1.]

A study says women in New York City came closer to matching the earnings of men
in the 1980's than elsewhere in the nation. [B1.]

The vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, David W. Mullins Jr., said he would
resign to join a money management firm. [D1.]

A survey by the National Association of Purchasing Management showed that
manufacturing activity continued to expand in January, for the fifth consecutive
month. [D2.]

Business Technology

The electronic data frontier is potentially one without boundaries, but it is
being overrun by a rush of new users tapping into on-line services. There is
already a shortage of mailing addresses on the Internet, a web of computer
networks. And services like American Online are scrambling to meet demand. [D1.]

A company is offering air bags for used cars, in the form of a replacement
steering wheel that contains an air bag. [D5.]

International

The Clinton Administration plans to lift the trade embargo on Vietnam within a
few days. [A1.] In Washington State, companies, especially Boeing, stand to reap
billions on Vietnam sales. [A8.]

Japan's markets were relieved when political-reform legislation was finally
passed, paving the way for Government action on the economy. But a fight is
already brewing in the Cabinet over what shape an economic-stimulus package will
take. [D1.]

Markets

Blue-chip stocks retreated after four days in record high territory. The Dow
Jones industrial average fell 14 points. [D6.]

Treasury prices tumbled after a report indicated that the robust recovery
continued to pick up steam in January. [D14.]

The dollar fell against the yen, following the decline in Treasury prices.
[D13.] Crude oil prices surged. [D13.]

Today's Columns

Baybanks is as much a part of Boston as the Red Sox. The bank's big presence
there has drawn attention to its stock, as New England's economy begins to
rebound. Market Place. [D6.]

In a humorous campaign, a new car from South Korea is happy to play follow the
leader. Stuart Elliott: Advertising. [D16.]

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Forget Vietnam? No. Forgive? Perhaps.

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1171 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, Feb. 1


Leo Thorsness spent six years inside a prisoner of war camp in North Vietnam.
Now he is building a home on Puget Sound in a state whose leading industries are
poised to make billions of dollars trading with the former enemy.

If anyone seemed likely to be angry over lifting the two-decade-old embargo on
trade with Vietnam, it would be Mr. Thorsness, a former Air Force fighter pilot.
But he favors dropping the economic barriers.

"The passion is gone," Mr. Thorsness, a conservative leader of this state's
Republican Party, said earlier this week. Last year he returned to Vietnam with
five other former prisoners of war. And, like many visitors, he was astonished
by the rush to capitalism there.

Twenty-one years after the Paris peace accords ended the United States's
involvement in Vietnam, the question of whether Americans can do business seemed
ripe for resolution even before reports that President Clinton would life the
trade embargo in a few days. To some, Vietnam is the century's last gold rush, a
potential mother lode of American prosperity. To others, it is a storehouse of
shame, duplicity and secrets that have haunted families for more than a quarter
of a century.

Big Untapped Market

Last week, in a surprisingly strong bipartisan vote of 62 to 38, the Senate
passed a nonbinding resolution favoring an end to the embargo.

In this state -- whose economy depends on exports and which is home to a large
retired military community and the national headquarters for an influential
P.O.W. support group -- all the major political forces in the debate are
clashing in what may be the final days of the final conflict over Vietnam.

The Boeing Company, America's leading exporter, says it could reap $3 billion to
$5 billion in passenger aircraft sales to Vietnam, enough work to sustain up to
50,000 high-paying jobs here on factory lines and in support services elsewhere.

The company lost a deal to sell four 737 passenger jets to Vietnam last fall
when rumors that the embargo would be lifted proved false. Now Vietnam's
airline, Hang Khong Vietnam, could become one of the major carriers in Asia,
said Rob Laird, a Boeing sales director.

Healing Effect of Time

East of the Cascade Mountains, the farmers who grow more than 60 percent of the
nation's apples look on Vietnam as one of the last big untapped markets for
American fresh fruit.

But this state, which has tied its future to expanding Asian trade, is also the
national headquarters for the strongest opponents of lifting the embargo, the
families of P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s.

Volunteers at the headquarters of the National Alliance of Families for the
Return of America's Missing Servicemen, in the Seattle suburb of Bellevue, were
alerting veterans groups around the country this week.

The vote in the Senate last week "betrayed the wishes of all the nation's major
veterans groups," said Dolores Apodaca Alfond, the group's national chairwoman.
"Shame on the U.S. Senate; they put business before morality."

But business, and the softening effects of time, appear to have priority.

Political Cost Diminishes

Ms. Alfond's brother, Maj. Victor Apodaca of the Air Force, was shot down in
North Vietnam in 1967. His remains have never been found, and he is one of more
than 2,200 American servicemen listed by the Pentagon as missing or unaccounted
for.

If Ms. Alfond's efforts to influence her senior senator are any indication of
the power of the P.O.W. movement here and in the other Washington, then lifting
the embargo would not appear to be much of a political liability.

Senator Slade Gorton, a Washington Republican who is considered one of the
nation's most vulnerable incumbents, voted to push for an end to the embargo. If
the vote had happened a year ago, he would probably have gone the other way, he
said.

But the issue has lost much of its political power, he said. Before the vote,
Mr. Gorton was lobbied by Ms. Alfond and veterans groups. After the vote, he
said, there was very little reaction, which surprised him.

Poll Shows Support

A supporter of the American war in Vietnam and a proponent of veterans causes,
Mr. Gorton said he believed that most Americans were ready to normalize
relations.

"Having American business there now is more likely to accelerate the original
reason why Americans were there to begin with," he said. "We have gotten
everything we are going to get by not normalizing relations."

A New York Times/CBS New Poll conducted two weeks ago indicated that while 57
percent of those surveyed believed that some American soldiers missing in action
were still alive, ending the embargo was favored by a slim margin. In the poll
of 1,146 adults interviewed by telephone from Jan. 15 to 17, 46 percent favored
an end to the embargo, while 40 percent wanted to keep it. The poll had a margin
of sampling error of three percentage points.

Over the weekend, Mr. Gorton attended a celebration of the Vietnamese New Year
in Tacoma. Washington has the largest Vietnamese population, by percentage, of
any state -- with nearly 20,000 people who moved here from Vietnam since 1975.
But no one at the festival voiced an objection to Mr. Gorton's vote, he said.

'No-Holds-Barred Campaign'

For President Clinton, his biggest problem in relaxing the trade embargo may be
with the nation's 27 million veterans, many of whom are suspicious of him for
his lack of military service and his opposition to the war.

In the last month, veterans groups turned up the heat. Bruce Thiesen, national
commander of the American Legion, which has more than three million members,
called on veterans to wage "a no-holds-barred, call-in-every-chip,
twist-every-arm campaign" to prevent lifting the embargo.

"American veterans aren't going to forgive or forget about the businesses that
put their profit margins ahead of the interests of our P.O.W.'s and their
families," he said in a statement.

But random interviews with other veterans here before the reports of Clinton's
decision reveal more diverse feelings. In part, that may explain why senators
like Mr. Gorton have not felt a strong backlash from their vote.

"We should learn to forgive and forget," said Wayne Collie, a retired Army
sergeant who lives among thousands of retired military officers south of Tacoma.
"I don't see anything wrong with starting new."

Making It an Issue

No matter how many Senate investigations or official inquiries of the M.I.A.'s
are conducted, a small percentage of veterans will not be satisfied, said
Sherwood Dickie, leader of a Seattle charity group for Vietnam veterans. Mr.
Dickie served in Vietnam and now works as a police officer.

"I think the majority of veterans groups that are not active in P.O.W.-M.I.A.
campaigns will be supportive" of lifting the embargo, said Mr. Dickie.

But Ms. Alfond, with her photographs of the men who never came back, has vowed
that she will make it an issue in the fall, for Mr. Gorton and anyone else who
voted to normalize relations.


LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  The United States has imposed a trade embargo against Vietnam since
the end of the Vietnamese War, prohibiting U.S. trade with Vietnam.
Chart: "Thawing Relations"

Do you think the United States Government should continue the trade embargo
against Vietnam or should it end the embargo and have normal trade with Vietnam?

End embargo -- 46%

Continue embargo -- 40%

"Don't know" -- 14%

The New York Times/CBS News Poll, based on telephone interviews with 1,146
adults nationwide conducted Jan. 15-17.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

H. R. Leary, 82, A Commissioner Of Police, Dies

BYLINE: By RICHARD D. LYONS

SECTION: Section D; Page 21; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 473 words


Howard R. Leary, the Police Commissioner of New York City from 1966 to 1970, a
turbulent period marked by the exposure of corruption within the department and
social strife in the city, died on Monday at the Buckingham Valley Nursing
Center in Buckingham, Pa. Mr. Leary, who lived in Solebury Township, Pa., was
82.

The cause was congestive heart failure, said his wife, Jennie.

Mr. Leary was a native of Pennsylvania. He was brought to New York and named
Police Commissioner by John V. Lindsay shortly after he became Mayor. Four years
later Mr. Leary resigned. The Police Department was then engulfed in a swirl of
accusations that affected City Hall and Mr. Lindsay's national political
aspirations.

In addition, a commission headed by Whitman Knapp had been formed to conduct an
investigation into charges that the department was riddled with bribe-taking and
other corruption.  Some civic leaders questioned Mr. Leary's ability to correct
the situation.

A year after he resigned, the Knapp Commission reported that both Mr. Lindsay
and Mr. Leary bore some responsibility for failing to act promptly against
corruption.

Morale Problems

During his tenure, Mr. Leary was caught in a barrage of problems that included a
strained relationship with City Hall, declining morale within the department and
deepening divisions among the city's residents.

He had to deal with demands for the creation of a civilian-controlled review
board, scandals within the narcotics bureau, violence between police officers
and Columbia University students, attacks on groups protesting the Vietnam War,
the bombing of synagogues and the perception of many police officers that they
were unfairly criticized for performing their duties.

Mr. Leary was widely praised for making innovations in the department. He
established the 911 police emergency number and set up a computerized dispatch
system. He also worked to increase the size of the force and to recruit more
black and Puerto Rican officers.

Mr. Leary never gave any reasons for his resignation at the time or later. He
refused to provide City Hall with a formal letter of resignation. His wife said
yesterday that he had never discussed the matter with her or alluded to it.

After leaving the department Mr. Leary became, briefly, an executive of the
Abraham & Straus store and then of Holmes Protection. In 1972 he became a
professor of criminal justice at Trenton State College, retiring in 1982.

Mr. Leary's career in law enforcement started when he became a foot patrolman
with the Philadelphia Police Department in 1940. He worked his way up, putting
himself through law school at night in the process. He was finally named
commissioner in 1963 and served for three years, then left Pennsylvania for New
York.

Mr. Leary is survived by his wife of 52 years.

NAME: Howard R. Leary

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Howard R. Leary, left, with Mayor John V. Lindsay in 1966, when
Mr. Lindsay appointed Mr. Leary as New York City Police Commissioner. (The New
York Times)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

In America;
Joe Willie's World

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 688 words


So there was Joe Namath, walking across the artificial turf with the aid of his
new plastic knees, his face baked and creased from decades in the Florida sun,
getting ready to toss the coin for the opening of Sunday's Super Bowl.

And then someone mentioned that Joe Willie was 50 years old. Fifty. An age
associated with grandfathers. This didn't seem shocking, it just didn't compute.
The idea hung in the air as something not quite real, at least to some of us who
remembered the way it was, and the way he was, 25 years ago when he had his
extraordinary triumph.

In January 1969 Lyndon Johnson was packing, getting ready to turn the White
House over to Richard Nixon. Vietnam was on television every evening and the
grimness of the war was echoed at home by the bitterness of the conflict between
the hard hats and the longhairs, the hawks and the doves.

And yet there was a youthful sense that ultimately everything would be fine.
Progress and the inevitability of justice were givens. Optimism was the rule.

When Joe Namath suited up in the Orange Bowl on Jan. 12 to lead his New York
Jets against the mighty Baltimore Colts, Troy Aikman and Thurman Thomas were 2
years old, and Emmitt Smith hadn't even been born. Man had not yet walked on the
moon, jumbo jets had not yet arrived, beer cans did not have pop-tops, and there
was no instant replay.

Despite the war, for most of the kids I knew, it was a wonderful time.

Growing up you hear a lot of old fogeys tell you how much better things were
when they were young. You scoff. Then two or three decades pass, an aging
quarterback makes a Super Bowl appearance, and suddenly you've picked up the
same obnoxious habit. In the comforting haze of your reflections, all the years
of your youth seem like summer.

But what was real?

When the Jets went to the Super Bowl the country had just left the yearlong
trauma of 1968. Martin Luther King had been murdered in April and riots
followed. Robert Kennedy was murdered in June. It was also the year of the Tet
offensive in Vietnam and the riotous Democratic Convention in Chicago.

Nevertheless it was not a bad time to be young. With the exception of drugs,
most of the pursuits and most of the attitudes of young people were benign.
Movies included "Funny Girl," "Rosemary's Baby" and "The Yellow Submarine."

Rock 'n' roll songs were still mostly about love and high ideals and we hadn't
yet gotten to the unmitigated cruelty and ugliness of groups with names like the
Dead Kennedys or Niggaz With Attitude. And we hadn't yet reached the era of song
lyrics that deliberately degraded women and celebrated the killing of cops.

Unless you were in Vietnam, it was highly unlikely that you'd be shot. And a
child getting shot in school was too bizarre even to contemplate.

AIDS and crack and the widespread unkindnesses of the 1980's were still well in
the future, as were the trashy television talk shows and the proliferation of
hate radio. We still had some innocence to lose. In January 1969 Michael Jackson
was 8 years old, Mike Tyson was 2, William Kennedy Smith was 8 and Joey
Buttafuoco was 11.

When the Jets beat the Colts 16-7, it was more than an astonishing upset. It was
a symbolic triumph of youth over the establishment. Namath was 25, long-haired,
cocky and hip. Most of the Colts, and especially their quarterbacks, Earl
Morrall and John Unitas, looked like escapees from Parris Island.

That's what was happening in 1969. The young, the underdogs, the oppressed were
being liberated. It was fun, and heady as hell. But as the successes mounted,
cautionary voices were forgotten or ignored.

The country still needed Martin Luther King and Robert Kennedy. The young still
needed the counsel of the wise. And the wise were always counseling values.

Men die. People forget.

The Jets never reached the Super Bowl again, and the country moved beyond the
turbulence of the 60's.

Was it better 25 years ago, when Joe and many of the rest of us were young? Not
better, but I remember it as more fun. Those who are kids today, beware --
you'll be saying the same thing when Troy Aikman turns 50.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 3, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words



International A3-12

GRIM REPORT ON WOMEN'S RIGHTS
For the first time, the State Department has focused on the treatment of women
in its annual human rights report and its findings were grim. The report on 193
countries paints a dreary picture of day-to-day discrimination and abuse.  A1



ASSAULT ON A SECULAR SOCIETY
Muslim militants have destroyed Egypt's tourist industry, scared away investors
and frozen its march toward democracy. But the more serious threat, many
Egyptians say, is the assault on the country's secularist traditions.  A1

An Islamic group told all foreigners to leave Egypt.  A10

SOUTH AFRICA CAMPAIGN HEATS UP
In the first blazing battle of what is now a full-scale campaign for the first
national election open to all races, Nelson Mandela and F. W. de Klerk warred
over who really freed South Africa.  A1

I.R.A. LEADER LEAVES U.S.
Acknowledging that President Clinton had increased the pressure to negotiate by
granting him a visa, Gerry Adams, the leader of the political wing of the
I.R.A., headed home yesterday as Britain denounced his visit as a "smokescreen."
A3

Britain's official for Ulster tried to discredit Mr. Adams.  A3

NO DECISION ON VIETNAM EMBARGO
If anyone had forgotten just how skittish Bill Clinton can be when it comes to
Vietnam, there could be no better evidence than his public insistence today that
he has not made up his mind on whether to lift the American embargo on Hanoi.
A8

Hanoi and U.S. predict a surge of investment in Vietnam.  A8

COMMERCE SECRETARY IS CLEARED
The Justice Department cleared Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown of all charges
that he had accepted a $700,000 bribe in exchange for helping lift the trade
embargo against Vietnam.  A8

SOMALIA ENVOY 'MORE OPTIMISTIC'
Three days after American troops and Somalis clashed in Mogadishu, Washington's
special envoy to Somalia, Robert B. Oakley, met with the clan leader Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, saying he was "more optimistic" about peace.  A10

JAPANESE POLITICAL CRISIS
The Prime Minister of Japan announced he would only reduce income taxes only if
the cuts were offset by a larger rise in sales taxes. The move created a
political crisis that could affect the U.S. as well as Japan.  A6

North Korea threatened to break off nuclear talks with the U.S.  A5

Havana Journal: The city's new ethic -- a frantic search for dollars.  A4

National A14-19

A BLOW TO CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN
The Business Roundtable, representing about 200 of the nation's largest
companies, shunned President Clinton's health care plan and endorsed a rival
proposal that would not guarantee universal coverage.  A1

EDUCATION OFFICIALS FALL SHORT
Because of Vice President Al Gore's pledge to cut the Federal bureaucracy, $2.5
billion for the Education Department's new loan program will not allow it to
expand without paring other programs.  A1

THIRD TRIAL, SAME DEFENSE
The defense in the third trial of Byron De La Beckwith, accused of murdering
Medgar Evers in 1963, began the same way it did 30 years ago: with witnesses who
placed the defendant 95 miles away at the time of the shooting.  A14

19 NEGLECTED CHILDREN FOUND
A drug raid led Chicago police to a cockroach-infested apartment, where children
slept on the floor and competed with dogs for food.  A14

NOMINEE FACES SENATORS
Appearing before the Armed Services Committee, William J. Perry, President
Clinton's nominee for Defense Secretary, portrayed himself as not just a
talented technocrat, but a global strategist and a forceful leader.  A16

THE COLISEUM MAY NOT REOPEN
The Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum was so badly damaged in the earthquake that it
will cost millions to repair and may not reopen for next fall's season.  A19

HEARING ON TROUBLED SATELLITE
An Air Force colonel told a Congressional committee that he was dismissed from a
job for recommending that a military satellite program be scuttled because of
"insurmountable problems." A16

CONSOLIDATING JOBLESS BENEFITS
President Clinton said he would ask Congress to consolidate benefit programs and
create "one-stop-shopping" centers where unemployed workers could pick up
assistance checks and get job training.  A18

EVILS OF SUGAR DISPUTED
Researchers have found evidence that they say should refute the belief that
sugar or the artificial sweetener aspartame can make normal children frenetic or
make hyperactive children wild.  A19

Metro Digest B1

GIULIANI SPENDING PLAN
Saying New York City faces "a fiscal emergency," Mayor Giuliani outlined a
fiscal plan that would reduce the size of the city's government for the first
time since the 1970's.  A1

LIMITED UNION SUPPORT
News analysis: Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to trim New York City's work force
makes a target of one constituency that did not support him: the unions.  A1

YOUTHS HELD IN SLAYINGS
A Brooklyn youth led a teen-age stickup team on a string of robberies at small
stores, killing three shop owners without apparent provocation, the police said.
A1

Business Digest D1

Home Section C1-10

It may be cold outside, but inside, it's crazy.  C1

Consumer's World: Unscrambling hype in cellular phones.  C1

At home with Ann-Margret: The lady in pink remembers Elvis.  C1

House Proud C4

Stripping furniture finish.  C7

Parent & Child C8

Arts/Entertainment C11-18

Hollywood on Hollywood.  C11

Guggenheim Museum cuts hours and staff.  C11

Theater: "Smiling Through," new musical.  C15

Music: The Lyric's "Wozzeck." C11

Pop Life C16

Dance: Nikolais and Louis troupe starts anew.  C11

Books: "The Palace Thief." C16

Sports B8-14

Obituaries B6-7

John Rewald, art authority.  B7

Willie Mae Ford Smith, gospel singer.  B7

Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21

Editorials

A first deep cut.

Mr. Hosokawa's next challenge.

Going on guesswork.

A chief for civil rights.

Letters

William Safire: Hair shirt city.

Frank Rich: "Some place thrilling."

Michael Eric Dyson: Bum rap.

Jeff Stryker: The dog walks.

Bridge C14

Chronicle B6

Crossword C14

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 3, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 157 words



Nominee Faces Senators

Appearing before a Senate committee, William J. Perry, the nominee for Defense
Secretary, portrayed himself as a global strategist and forceful leader. Page
A16.

Hearing on Troubled Satellite

An Air Force colonel told a Congressional committee he was dismissed for
recommending that a military satellite be scuttled because of "insurmountable
problems." Page A16.

No Move on Hanoi Embargo

Despite growing signs to the contrary, President Clinton insisted he has not
made up his mind on whether to lift the United States economic embargo against
Vietnam. Page A8.

19 Neglected Children Found

A drug raid led Chicago police to a cockroach-infested apartment, where children
slept on the floor and competed with dogs for food. Page A14.

Guggenheim Cuts Back

Just weeks after receiving two major donations, the Guggenheim Museum announced
cuts in its staff and operating hours. Page C11.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 3, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Inquiry Clears Commerce Chief On Vietnam Bribery Accusation

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 487 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 2


The Justice Department today cleared Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown of all
charges that he had accepted a $700,000 bribe in exchange for helping lift the
trade embargo against Vietnam.

The notice that law-enforcement officials had decided to end their investigation
with no action against Mr. Brown came today in a letter to the Secretary's
lawyer, department officials said. "He is pleased that the inquiry has fully and
fairly exonerated him of any wrongdoing," department officials said in a
statement.

The end of the investigation removed an obstacle to the Clinton Administration's
cautious moves toward lifting the 19-year-old embargo against Vietnam.

President Clinton told reporters that the decision by Justice Department
officials to clear Mr. Brown was unrelated to the deliberations on the embargo.
But it is apparent that the Brown investigation created a troublesome factor as
the Administration moved toward its decision.

The lifting of the embargo is certain to attract strong objections in Congress
and elsewhere.

Although prosecutors found the accusations against the Secretary hard to
investigate because of their vagueness, Mr. Brown added to the suspicion that he
might have been involved in a scheme when he falsely said he had never met the
man who was supposed to have arranged the bribe. Mr. Brown was forced to
backtrack and admit that he had met the man three times, once giving him a tour
of the Commerce Department.

Before joining the Government, Mr. Brown worked for years as one of Washington's
most prominent lawyer-lobbyists, sometimes on behalf of foreign governments.

Two months after his confirmation as Commerce Secretary in January 1993,
law-enforcement authorities began a formal investigation into the accusations
that had been made by a Vietnamese businessman in Florida, Ly Thanh Binh. Mr.
Binh said he had learned of the bribe from a business associate, another
Vietnamese expatriate named Nguyen Van Hao.

What Brown Remembered

When in the fall Mr. Brown acknowledged the untruth of his aides' statements
that he had never met Mr. Hao, the investigation gained momentum.

A Commerce Department spokesman had said Mr. Brown "did not recall meeting this
man." But in September, Mr. Brown's lawyer, Reid H. Weingarten, issued a
statement saying Mr. Brown had met with Mr. Hao, a former official in Vietnam,
three times and had discussed the resumption of trade between Hanoi and
Washington.

Mr. Weingarten said Mr. Hao had sought advice on trade issues and sounded out
Mr. Brown about starting a company to advise American businesses hoping to
operate in Vietnam.  But Mr. Weingarten said that the two men never discussed
any payment and that once Mr. Brown had been nominated to the Cabinet, he told
Mr. Hao that he could not help him.

Mr. Brown has said he never participated in any Administration deliberations
about lifting the trade embargo.


LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 3, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam and U.S. Businesses Eager to Trade

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 658 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 2


Welcoming reports that the 19-year-old United States trade embargo against
Vietnam is nearly over, Hanoi joined with American businesses today in
predicting a surge of new investment in a nation that is growing rapidly
economically but still suffering from the effects of the Vietnam War.

In Hanoi, the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry said it had not received any formal
notification from Washington, but the Government's chief spokesman said in a
statement that the lifting of the trade embargo would be "good news not only for
the two peoples -- the Vietnamese and the Americans -- but also for the world
community."

"We welcome American companies and companies from all countries that want to do
business and invest in Vietnam," the spokesman, Ho The Lan, said.

Reports that President Clinton would lift the embargo within the next few days
circulated quickly in Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, with Vietnam Government
officials and the representatives of American corporations sharing faxes and
telexes carrying the latest news and rumors from Washington.

The reaction to the reports from American businesses was one of relief that they
would finally be able to enter one of the world's fastest-growing markets, one
that their Asian and European competitors have been able to exploit for years.

As Communism was collapsing in Eastern Europe in the late 1980's, Hanoi
abandoned Marxist economic theory and embraced the free market. Although Vietnam
is still regarded as a poor country, the economy has enjoyed something of a boom
since the economic switch, growing last year alone by 8 percent.

"This will be an excellent development for the United States and for Vietnam,"
said James Rockwell, managing director of Vatico, a Hanoi-based consulting
concern that represents the Chrysler Corporation and other large American
companies who are expected to seek a market in Vietnam.

"The timing is good," Mr. Rockwell said. "The Vietnamese like and respect
Americans. I don't know why. It's just a fact. They see us as fair and
trustworthy and they want to do business with us. But if the embargo had gone on
another six months to a year, there would have been trouble. Americans would
have been very, very small players in Vietnam."

The Hanoi representative of Citibank, Frank Hawke, said that while some American
investors seemed to believe that they had already "missed the boat" because so
many competitors had already moved into Vietnam, the truth is that "there are
lots of boats out there -- some of them missed, some of them not."

"The Vietnamese are emphasizing key infrastructure areas such as petrochemicals,
telecommunications, transportation and power generation, all areas where U.S.
companies excel," Mr. Hawke said.

Embargo Began in 1975

The United States imposed an economic embargo on Vietnam in 1975, when the
American-backed Government of South Vietnam was toppled by the invading North
Vietnamese Army. Washington has since used the embargo as a way of persuading
the Vietnamese to cooperate in the effort to determine the fate of more than
2,200 Americans missing from the war.

As Hanoi has expanded its cooperation to account for the missing, the United
States has gradually eased the embargo, most recently last July, when President
Clinton lifted an American veto that had blocked billions of dollars in loans
and aid from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.

While American corporations are now allowed to open offices in Vietnam and to
bid on large infrastructure projects underwritten by the World Bank and the
I.M.F., they are still barred under the embargo from selling their products in
Vietnam and from conducting other types of business.

The many American products that do reach the Vietnamese market -- from Coca-Cola
to Apple Computers to American Tourister luggage -- are sent in by foreign
middlemen who rake off profits that would otherwise go to American
manufacturers.


LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 3, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

White House Memo;
Clinton Is Still Tiptoeing Round the Vietnam Mines

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 806 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 2


If anyone had forgotten just how skittish Bill Clinton can be when it comes to
Vietnam, there could be no better evidence than his public insistence today that
he has not made up his mind on whether to lift the American embargo on Hanoi.

It has been more than a month since his top deputies signed off on a
recommendation to restore trade relations with that former enemy, a step they
would never have taken without a keen sense of the boss's wishes. Aides had been
saying for weeks that he was moving irrevocably in that direction, and they said
Tuesday and again today that there would be no turning back.

In addition to a vague yet pervasive sense in Washington that the embargo has
lasted long enough, Mr. Clinton has been driven to this point by cold political
calculation. He and his aides know a healthy economy is crucial to his political
health. A healthy economy requires the creation of more jobs, and that in turn
requires expanded foreign trade. So the President backed the North American Free
Trade Agreement and extension of the world trade pact and he will open the
potentially rich Vietnamese market to American business.

A Very Cautious Approach

Still, he has moved exceedingly cautiously.

A refrain common to every White House press office is that no decision has been
made until the President announces it. By today, however, when news reports
quoted senior officials saying the end of the embargo was a done deal, most
other administrations would have conceded the impossibility of protecting what
was no longer a secret.

But Mr. Clinton's wariness of giving ammunition to those who will not forgive
him for having avoided the draft in the Vietnam War era has left him determined
to make no commitments until he must. Even as his aides planned quietly today
for an announcement by the end of the week, Mr. Clinton stuck to his plan to
line up support and assuage critics before he himself takes a public stand.

At a photo session this morning, he would say only that he would reach a
decision "in the next couple of days." But later he dropped a less than subtle
hint of where he was heading, noting that many prominent veterans favored ending
the embargo.

The White House has long known that an announcement of an end to the embargo
would infuriate the American Legion and other groups whose criticism of his
conduct in the Vietnam era helped to make his path to the presidency so
treacherous.

Soothing the Critics

But rather than confront the issue head on, Mr. Clinton and his aides have
counted on others to do it for them, relying in large part on the Senate vote
last week recommending an end to the embargo to make the case to the American
public.

"What's being decided now is how they do it and who meets with whom," a White
House official said today of the scramble to soothe the most likely critics, who
include the families of those still missing in action from the Vietnam War.

As the White House had feared, the national commander of the American Legion
dispatched a letter to Mr. Clinton angrily warning that the step would amount to
a betrayal of American veterans. Separately, the National League of Families of
American Prisoners and Missing in Vietnam urged Mr. Clinton to postpone any
decision until it could determine whether its Government had indeed made
progress in providing information about missing Americans.

White House officials said tonight that Mr. Clinton was determined at least to
explain to those groups the reasons for his decision before announcing it
publicly.

A White House official said tonight that it was likely that Mr. Clinton would
meet with some of the critics on Friday before announcing his decision on
Saturday at a ceremony to be attended by veterans who support his action.

An Unpleasant Prospect

What leaves his aides most anxious, of course, is the prospect that an
announcement by Mr. Clinton calling an end to the embargo will call attention to
the steps he took to avoid the draft and to his college-age protests against the
war.

Bruce Thiesen, the American Legion national commander, did not make that point
directly in his letter to Mr. Clinton. But the strong language he employed made
clear that he and other critics regard the decision as one involving much more
than the President's judgment on whether Vietnam has made sufficient progress in
aiding the United States with information about P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s to be
rewarded with restored trade ties.

"If you decide to lift the embargo this week as is rumored," Mr. Thiesen said,
"you will have not only broken your promise, but you will also have betrayed the
missing servicemen, their families, members of the active military services and
millions of Vietnam veterans who feel very strongly about their brethren who
have not been accounted for."


LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

OPENING TO VIETNAM;
CLINTON DROPS 19-YEAR BAN ON U.S. TRADE WITH VIETNAM; CITES HANOI'S HELP ON
M.I.A.'S

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1516 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 3


President Clinton today ordered an end to the trade embargo on Vietnam, casting
away a central remnant of one of America's most divisive wars and opening a
potentially lucrative market to American goods.

After nearly two decades of a bitter peace, Mr. Clinton said it was now time to
acknowledge the cooperation Vietnam has shown in the search for evidence of the
2,238 Americans still officially listed as missing from that conflict, which
ended in 1975. He said opening the door to trade would benefit that
still-unfinished search.

At a White House ceremony this afternoon, Mr. Clinton said he was lifting the
trade embargo "because I am absolutely convinced it offers us the best way to
resolve the fate of those who remain missing and about whom we are not sure."
[Excerpts, page A8.]

Allowing Liaison Offices

The step taken by Mr. Clinton stops short of restoring diplomatic relations with
Vietnam. But it will allow the United States and Vietnam each to open a liaison
office in the other's capital, the highest level of ties between them since the
long and painful war that left more than 58,000 Americans dead before the United
States withdrew from the conflict in 1973.

The United States informed Vietnam of the decision this afternoon, and the White
House said trade between the two countries would resume as soon as the Commerce
Department could draft the necessary regulations, probably within the next
several weeks.

The idea of reaching out to Vietnam had been vigorously opposed by the American
Legion and others among the nation's leading veterans' groups, making the
decision a sensitive one for Mr. Clinton. He had to overcome criticism from them
during his presidential campaign for having avoided the military draft during
the Vietnam War.

Bid to Avoid Political Attacks

In an effort to avoid a new round of damaging attacks, Mr. Clinton announced his
decision this afternoon only after meeting privately with representatives of
veterans' organizations. The White House also released a sheaf of endorsements
from distinguished Vietnam-era commanders, including Gen. William C.
Westmoreland, the former commander of United States forces in Vietnam, and Adm.
Elmo Zumwalt, the Navy's top officer in the final years of the war.

But Mr. Clinton appeared determined to show no great pleasure in his decision,
which he announced by reading a passionless statement in the Roosevelt Room of
the White House.

To Mr. Clinton's immediate right was Gen. John Shalikashvili, Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. Others positioned next to the President were Secretary of
State Warren Christopher, Defense Secretary Les Aspin, who served in Vietnam as
a civilian assistant to Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, and Anthony Lake, the
President's national security adviser, who volunteered for service in Vietnam as
a young diplomat. In the audience were Democratic Senators John F. Kerry of
Massachussetts, a veteran who had called for an end to the embargo, and Bob
Kerrey of Nebraska, who lost a leg and won the Medal of Honor for his heroism in
Vietnam.

While Mr. Clinton has spoken repeatedly of the importance that expanded trade
holds for the United States economy, he insisted today that the potential for
American economic gains played no part in his decision. But it was greeted with
delight and relief by American businessmen who had complained that an
anachronistic policy was denying them a share of the Vietnamese market that
advocates say could be worth up to $6 billion a year in trade involving American
companies.

The plan to lift the embargo had been unanimously recommended several weeks ago
by Mr. Clinton's top Cabinet officers and by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. But
aides said the President calculated that his position would be strongest if he
waited for the endorsement that the Senate provided in a vote last week before
making his decision public.

'Get It Over With'

As late as this morning, White House officials had said that Mr. Clinton had not
made up his mind about the embargo and that he would not announce his decision
before Saturday. But Administration officials had long since made clear that his
commitment was irrevocable, and aides said he had wanted to "get it over with"
once he finally initialed his approval.

Officials said Mr. Clinton had not made his decision until he reviewed a final
packet of information about the search for American prisoners of war and those
missing in action, but they would not be more specific.

In explaining their decision to go ahead now, Mr. Clinton and his top deputies
praised Vietnam today for having been more cooperative last year than in any
year since the end of the war in the effort to resolve the mystery about those
who are still listed as missing.

Some Remains Returned

Since July alone, Vietnam has returned to the United States the remains of 39
individuals believed to have been American personnel, bringing to 67 the number
of sets of remains handed over in 1993. Only three of those sets have so far
been conclusively identified as the remains of United States servicemen.
Vietnam has also provided new help in investigating claims of live sightings of
missing Americans, and in sharing wartime documents.

Mr. Clinton, who eased some sanctions against Vietnam on two occasions last year
but refused to lift the embargo, said today that the progress met the conditions
he had set for a restoration of trade. Without fully explaining his reasoning,
he said he had also concluded that an end to the embargo represented "the best
way to continue getting information" about those Americans who are still
missing.

But that argument has found little resonance among the nation's largest
veterans' groups, including the American Legion, whose national commander warned
Mr. Clinton in advance of the decision that it would be regarded as "a betrayal"
of veterans, the missing and their families.

Meeting With Veterans

In a sign of how important the White House regarded their reaction, the
veterans' representatives invited on short notice to the White House this
afternoon were briefed not just by Mr. Clinton, but also by Mr. Christopher, Mr.
Lake, General Shalikashvili and Mr.  Aspin. Both sides described the discussion
as cordial, but the veterans said later that it had done nothing to change their
minds.

Larry Rivers, executive director of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, said he and
others had told Mr. Clinton that they intended "to keep him at his word to keep
Vietnam accountable." Ann Mills Griffiths, who heads the National League of
Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia, chose not to
attend the meeting and said she believed Mr. Clinton had "clearly broken his
promise" to maintain pressure on Hanoi.

But relations between the White House and veterans remain so delicate that even
John Wheeler, who led fundraising efforts for the Vietnam Memorial and helped
Mr. Clinton during his presidential campaign to deflect criticism from Vietnam
veterans, combined his statement of support with one chiding the President for
"an embargo on vets" within the Administration. White House officials said they
could not dispute Mr. Wheeler's assertion that only 8 percent of the men among
Mr. Clinton's senior appointees are military veterans.

With the directive he issued today to the Departments of State, Treasury and
Commerce, Mr. Clinton set aside the embargo the United States imposed against
North Vietnam in 1964 and extended to cover all of Vietnam after the fall of the
South Vietnamese Government on April 30, 1975.

Other Restrictions Remain

Administration officials emphasized tonight that the lifting of the embargo
would not spell an end to other restrictions imposed by Congress against
Vietnam, which will continue to prohibit sales of weapons and some
high-technology goods. In an odd twist, they also said the Trading with the
Enemy Act would be left in place, although only to insure that Vietnamese assets
frozen by the United States remain in American control until the two countries
can agree on their disposition.

The officials also strongly rejected characterizations that the step represented
a reward for Vietnamese cooperation, and spoke with some lingering bitterness at
a briefing today of the years in which Vietnam had confounded rather than helped
the American search for the missing.

Mr. Clinton, who took extraordinary steps to avoid military service in Vietnam,
was in the odd position today as Commander in Chief of marking an end of sorts
to a war in which he, unlike many of his contemporaries, did not take part. But
he insisted today that his decision had not been complicated by that fact.

"Everybody my age, whether they were in Vietnam or not, knew someone who died
there, knew someone who was wounded there," the 47-year-old President said. "And
I think people in our generation are perhaps more insistent on trying to get a
full accounting, more obsessed with it, than perhaps people who are younger and
people who are older, except those who had children."


LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Clinton announcing an end to the Vietnam trade
embargo. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg. A1); President Clinton's
lifting of the trade embargo on Vietnam was a big step in repairing relations in
the aftermath of a war that evokes powerful memories, including this image of
helicopters evacuating people from a rooftop inside the United States Embassy
compound on April 29, 1975. (United Press International) (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

OPENING TO VIETNAM;
A Passion Spent, Finally

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE, Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1099 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 3


It was Lyndon B. Johnson's war, though the initial commitments were made by John
F. Kennedy. The peace, such as it was, was the handiwork of Richard M. Nixon,
but that was tainted by the stench of defeat.

Now, irony of ironies, fate has chosen Bill Clinton to lead the nation in
consigning the whole sad, ugly ordeal to the dim recesses of memory -- the same
Bill Clinton who, like Dan Quayle and many other privileged members of his
generation, managed to avoid service in the rice paddies of the Mekong Delta or
the jungles of the Central Highlands, on the carriers in the Gulf of Tonkin or
the choppers of the First Cavalry Division.

Some organizations that represent veterans of the war protested bitterly even
before President Clinton announced the lifting of the 19-year embargo this
afternoon. No doubt a spirited scrap will ensue. But many voters, if the polls
are to be believed, agree with Mr. Clinton and with the Senate, which voted
overwhelmingly last week to end the embargo.

Tragedy to Opportunity

Trade follows the flag, it is said, and mutual diplomatic recognition between
Hanoi and Washington is not likely to be delayed many years more, though the
President specified that it would have to wait upon "a full and final
accounting" of America's losses.

Slowly, almost imperceptibly, Vietnam has turned from a tragedy into an
opportunity. Having watched their German and British counterparts making large
investments there, having pondered the prospects of turning the one-time enemy
into the next Thai- or Malay-style success story, American businessmen have
pushed relentlessly for today's change.

But it took more than that; it took a political strategy. That was cobbled
together largely by Winston Lord, the Assistant Secretary of State for East
Asian and Pacific Affairs, who persuaded Hanoi to provide enough answers to the
vexed question of prisoners of war and servicemen still missing to enable Mr.
Clinton to win the support of important public figures who had the credibility
on Vietnam that he did not.

Among those, by far the most important were a pair of Senators -- John Kerry, a
Massachusetts Democrat who won the Silver Star as a patrol-boat commander in the
Delta, and John McCain, an Arizona Republican, the son and grandson of admirals,
who bailed out of his naval attack plane after it was hit over North Vietnam and
spent five and a half years in an enemy prison camp.

"I feel we are finally putting this war behind us, as we have put every war
behind us," Senator McCain said by telephone from his home in Phoenix.  "A
nation must do that, and I am grateful to have survived to see it, when so many
of my friends did not. I feel it is in our interest to have a strong
counterweight to China, the growing military and economic power in the region,
and I feel this will help us a lot economically."

Another who served in Vietnam emphasized the geopolitical aspect.

"We really need to have a relationship with these people, not for the past but
for the future," said Frank Wisner, a career diplomat, now a senior Defense
Department official, who served as a provincial adviser in the Highlands. "
Vietnam is a key actor along the Pacific Rim as we, they, the Chinese and others
in the area head into the next century."

A Cultural Benefit

A scholar who studied American troops during the war and has studied them since
foresaw another benefit.

"Not many people realize it yet," said Charles Moskos of Northwestern
University, one of the country's leading military sociologists, "but this will
do what the peace treaty never did. More Americans will go to Vietnam. They will
see how much the Vietnamese people like Americans, and how many supported the
American intervention. That will redound to the credit of the Vietnam veterans
and of the serving military today."

If so, the President's action will truly represent the closing of a chapter in
American history.

The war and its aftermath helped to shape American public life for three
decades. Even when the shooting stopped, the United States found it agonizingly
difficult to follow Lincoln's injunction to "bind up the nation's wounds, to
care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his widow and for his
orphan." The anguish of the families of the P.O.W.'s and the M.I.A.'s, the
travail of the boat people and the devastation wrought by defoliants on the
landscape of Indochina all kept the pain alive in peoples' minds.

Political Waves and Ripples

The war forced President Johnson into retirement, almost certainly cost Hubert
H. Humphrey the Presidency, planted the seeds of doubt and discouragement about
government in the minds of the electorate and the news media and helped keep the
Democrats out of the White House for most of the 1970's and 1980's. The image of
the last CH-46 helicopter lifting off the roof of the United States Embassy in
Saigon on April 30, 1975, burned a hole in the national psyche.

"After that," said the novelist Ward Just, who worked as a war correspondent in
Vietnam, "I thought we'd be better off without each other for a while. Vietnam
had a bad effect on us, and, God knows, we had a terrible effect on Vietnam. Now
I think it's time to see whether we can't all behave like grown-ups. I think
most people feel that way, actually."

Like the Vietnam War memorial, like the end of the war itself, today's decision
has been a long time coming.

A Decade of Agony

Thirty-one years ago, in January 1963, the weakness of the American-advised
South Vietnamese troops was revealed to an American officer named John Paul Vann
and, through him, to many others, in the debacle at the hamlet of Ap Bac.

Twenty-six years ago, on Jan. 31, 1968, the North Vietnamese and the Vietcong
launched the Tet offensive, attacking on many fronts at once, capturing the old
capital of Hue and penetrating Saigon itself.

Twenty-one years ago, on Jan. 27, 1973, a peace treaty was signed in Paris by
the United States, the South Vietnamese, the North Vietnamese and the Vietcong.
The next day, a cease-fire took effect.

Those events are almost as distant from today as the battles of World War I were
from those of World War II. Many who took part in them or witnessed them have
retired or died, and new generations have grown up for whom names like Ia Drang
and Parrot's Beak seem as remote as Belleau Wood or Iwo Jima.

In a sense, time was Bill Clinton's ally. Fewer and fewer people cling to the
past. And even for many of those who do, as Leo Thorsness, a former Air Force
P.O.W., said this week, one day "the passion is gone."

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 61 words


"Whatever the Vietnam War may have done in dividing our country in the past,
today our nation is one in honoring those who served and pressing for answers
about all those who did not return. This decision today, I believe, renews that
commitment and our constant, constant effort never to forget those until our job
is done."   PRESIDENT CLINTON. [A6:4.]

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 614 words



The Economy

The Clinton Administration is drafting a plan to create a Western Hemisphere
free trade zone, with Chile intended as the first member. The plan, which may
take 10 to 15 years to fully accomplish, responds to Latin American interest in
joining the North American trade zone and recognizes that removing trade
barriers can spur United States exports. [D1.]

A turf battle between cable television and phone companies has erupted as bills
before Congress seek to sweep away many of the regulations that have kept the
industry's different segments separate and somewhat protected. [D1.]
 Auto sales surged in January as car buyers moved up their purchases of new cars
faster than auto makers and economists had expected, leading analysts to predict
shortages of models. [D1.]
 January retail sales were hampered by cold weather in the Northeast and the
earthquake in California. But analysts said the setback was temporary and the
industry's outlook was strong. [D2.]
 Factory orders rose for a fifth consecutive month in December, and economists
predicted a strong showing for manufacturing in 1994. But the number of claims
for unemployment benefits rose to the highest level since July 1992. [D2.]
 Congress appears set to remove the biggest barriers to interstate banking after
a House panel endorsed a bill to remove the current barriers and the leading
Senate critic of the bill abandoned his opposition. [D14.]

Companies

The three biggest television networks are underwriting a multi-million dollar
research effort to find an alternative system to the Nielsen ratings, after
years of complaining about inaccuracies in the country's only source of national
television ratings. [D1.]

Shares of Copley Pharmaceutical fell on news of lawsuits claiming damages on
behalf of patients who used albuterol, the generic drug maker's troubled asthma
drug. [D3.]
 Cyrix may get up to $10 million from Intel as part of a settlement the
companies reached in a patent dispute. [D3.]
 Analysts say a bidding war for Maclean Hunter may follow Rogers Communications'
proposed $3 billion merger with the Canadian communications giant. [D3.]
 Owens-Illinois will set aside $575 million for costs related to asbestos claims
and a restructuring that will reduce the company's United States work force by
2,000 employees, or 10 percent. [D3.]
 Nissan is preparing to spend more than $200 million to buy back 33,000
trouble-plagued mini-vans. [D3.]

International

President Clinton ordered an end to the trade embargo on Vietnam, opening a
potentially lucrative market to America. [A1.]
 Some money managers have questioned the risk for investors of a $1 billion
offering of 10-year bonds that was completed by the Chinese Government and
Merrill Lynch. [D1.]

Markets

The 4,000 level slipped further away on the Dow Jones industrial average, which
fell 7.88 points, to 3,967.66, under pressure generated by a weak bond market
and by profit taking. [D4.]
 Treasury yields rose on speculation that the Fed would nudge short-term
interest rates higher. [D12.]
 The dollar rose against other leading currencies on speculation about higher
interest rates. Gold prices also rose. [D11.]
 Sugar futures prices surged to their highest levels in almost eight months on
signs of stiffening demand. [D11.]

Today's Columns

A contrarian is arguing against securities and for commodities, saying that he
prefers things to paper. [D4.]
 Prudential Securities' new campaign promises straight talk, and subtly attempts
to distance the brokerage firm from its troubled past. Stuart Elliott:
Advertising. [D15.]

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

OPENING TO VIETNAM;
Sense of Relief, and One Of Betrayal, Are Evoked

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 920 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 3


For some, the announcement of economic coexistence with Vietnam was greeted with
a sense that, finally, peace was at hand. For others, it seemed a final betrayal
by the Government.

Bitterly denouncing the President's decision were some former prisoners of war
and those who believe American troops listed as missing in action may still be
alive. They said any accommodation with Vietnam would be wrong until a final
accounting.

"All of us who were held as P.O.W.'s in Vietnam know first-hand that there are
no limits to what the Vietnamese will do to show they are 'cooperating' with the
United States to account for our missing comrades," a group of 70 former
prisoners of war, including James B. Stockdale, a retired Navy admiral and Ross
Perot's running mate in the 1992 election, said in a letter sent to President
Clinton today.

In a fierce attack, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Senate Republican leader,
called the embargo's end "the wrong decision at the wrong time for the wrong
reason."

U.S. Can 'Move Forward'

Senator John Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat and a highly decorated Vietnam
veteran, said the decision "guarantees we keep faith with the veterans and
families but that we continue to move forward."

"We have the most exhaustive, painstaking accounting in place in the history of
warfare and I think we ought to be proud of that," Mr. Kerry added.

Addressing the disbelief and anger among the families of the missing, Senator
Bob Kerrey, a Nebraska Democrat who lost a leg in Vietnam, said there had been
"a great deal of lying on everybody's part in the 1970's. The families of the
P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s are anguished because the government hadn't told them the
truth. Now the Government is telling them the truth."

Senator Larry Pressler, a South Dakota Republican and Vietnam veteran, simply
said, "The Vietnam War is finally over."

'A Few Pieces of Silver"

For some families of the missing, "President Clinton has sold the morality of
the American people for just a few pieces of silver by lifting the trade embargo
and abandoned the leverage we had for gaining information on our loved ones,"
said Dolores Apodaca Alfond, who leads the National Alliance of Families for the
Return of America's Missing Servicemen, based in Seattle.

But for another set of families, Vietnamese who came to America seeking freedom
and whose families remain there, the end of the embargo offered the hope of
long-awaited reunions.

"It's time, you know -- there is no way to avoid it," said Thiep Le, who fled
Vietnam in 1979 and is now a restaurateur in suburban Washington.

'Easier to Breathe' in Vietnam

"Depending on whether the Vietnamese Government can exploit the opportunity
positively, it will be a little bit easier to breathe for the ordinary people in
Vietnam . If normalization is coming in the near future, people can go back and
forth from here to Vietnam. My mother is still there, my sister's still there,
but I've dared not to go back. In a few years, I can hope to go and come back
safely."

Truyen Swinger, a Vietnamese woman married to an American doctor, said the
decision made her "really happy" and gave substance to her dreams of starting a
business in her homeland. "I'm thinking of opening a sewing factory in Vietnam,"
said Ms. Swinger, who runs a New York clothing design and manufacturing firm.

For Mimi Tran, one of four sisters who run Cuisine de Saigon at 154 West 13th
Street in Manhattan, "there's a sad side, but there's a happy side, too" in the
decision.

"There are lots of people who are stranded in the refugee camps in the
Philippines -- I don't think they can gain entrance to the U.S. anymore," said
Ms. Tran, who is 35 years old and came to the United States in 1968. "The happy
side is we hope we're able to travel freely."

There is no such happiness for the groups demanding a final accounting of those
missing in Vietnam -- and in Laos and Cambodia, where the United States
conducted secret missions to root out Communist forces. They have found it hard
to accept the official Government position that much has been accomplished and
not much more can be done to trace those who disappeared in the war. Many of the
groups contend that some of the missing are still alive, but White House and
Pentagon officials say no credible evidence supports that belief.

'A Growing Cooperation'

Noting that 78,000 soldiers remain listed as missing in action from World War
II, Senator John Glenn, an Ohio Democrat, said Vietnam has shown "a growing
cooperation" on the issue in recent years and has granted American military
emissaries "complete access to go anywhere in Vietnam" in order to bring the
number of unresolved cases down to a few hundred.

Official United States figures list 1,647 servicemen missing in Vietnam and a
total of 2,238 unaccounted for in various areas of Southeast Asia. An additional
505 remain unaccounted for in Laos, 78 in Cambodia and 8 in China. The remains
of 344 Americans have been returned and identified since the war, leaving 1,894
cases unresolved.

Senator John McCain, an Arizona Republican and former Navy flier who was a
prisoner of war for more than five years, called again for a continuing efforts
to trace those lost troops and added: "Beyond even that most important priority,
the President has decided today to move the nation toward closure of a chapter
in our history that has divided us for too long. I commend him for that
decision, as would my comrades who did not come home."

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

OPENING TO VIETNAM;
In Clinton's Words: 'Fullest Possible Accounting' of M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 988 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 3


Following are excerpts from President Clinton's announcement today that he was
lifting the trade embargo against Vietnam, as transcribed by the Federal News
Service, a private company:

From the beginning of my Administration, I have said that any decisions about
our relationships with Vietnam should be guided by one factor and one factor
only -- gaining the fullest possible accounting for our prisoners of war and our
missing in action. We owe that to all who served in Vietnam and to the families
of those whose fate remains unknown.

Today I am lifting the trade embargo against Vietnam because I am absolutely
convinced it offers the best way to resolve the fate of those who remain missing
and about whom we are not sure.

We've worked hard over the last year to achieve progress. On Memorial Day, I
pledged to declassify and make available virtually all government documents
related to our P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s. On Veterans Day, I announced that we had
fulfilled that pledge.

Last April, and again in July, I sent two presidential delegations to Vietnam to
expand our search for remains and documents. We intensified our diplomatic
efforts. We have devoted more resources to this effort than any previous
Administration. Today more than 500 dedicated military and civilian personnel
are involved in this effort under the leadership of General Shalikashvili,
Secretary Aspin, and our commander in the Pacific, Admiral Larson. Many worked
daily in the fields, the jungles, the mountains of Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos,
often braving very dangerous conditions, trying to find the truth about those
about whom we are not sure.

Four Areas of Progress

Last July, I said any improvement in our relations with Vietnam would depend on
tangible progress in four specific areas: first, the recovery and return of
remains of our P.O.W.s and M.I.A.'s; second, the continued resolution of
discrepancy cases, cases in which there is reason to believe individuals could
have survived the incident in which they were lost; third, further assistance
from Vietnam and Laos on investigations along their common border, an area where
many U.S. servicemen were lost and pilots downed; and fourth, accelerated
efforts to provide all relevant P.O.W.-M.I.A.-related documents. Today I can
report that significant tangible progress has been made in all these four areas.

                                    .  .  .

First, on remains. Since the beginning of this Administration, we have recovered
the remains of 67 American servicemen. In the seven months since July, we've
recovered 39 sets of remains, more than during all of 1992.

Second, on the discrepancy cases. Since the beginning of the Administration,
we've reduced the number of these cases from 135 to 73. Since last July, we've
confirmed the deaths of 19 servicemen who were on the list. A special United
States team in Vietnam continues to investigate the remaining cases.

Third, on cooperation with Laos. As a direct result of the conditions set out in
July, the Governments of Vietnam and Laos agreed to work with us to investigate
their common border. The first such investigation took place in December and
located new remains as well as crash sites that will soon be excavated.

Fourth, on the documents. Since July we have received important wartime
documents from Vietnam's military archives that provide leads on unresolved
P.O.W.-M.I.A. cases.

Continuing the Search

The progress achieved on unresolved questions is encouraging, but it must not
end here. I remain personally committed to continuing the search for the answers
and the peace of mind that the families of the missing deserve. There's been a
substantial increase in Vietnamese cooperation on these matters over the past
year. Everyone involved in the issue has affirmed that.

I have carefully considered the question of how best to sustain that cooperation
in securing the fullest possible accounting. I've consulted with my national
security and veterans' affairs advisers, with several outside experts such as
Gen. John Vessey, the former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who has been
an emissary to Vietnam for three Presidents now. It was their view that the key
to continued progress lies in expanding our contacts with Vietnam. This was also
the view of many distinguished Vietnam veterans and former P.O.W.'s.

                                    .  .  .

I have made the judgment that the best way to insure cooperation from Vietnam
and to continue getting the information Americans want on P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s
is to end the trade embargo. I've also decided to establish a liaison office in
Vietnam to provide services for Americans there and help us to pursue a human
rights dialogue with the Vietnamese Government.

I want to be clear: These actions do not constitute a normalization of our
relationships. Before that happens, we must have more progress, more
cooperation, and more answers. Toward that end, this spring I will send another
high-level U.S. delegation to Vietnam to continue the search for remains and for
documents.

Earlier today, I met with the leaders of our nation's veterans organizations. I
deeply respect their views.

                                    .  .  .

I talked with them about my decision, and I explained the reasons for that
decision. Some of them, in all candor, do not agree with the action I am taking
today, but I believe we all agree on the ultimate goal: to secure the fullest
possible accounting of those who remain missing. And I was pleased that they
committed to continue working with us toward that goal.

Whatever the Vietnam War may have done in dividing our country in the past,
today our nation is one in honoring those who served and pressing for answers
about all those who did not return. This decision today, I believe, renews that
commitment and our constant, constant effort never to forget those until our job
is done.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

British Worry That U.S. Is Slighting Them Now

BYLINE: By JOHN DARNTON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1497 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Feb. 3


There is a deep wellspring of anxiety in Government circles here these days. It
comes from the fear that the United States no longer cares about Britain.

This week's bout of jitters comes from the White House decision to grant a
temporary visa to Gerry Adams, the Irish republican leader. But that is only the
latest and most dramatic instance in what is seen as almost a yearlong series of
slurs and slights from Washington.

British governments are accustomed to new American administrations coming into
office infatuated with the political throw-weight of the Germans or casting a
covetous eye at commercial possibilities in Asia. It happened with Ronald Reagan
and it happened even more with George Bush, according to Lady Thatcher's
memoirs.

But sooner or later, the thinking goes, the Yanks will get in a tight spot
somewhere, maybe with a dictator like Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi or Saddam Hussein,
or maybe in a dispute with other European countries, and when they need help for
a little police or diplomatic action, they will find out who their real friends
are.

A 'Special Relationship'

Then they will come home again. That trans-Atlantic phone link that tied
Churchill to Roosevelt will start humming again, and the "special relationship,"
as Churchill called it, will be alive and well.

Except this time, with the Clinton Administration, it is not turning out that
way.

Things have even reached the point where Prime Minister John Major has trouble
getting President Clinton on the line. When he called to congratulate him on the
passage of Nafta in November, a senior government official admitted sheepishly
at the time, he could not rouse him. (Though some days later Mr. Clinton called
back.)

Now the two men who would seem to have a lot in common -- they are roughly the
same generation, both "self made" and from modest beginnings -- but these days
they rarely talk at all. Perhaps once a month, ventured a British official, who
pointed out that they had just seen each other, along with the other heads of
state, at the NATO summit meeting in January.

U.S. Ambassador Summoned

On Tuesday, Mr. Major summoned the American Ambassador, Raymond Seitz, to 10
Downing Street to express his displeasure at the visa for Mr. Adams, a
diplomatic move virtually unknown in recent memory. Though there has been a
flurry of communications through the embassies and through the Foreign
Secretary, Douglas Hurd -- who was in Washington this week and had what a senior
official here called a "lively" meeting with the national security adviser,
Anthony Lake, who favored giving the visa -- the two top leaders still have not
been in contact to defuse the ill will.

The problem, said one person involved in the back and forth, is not that "we
have substantive differences" or "hugely competing policies" on Northern
Ireland. "The problem is that it is an issue which means very little in the
United States, whereas on this side it has tremendous salience," he said.

"It matters to the Prime Minister, who is politically exposed because of his
joint declaration with the Irish Government," he continued. "It matters to the
press. It matters to Parliament."

And so, he said, in acting unilaterally and against British wishes that were
clearly spelled out in advance, it was as if Washington was saying "none of that
really counts to us."

An Opening 'Sour Note'

Relations with the Clinton Administration began over a year ago on what an
official in 10 Downing Street conceded on Wednesday was a "sour note." He was
referring to the discovery that strategists from Mr. Major's Conservative Party
were working in the Presidential campaign advising the Republicans.

Then there were news reports that the British Home Office had agreed to search
through its files to see if there were any documents on Mr. Clinton from his
years as a Rhodes scholar at Oxford and an anti-Vietnam War protester. What was
presumably being looked for was any application to change his nationality, which
would have instantly dashed his campaign.

There was even a report of an unfortunate private cablegram sent on election day
from Mr. Hurd, a seasoned and patrician diplomat, to James A. Baker 3d, whom he
had come to know well as Secretary of State. He used a hunting metaphor to wish
him good luck: "May you bring down every duck in the last flight of the shoot."

Does Clinton Bear a Grudge?

Now, British officials are wondering if these ducks are coming home to roost. Is
it possible, a top diplomat wondered, that Mr. Clinton really bears a grudge and
enjoys sending little darts in Mr. Major's direction?

They do not have to search very hard to find a disconcerting pattern, including
public statements from Washington that grate on Britain's sensitivities by
making it feel like just any other country. Only three months ago Secretary of
State Warren Christopher said Europe was "no longer the dominant area of the
world."

At the same time Mr. Clinton gave an interview in which he attacked Britain and
France over Bosnia and singled out Mr. Major with an embarrassing aside. Mr.
Major had confessed privately to him, the President said, that he could not
support lifting the Bosnian arms embargo because his Government might fall if he
did.

Mr. Clinton has met Mr. Major in a one-on-one session only once, in Washington
last Feb. 7, although they have encountered each other at the Group of Seven
meeting in Tokyo and the NATO summit in Brussels. They are scheduled to meet
again Feb. 28 in Washington.

In recent days both British and American officials here have been quietly
enumerating for reporters the list of issues on which the two countries have
closely cooperated recently, from coordinating efforts to secure a General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to policies on China and Russia and the
"Partnership for Peace" arrangement with Eastern European countries.

A Divide on Bosnia

Both sides have also pointed out that a profound difference still exists in the
approach to Bosnia. Britain, which has 2,300 troops on the ground there, opposes
air strikes and the lifting of the arms embargo, as does France. The diplomats
mention this as if to say: You see, this is the kind of disagreement we should
be having, and when we do, it is not the end of the world.

But Ireland is different. For one thing, Britain has long regarded it as an
internal matter and something the United States should keep out of. For another,
Britain has long harbored a fear that if the United States ever does get
involved, given the leverage of Irish-American politicians in Washington, it
might press Britain to move in a direction that it does not want to go.

The fact that Senators Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, whose
sister, Jeanne Kennedy Smith, is now the American Ambassador to Dublin, and
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, were among a group lobbying Mr.
Clinton for Mr. Adams to be admitted only feeds the British insecurity. Both
Senators are essential allies if Mr. Clinton is to pass his health and welfare
programs, and so the visa to Mr. Adams can be read by the British as the triumph
of domestic political considerations over the foreign policy value of having
Britain as an unswerving ally.

Today's Daily Telegraph, in what might have been intended as a calming reference
to show that there have been ups and downs in the past, said the dsipute over
the visa was "the worse rift in relations between Washington and London since
Suez" -- a reference to President Eisenhower's blocking a British-led campaign
to wrest back control of the canal from Egypt in 1956.

Even an Anti-Thatcher Whiff

One Downing Street official, trying to dampen the flames, turned philosophical.
"You're always going to have differences in tone between administrations," he
said, recounting the atmosphere in 1989. "There was a view in Washington that
Margaret Thatcher had too much influence, and there was a distinct whiff in the
air of putting the British back in their place."

Mrs. Thatcher's "influence," in addition to a personal chemistry with Presidents
Reagan and Bush, stemmed in part from her Government's actions in 1986, when she
supported the raid on Libya. She allowed American F-111's to fly from British
bases, at a time when France refused overflight permission.

That is the way the special relationship -- built upon a common language and a
shared culture and sense of national values -- is supposed to work: the United
States supplies the basic firepower and Britain, the loyal sidekick, gets the
diplomatic pins lined up.

One commentator noted at a dinner table that while Mr. Clinton has traveled
around a lot lately, he still has not returned to the land of his post-graduate
days. Perhaps, said the writer, who ticked off three other former Rhodes
scholars in top positions in the Administration, sending people to school in
England did not automatically insure that they would become Anglophiles.


LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1044 words



International A2-10

CLINTON LIFTS VIETNAM EMBARGO Saying it was time to acknowledge Hanoi's efforts
to account for missing G.I.'s, President Clinton ordered an end to the trade
embargo against Vietnam. The decision removes a critical vestige of America's
most divisive war and opens a potentially lucrative market to its goods. A1

CLOSING A PAINFUL CHAPTER News analysis: Slowly, almost imperceptibly, Vietnam
has turned from a tragedy into an opportunity. But it took a political strategy,
not just pressure from American businessmen, for President Clinton to win the
support he needed to resume trade with Vietnam. A1


Some former prisoners of war denounced the decision. A8

RUSSIA AND GEORGIA IN PACT Russia and Georgia signed a treaty that will extend
Russia's military influence. The accord caused protests in Moscow and in the
Georgian capital, Tbilisi, where a bomb killed the Deputy Defense Minister. A3

Ukrainians inch toward accepting nuclear disarmament. A3

CROATIA WARNED TO QUIT BOSNIA The United Nations Security Council warned
President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia that his country may face an economic
embargo unless he withdraws his forces from Bosnia and Herzegovina. A4

COURT REJECTS LIBYAN LAND CLAIM The International Court of Justice rejected
Libya's claims to the Aozou Strip, a 45,000-square-mile swath of territory in
neighboring Chad. A6

CRITICISM RAINS ON HOSOKAWA Facing the harshest personal attacks of his tenure,
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa suffered a humiliating blow when he was forced
to abandon a plan for a $55 billion income tax cut and an increase in sales
taxes later. A6

U.S. NOMINEE FAULTED ON ISRAEL American Jewish organizations and Republican
senators have raised questions about the writings of Strobe Talbott, the Deputy
Secretary of State-designate, on Israel. Some say his articles reflect at best
ignorance, at worst hostility. A6

CULTURE MINISTER VS. FALLEN IDOL Now that she and other Greek Socialists are
back in power, Culture Minister Melina Mercouri is taking up the cudgels for art
and antiquity -- and against Constantine Mitsotakis, the ex-Prime Minister. Ms.
Mercouri says part of his Minoan collection stems from illegal excavations. A4

Archeologists uncovered a vast seaport from pre-Columbian times. A10

Britain frets that it has lost its special relationship with the U.S. A2

National A12-18

MILK HORMONE DRAWS PROTESTS A day before the introduction of a new genetically
engineered growth hormone designed to boost milk production in dairy cows, some
of the country's largest food companies moved to restrict its use. A1

SULLIED PELL GRANTS In the wake of hearings exposing misuse of Federal
student-aid money by colleges and trade schools, the Education Department knows
what needs to be done to regain fiscal control. A1

FARRAKHAN REACTS TO SPEECH The head of the Nation of Islam demoted an aide who
made anti-white and anti-Semitic statements in a recent speech. A1

INQUIRY INTO SUICIDE WIDENS The report by Washington Park Police on their
inquiry into the death of the Clintons' lawyer, Vincent W. Foster Jr., strongly
suggests that Bernard W. Nussbaum, the President's counsel, impeded
investigators. A1

YOUTHS PLEAD FOR GUN CONTROLS Eleven teen-agers whose lives were changed by
shootings appeared before Congress to plead for Government controls on firearms.
A12

RECORDS DESTROYED IN TEXAS Gov. Ann W. Richards of Texas is embroiled in a
controversy over her aides' destruction of years of long-distance telephone
records from her state office. A12

DEFENDANT DOES NOT TESTIFY Byron De La Beckwith, charged with murdering Medgar
Evers 31 years ago, decided not to testify on his own behalf in his re-trial.
A12

ALCOHOL AND TRANSPORTATION The Clinton Administration issued regulations
requiring random breath tests for alcohol use for millions of transportation
workers. A15

ENVIRONMENTAL OFFICIAL RESIGNS The Federal official responsible for managing 270
million acres of public lands, resigned after the Clinton Administration sought
to reduce his role in the political fights over grazing and mining. A15

JOINT EFFORT IN SPACE The space shuttle Discovery streaked into an icy dawn sky
carrying the first Russian astronaut ever to be launched in an American
spacecraft. A17

PRESIDENT SPEAKS TO STUDENTS After sidestepping critical comments by Mother
Teresa about abortion, President Clinton lectured about 300 junior high school
students against the perils of single parenthood. A18

HOUSE PASSES EMERGENCY AID The House approved $7.7 billion in emergency aid for
victims of the Los Angeles earthquake, but also added money for victims of last
summer's flooding and the San Francisco earthquake. A18

Law Page A19

A little Massachusetts law school is doing battle with the A.B.A.

At the Bar: New honorific at the bar association -- Madam President.

Metro Digest B1

YOUTH HOCKEY TAKES OVER Where do the little boys get their big dreams? At center
ice at a Connecticut ice rink, under the championship banners, beneath the
electronic scoreboard, at 5 A.M. Saturdays. A1

SHIFT ON SCHOOL JOBS Just a day after releasing his preliminary financial plan
for New York City, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani backed off a call for a reduction
in some jobs. A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-24, D17

When Hollywood could be naughty. C1 For Children C23 Theater: On Stage, and Off
C2 Bogosian's "Pounding Nails in the Floor With My Forehead." C1 Film: "I'll Do
Anything." C3 Restaurants A20 Art: Inside Art C20 Political works. C22 Robert
Morris at two sites. C24 Books: A Tennessee Williams biography. C23 Television:
TV Weekend D17 Home Video D17

Sports B7-13

Baseball: Yanks renew Michael's contract. B7 Column: Vecsey on women in sports
day. B7 Hockey: Rangers shut out Bruins. B7 Olympics: Harding faces new threat.
B7

Obituaries B6

Dr. Marija Gimbutas, an archeologist and author. Anatoly Aleksandrov, designer
of Soviet nuclear power plants.

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

Measure twice, cut once. A delicate balance on Korea. The truth according to
Ollie. Not to worry.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Bigots and journalists. Anthony Lewis: The economic motive.
Harry Wu: China's gulag. Dorothy Nelkin: The double-edged helix.

Chronicle B4

Crossword C23

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 5, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Welcomes U.S. Decision on Embargo

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 919 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Feb. 4


In the crowded streets of a city still better known to the world as Saigon,
there was a sense today that the war was finally over, the last battle concluded
half a world away in the corridors of the White House.

The news that President Clinton had decided to lift the American trade embargo
against Vietnam reached here today shortly before dawn, and by breakfast it was
the only topic of conversation to be found in much of Ho Chi Minh City, the city
that the Americans had to flee in humiliation a generation ago.

"A heavy burden has been lifted," said Lam Thanh Sy, a 38-year-old high school
mathematics teacher who recalls the boyhood terror of rushing into a bomb
shelter with his parents. "We in Vietnam have felt that we were not allowed to
participate in the world as full citizens because of the embargo. Now at last we
are allowed to forget the war."

A Matter of Perspective

He was standing in the shadow of a large statue of Ho Chi Minh, the Vietnamese
revolutionary leader, in a small, well-tended public park near city hall. A few
feet away, a photographer, Hoang Hon Thanh, was snapping pictures of happy
families posed beneath the statue.

"Me? I'm happy too," he said. "And I'm happy for a simple reason. Five years
ago, I bought a Polaroid. Now that the embargo is lifted, I can finally buy some
film for it."

The Vietnamese Government said in a statement released in Hanoi today that it
was thankful to President Clinton for his decision to lift the embargo. The
statement by Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai pledged Vietnam's continued
cooperation in determining the fate of 2,200 Americans still missing from the
Vietnam War, the issue most often cited by the United States in keeping the
trade embargo in place for so long.

"This decision meets the desire of the American and the Vietnamese peoples," Mr.
Mai said, praising the President for having opened "a new page in U.S.-Vietnam
relations." He called on Washington to consider establishing full diplomatic
relations with Vietnam.

Fast-Growing Market

American corporations have been planning for years for the moment when they
would be allowed back into Vietnam, a market of nearly 71 million consumers that
even with the American embargo in place has emerged as one of the
fastest-growing and most dynamic in Asia.

And so only hours after they heard the announcement from Washington, Americans
began marching back onto the streets of Ho Chi Minh City, this time armed with
checkbooks and marketing plans and wearing suits and ties.

Vietnam remains one of the world's poorest countries, with a per capita annual
income of less than $500, but economists agree that with its diligent,
well-educated work force and untapped natural resources, Vietnam has the
potential to catch up with its booming Southeast Asian neighbors.

In a country where smuggled Coca-Cola is the most popular drink, Pepsi was the
first to act. This morning, Pepsi began legitimate distribution for the first
time since the 1970's, handing out bottles free to passers-by. This weekend,
Pepsi says, television viewers here will see a new commercial featuring Miss
Vietnam, 18-year-old Ha Kieu Anh, one of Vietnam's most popular celebrities.

Other American companies were not far behind in the battle to make their
presence felt here. Coca-Cola announced that it would spend $45 million in
Vietnam over the next five years. American Express said that Vietnam's foreign
trade bank had agreed to accept the American Express charge card, making it the
first American card to return to Vietnam since 1975. United Airlines reported
here that it would soon begin service to Ho Chi Minh City from Los Angeles under
a route authority it purchased in 1986 but, because of the embargo, had not been
able to use.

In the streets of Ho Chi Minh City, many Vietnamese reacted to the lifting of
the embargo with a sort of giddy excitement. There was for some the thought of
renewing ties to an old, prosperous friend, the United States.

"My mother told me that when the American soldiers were here, there was lots of
candy and many television sets and nice cars," said Tran, the 8-year-old son of
a factory worker. "I think it will be fun to have the Americans here."

The end of the American embargo only made worse the usual crush today at the
international airport in Ho Chi Minh City, once the American-run Tan Son Nhut
Air Base.

Anxious to Return

Nineteen years after they joined the panicked evacuation out of what was then
Saigon, large American corporations were struggling today to get their salesmen
and marketing executives on the first flights heading back into the city.

John R. Guy, director of international sales at Briggs & Stratton Corporation, a
Milwaukee-based manufacturer of gasoline engines, arrived in Ho Chi Minh City on
a flight from Bangkok, Thailand, and went immediately to work. He is here to
search for a Vietnamese partner.

His enthusiasm about his first trip to Vietnam was tempered by worries about his
competitors, Asian and European manufacturers that were not hobbled by the
American embargo. Some have been at work in Vietnam for years. "All of my major
competitors are Japanese," he said. "And they are already in Vietnam."

Can Briggs & Stratton hope to catch up with the Japanese? "It's my job to make
sure that we can," Mr. Guy said with some confidence. "This isn't impossible."
Briggs & Stratton, he said, thinks that Vietnam could become the company's major
Asian market within four years.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Free Pepsi-Cola was served on the streets of Ho Chi Minh City
yesterday as American companies tested a market opened by President Clinton's
lifting of the United States embargo on trade with Vietnam. (Reuters)(pg.1);
Construction workers using a hand cart and an old steamroller for road work in
suburban Hanoi yesterday, the day after the American trade embargo on Vietnam
was lifted. Caterpillar, one of the American companies expected to benefit from
the move, estimated that road, bridge and airport construction there could
create a $500 million market for earth-moving equipment in the next five years.
(Associated Press)(pg.5)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 5, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 981 words



International   3-5

HEADY ERA OPENS IN VIETNAM

Armed with checkbooks and marketing plans, American business people began
flooding back onto the streets of Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, to
capitalize on the lifting of the American trade embargo against Vietnam. In the
streets, many people reacted with excitement.  1


ECONOMIC FORMULA ELUDES JAPAN

Even after dropping a contested tax-increase plan, Japan's Government grew more
divided. The turmoil is frustrating businesses and consumers, who are seeking
quick measures to revive a stagnant economy.  5

TRYING TO CORNER NORTH KOREA

Supported by Britain, France and Russia, the United States asked China to put
pressure on North Korea to open its nuclear sites to international inspection.
Envoys warned that they would start pressing for United Nations sanctions if
North Korea did not comply by Feb. 21.  5

CHINA FREES 3 POLITICAL CAPTIVES

China has released three political prisoners, including a worker who was jailed
for giving a foreign television interviewer a high estimate of the number killed
in the 1989 crackdown on the Tiananmen Square democracy movement.  4

TOUGHER HAITIAN EMBARGO SOUGHT

The United States said it would ask the United Nations next week to toughen
sanctions against Haiti to prod the army to restore democratic rule. The
decision comes despite concern that the current oil and arms embargo is not
working and is badly squeezing Haiti's poor.  1

THE BALKAN DRAWING BOARD

France and the United States are quietly trying to convene a high-level working
group to coordinate peace efforts in the Balkan war and take the efforts in a
new direction.  4

MOZAMBIQUE'S IDLED WARRIORS

Half drawn from the old rebel movement and half from the old army, Mozambique's
new military is shaping as a reassuring symbol of stability in a country
fractured by a generation of war.  3

Chia Journal: Few doubt the source of the restaurant owner's riches.  4

National   6-10

FED PUSHES RATES HIGHER

The Federal Reserve nudged short-term interest rates higher. The move set off a
strong reaction in the stock market, which fell sharply.  1

UNEMPLOYMENT PUT AT 6.7%

The unemployment rate was 6.7 percent in January, under the Government's new
method for sampling the nation's households.  1

PUSH ON COMPUTER CODING

The Clinton Administration is promoting a technology that makes it possible for
law enforcement agencies to intercept telephone and computer communications,
even if they are in code.  1

A MARKET FOR MILK HORMONE

The manufacturer of a new, genetically engineered growth hormone designed to
boost milk production in dairy cows hopes to attract farmers who are comfortable
with the latest in technology.  6

PROVIDING HEALTH CARE TO FELONS

Should the nation provide expensive care and scarce organs to convicted felons?
Ethicists and lawyers raise troubling questions about access to health care for
those in the criminal justice system.  6

MOVING CLOSER TO SCHOOL PRAYER

Senators have approved measures giving students time for quiet reflection and
threatening to cut Federal funds to schools that impede constitutionally
protected prayer.  10

WHERE HEALTH CARE SHOULD GO

News analysis: The debate over the future of health care in the nation centers
on whether the nation can and should provide everyone with health insurance.  8

PARTISANSHIP AND HEALTH CARE

The House majority leader, charged that Republican opposition to President
Clinton's health care plan was an example of the party's unwillingness to
improve people's lives.  8

PEROT RIDES ON HEALTH CARE

Ross Perot tried to take political center stage, opening a national conference
of his political organization with a guest: the Representative whose health care
plan has become the leading alternative to the President's plan.  8

A DIFFERENCE IN STYLE

Bernard W. Nussbaum, the White House counsel, has been at the center of many of
the slips at the White House, and some say his experience as a corporate
litigator -- New York-style -- is largely the reason.  9

PUTTING HIGH TECH IN ARMS

The new Defense Secretary, William J. Perry, is an insider both at the Pentagon
and in Silicon Valley, now the heartland of high-tech military electronics.  9

SEGREGATION SUIT SETTLED

In a suit that had been pending for almost 21 years, a state judge ruled that
the Philadelphia School District had not done enough to desegregate its schools.
6

Jurors began deliberations in the Medgar Evers slaying trial.  7

As Mardi Gras nears, New Orleans' mayoral race heats up.  7

Round 2 of the Funniest Rabbi in New York Contest.  10

Metro Digest   23

TESTING THE UNBORN

With the support of their doctors, a growing number of younger women are having
amniocentesis, medical professionals say, ignoring the usual standard that only
women over 35 or those with a history of genetic abnormalities should risk a
miscarriage by having the test, which detects chromosomal disorders in fetuses.
1

Business Digest   37

Arts/Entertainment   11-17, 49

Artists' insurance policies.  11

Theater: Paper Bag Players.  12

"The Brothers Karamazov." 16

Music: A Harlem auditorium is named for Marian Anderson.  11

Mehta's Mahler.  14

Dance: A Martins premiere.  11

Television: "Sunday Morning" at 15.  49

Sports   29-33

Obituaries   28

Editorials/Op-Ed   20-21

Editorials

Opening to a new Vietnam.

The lion whines about Mr. Adams.

The five stages of weathering.

Sensible zoning for the East Side.

Letters

Anna Quindlen: Filling the vacuum.

Russell Baker: In comatose mumble.

Deborah E. Hare and Dru Nadler: Homeboys in New Haven.

Bridge   16

Chronicle   22

Crossword   15

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 5, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 43 words


A heavy burden has been lifted. We in Vietnam have felt that we were not allowed
to participate in the world as full citizens because of the embargo. Now at last
we are allowed to forget the war. -- LAM THANH SY, a teacher in Ho Chi Minh
City. [1:1.]

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 5, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Perot Attacks Clinton's Health Plan and Flirts With an Alternative

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 8;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 863 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Feb. 4


Never one to stay out of the spotlight too long, Ross Perot tried to take center
stage today with the opening of a national conference of his political
organization. And who should he invite but Representative Jim Cooper, whose
health care plan has become a leading alternative to the one being peddled by
the President.

For his part, Mr. Perot assailed President Clinton's proposal for national
health coverage as too costly and too reliant on a Federal bureaucracy. He also
suggested that Mr. Cooper's more modest plan would be better.

At the opening of a three-day meeting of his organization, United We Stand
America, Mr. Perot said he had invited Representative Cooper, a Tennessee
Democrat, but stopped short of endorsing his rival plan. Nonetheless, Mr.
Cooper's appearance here on Saturday was clearly intended to give his more
modest plan a boost at the expense of the Clinton package.

"Don't be misled by the way Government does business," Mr. Perot said of efforts
to play down the cost of the President's plan. "Somebody has to pay for it.
There is no free candy."

Declaring that the federally run Veterans Administration hospitals were a
"disgrace," he said it would be a mistake for the Government to have "a
nationwide mass production of health care" before the proposals were tried out
on a smaller scale.

A Re-emergence After Debate

Mr. Perot's reemergence at a hotel here was his first major public appearance
since his debate with Vice President Al Gore last November over the North
American Free Trade Agreement. Although Mr. Perot's popularity has ebbed since
the encounter, he seemed determined today to convince the public that he is not
about to disappear.

It remains to be seen how much Mr. Perot, who captured 19 percent of the vote in
his independent bid for President in 1992, can recover after that debate. And
polls show that the public does not value his opinions as much on issues like
health care as the issues that he emphasized during the campaign, like political
reform.

The purpose of the gathering of 50 state directors, who were recruited and paid
by Mr. Perot, and 50 state chairmen and chairwomen, who were elected by their
state's membership, was to plot strategy for the group's role in the 1994
off-year elections. Since it is tax-exempt, the group cannot directly endorse
candidates, but its members say they will turn to other means to help favored
office seekers and to promote issues important to them.

"We will hold officeholders responsible for their actions and accountable to the
voters," said Russ Varney, the organization's issues director. But he and other
leaders were not much more specific about their goals or whether they would
concentrate more on influencing legislation or campaigns. "We're anticipating
that a general plan will come out from this," Mr. Varney said of the conference.

Most of the sessions this weekend were closed, with officials of United We Stand
America insisting that they needed freedom to hash over ideas on the best course
to take the organization in coming months.

In a speech that lasted nearly an hour, Mr. Perot mentioned his defeat on the
trade accord only in passing. Beyond his familiar oratory about how the group
would press Congress for campaign reform and the elimination of foreign
lobbyists, for a line-item veto and a balanced Federal budget, he was short on
specific proposals of his own.

'Ain't Seen Nothing Yet'

Instead, Mr. Perot issued a warning to Washington that it "ain't seen nothing
yet." Asserting that the gathering here was proof that millions of people still
believed in his message, he told the cheering state leaders, who sat at tables
decorated with miniature American flags: "You are now a very effective force in
this country and you have created a certain level of trauma by your presence.
Both political parties are dedicated to see that you go away. We're not going
away -- we're going to grow."

"Right?" Mr. Perot shouted.

"Right!" his followers shouted back.

Besides his criticism of Mr. Clinton's health care proposal, Mr. Perot
questioned the President's lifting of the 19-year trade embargo against Vietnam.
"Think of the live Americans we left behind," said Mr. Perot, repeating a
contention he has made for years.

But questioned by reporters after his speech, Mr. Perot refused to say flatly
whether Mr. Clinton was wrong to have lifted the embargo. Asked whether the end
of the embargo would make it easier for the United States to find out about
missing prisoners, he said, "Time will tell."

In addition to Mr. Cooper, Mr. Perot invited Representative James M. Inhofe, an
Oklahoma Republican, to address the group on Saturday. Mr. Perot has
complimented Mr. Inhofe for his efforts to get the Congress to change a rule
that would make it easier for legislation to reach the House floor despite
opposition from the leadership.

As if he were a military commander, Mr. Perot implored his members "not to be
complacent and arrogant." He likened his group to pioneers who settled the West
and fought the Revolution, but said their mission was "a whole lot easier than
fighting without boots at Valley Forge."

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ross Perot opened the national conference of his political
organization in Dallas yesterday with an attack on President Clinton's health
care plan. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 5, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton's Jog Is No Escape

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 5;  Column 6;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 136 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 4


A day after lifting the trade embargo on Vietnam, President Clinton left the
White House today for an early-morning jog and ran smack into a reminder that
some of his neighbors were far from happy with his decision.

Mr. Clinton did not deviate from his favorite route, which takes him toward the
Lincoln Memorial along the Reflecting Pool -- and past a stand adjoining the
Vietnam Memorial where memorabilia are sold. It was not yet 8 A.M., but two
veterans were waiting for him.

One man shouted out a profane reference to Mr. Clinton's pedigree as he accused
the President of "back-stabbing." Another held up a sign: "Black Thursday, Feb.
3, 1994, Clinton Betrays P.O.W.'s."

The President jogged on without reaction. It was his only public appearance
today, which the White House described as a day off.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 5, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

City Hall Focuses on School Managers and Gets a Fuzzy Image

BYLINE: By JOSH BARBANEL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words


How many administrators does it take to run the New York City public school
system? Although it might seem the beginning of a bad joke, Mayor Rudolph W.
Giuliani raised the question in his plan to eliminate the job of every other
manager at the Board of Education's headquarters at 110 Livingston Street in
Brooklyn -- as much a symbol of bureaucratic resilience as the Pentagon.

Through what many say is bureaucratic obfuscation, no one inside or outside the
school system can agree on how many managers, trainers, curriculum experts and
support staff are included in the $7 billion school budget, let alone who should
stay, who should leave, whose task is essential and whose is bloat.

Are there only 3,500 managers working at headquarters, as the Board of Education
has reported, or have many hundreds more been taken out of the headcount or left
the school system only to be rehired as consultants or temporary workers? What
do the other 27,000 school employees who are not teachers do?

Are there 2,800 employees in the offices of the 32 community school districts,
as the State Comptroller found a couple of years ago? Or is the number really
1,200, as reported on school spending plans?

Why are several thousand school secretaries, along with some administrators,
listed in job counts as "pedagogical" employees? (Answer: Because they are
represented by the teachers' union.)

'An Indictment'

"That is an indictment of the system," said Schools Chancellor Ramon C.
Cortines, who took office in September. "Bureaucracy can work, but somebody has
to decide what the mission is. The problem is this place doesn't have a
mission."

Although Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Cortines have sparred over the extent and impact
of Mr. Giuliani's plan to cut waste and mismanagement in the schools, they seem
to share the view that the bureaucracy is the problem. And they have used it to
build support among the public.

In fact the Mayor's plan to cut 2,500 administrative jobs, while insulating
teachers and children from budget cuts, has disarmed many school groups that
have banded together to fight budget cuts over the last four years.

At the same time, the plan has put a spotlight on a resilient bureaucracy that
has survived periodic public floggings and attempts to cut administration and
shift resources to often underfinanced schools.

Mr. Cortines arrived to find that the Board of Education had half-a-dozen
different computer systems -- including three different systems to track
students -- that made it impossible to definitively answer any questions.

For years, the Board of Education was accused by the city budget office and
state and city fiscal monitors of withholding information about its staff and
budget plans. But yesterday Mr. Cortines said that some obvious information
never existed.

He has promised to produce a complete, reconciled accounting of the central
office staff, including part-time, temporary workers and consultants that he
said had been hired to replace some of the staff lost in past hiring freezes. He
said it would be soon followed by reports on staffing in school district
offices.

Michael Petrides, a Board of Education member from Staten Island who is also an
unpaid adviser to Mr. Giuliani, said that the staffing review found that past
counts understated the size of the bureaucracy. "It sounds like the Vietnam
War," he said. "Every day more bodies are being found, the number is going up
and up."

Mr. Giuliani's proposal to cut waste has proved extraordinarily popular within
school constituency groups. Virtually no one seems willing to stand up and
defend the administrative workers, who do everything from monitoring racial
balance in schools, to keeping track of grants

The opposition comes mainly from educators and parents who believe the cuts are
so large as to be undo able. Inevitably, they fear, the cuts will be transformed
into further cutbacks in spending on classrooms, which were already hurt by
hundreds of millions of dollars of budget cuts over the last four years.

Dennis Walcott, a Board of Education member appointed by former Mayor David N.
Dinkins, worried that cutbacks will inevitably affect lower-paid black and
Hispanic workers. But he did not defend the bureaucracy.

"We have to work hand in hand to tackle the monster of the Board of Education
and help the Mayor achieve his goal of a balanced budget," he said.

Since releasing his preliminary financial plan, Mr. Giuliani has strained
mightily to blunt attacks on his educational agenda and keep it focused on the
bureaucracy. In two meetings with Mr. Cortines and the Board of Education
president, Carol Gresser, he has reshaped his plans to meet their objections, at
the risk of appearing indecisive.

On Thursday he said that cutbacks of crossing guards -- a serivce popular with
parents -- was a mistake. Then yesterday he assured Mr. Cortines that he would
not insist on cutting the bureaucracy as deeply as planned, if Mr. Cortines
found the cuts would harm children. But he insisted that the Board still live
with his plan to cut $292 million from its budget.

But the school bureaucracy has shown an ability over the years to duplicate and
maintain itself.

Seymour Fliegel, a former director of alternative schools in East Harlem, who is
now with the Manhattan Institute, a private research group, said that the
Livingston Street bureaucracy is full of former teachers, who after many years
of service worked their way out of the classroom.

"If there weren't a terrible deficit," he said, "I would take those people and
put them into schools. They were once very good at what they did; that is how
they got out."

William Ubinas, the superintendent of Community School District 1 on the Lower
East Side, said the bureaucracy is self-perpetuating. His large administrative
staff spends much of its time dealing with demands for information from the
large staff at headquarters, he said.

"We have a duplication of labor that is unbelievable," he said. "I am willing to
downsize my office, if they downsize central. I have 50 percent of the people
here responding to 50 percent of the people downtown."

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 5, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Welcomes U.S. Decision on Embargo;
Hanoi's Response Subdued

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 5;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 533 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Feb. 4


Government officials welcomed President Clinton's lifting of the United States
trade embargo on Vietnam in measured terms today.

But even though this capital, unlike Ho Chi Minh City in the south, has never
known what it is like to have the United States as a trading partner, many
ordinary Vietnamese here greeted the American action as a significant boost to
the festive mood building up for Tet, the lunar new year holiday beginning on
Thursday.

In a news conference punctuated by bursts of exploding Tet firecrackers in the
surrounding streets, Deputy Foreign Minister Mai voiced the Government's
satisfaction at the lifting of the ban. But Mr. Mai, one of the principal
architects of Vietnamese-American reconciliation, took pains not to jubilate.
Asked about his personal feelings about the end of the embargo, he replied: "I
think that Vietnamese matters have created many emotional issues in the United
States. We, the Vietnamese, are less emotional."

"I think the lifting of the trade embargo may bring about many new things, or
maybe very few new things, or maybe nothing new," the Deputy Foreign Minister
said, and he indicated Vietnam's irritation at Mr. Clinton's remark, in
announcing the end of the ban, that his action was "reversible."

"No nation in the world," Mr. Mai said, "has the right to impose a trade embargo
on another nation or to threaten to reimpose an embargo."

Pledged Cooperation

But in comments obviously designed for concord with Mr. Clinton's emphasis --
that he lifted the embargo for the sake of advancing the search for evidence of
the 2,238 Americans still officially listed as missing in action -- Mr. Mai
pledged Vietnam's full cooperation.

"We will continue to cooperate fully with the United States under any political
circumstances," he said. "The Vietnamese people have themselves suffered sorrow
and grief and share the concern of American families whose loved ones are still
listed as missing from the war."

In a conversation before the lifting of the embargo was announced, Mr. Mai said
on Thursday that many Vietnamese held unrealistic hopes for quick economic
changes once trade with America became possible.

Fear of Inflation

Indeed, a staff member at the History Museum voiced caution today that the end
of the embargo might bring such an inflationary economic boom that the low wages
of civil servants might not keep up with a rise in prices. Most Government
employees earn no more than $30 a month.

But she also saw the value of the broadening of Vietnam's relations to include
the world's leading power. "It will protect us against invasion from the north,"
said the woman, a combat veteran of the war in South Vietnam. Her fear of China
is widely shared throughout this nation.

Tu Giay, founder and former chief of the National Institute of Nutrition, a
73-year-old veteran of the war against France and a longtime Communist, was
philosophically Buddhist in welcoming the end of the embargo.

"We come into the world only once," he said. "We don't know when we can come
back, because we must die before we can return. Why spend this short life
quarreling? So the event is a happy one -- but a little late."

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 5, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Opening to a New Vietnam

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 20;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 474 words


President Clinton did the right thing for the United States this week in ending
the 19-year-old ban on Americans' doing business with Vietnam. For Mr. Clinton,
it was an act of political courage. Had his predecessors been able to take a
larger view of American interests, they would have lifted the embargo years ago.

Vietnam has been changing dramatically for nearly a decade. Most of the
differences that drove Hanoi and Washington to war in the 1960's and 1970's and
kept them at odds through the early 1980's have disappeared.

In fact, almost all have been resolved in America's favor. Vietnam's troops are
out of Cambodia. Its markets are open to the world. And it has turned away from
what remains of the Communist bloc to seek new links with the Association of
South East Asian Nations, formed during the Vietnam War as an anti-Communist
bloc.

Vietnam is still a one-party state with an appalling human rights record, but so
are some of America's best friends and trading partners in Southeast Asia. What
has kept Washington at arm's length from the new Vietnam is, of course, the
legacy of an old war.

Only a small part of that legacy was substantive. While every single case of a
soldier lost without remains or information is a family tragedy, the number of
Americans still unaccounted for is unusually small given the scope and duration
of American involvement.

The war's larger legacy has been political and psychological. The dead and the
missing were not, as in past wars, redeemed by an American military victory. For
many Americans this was humiliating; for some, even dishonorable. Refusing to
acknowledge Hanoi meant refusing to certify Washington's defeat. As the years
passed, and Vietnam found the trade and aid it needed elsewhere, making the
embargo pointless, only a minority remained irreconcilable. But successive
Republican Presidents indulged this minority, while successive Democrats feared
provoking them.

It is thus remarkable that Bill Clinton, whose own opposition to the war and
avoidance of the draft made him especially vulnerable to attack on this issue,
became the President who finally recognized reality and acted in the national
interest.

Hanoi made it easier for him with its vastly improved cooperation in recent
years on searching for remains of missing Americans. So did American business
leaders clamoring for a share of the growing economic action before European and
Asian countries locked any more of it up for themselves. And Mr. Clinton has
prudently held back on such steps as diplomatic recognition and special trade
and aid agreements, holding them out as inducements for further Vietnamese
cooperation and human rights progress.

But give this President the full credit he deserves, for at last ending
America's self-imposed, self-punishing exile from the new Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Business Diary: January 31 - February 4

BYLINE: By Hubert B. Herring

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1530 words



THE ECONOMY

A Whiff of Inflation, and a Stampede Out of Stocks
Inflation continues to hover just off stage, a dragon that never actually
appears but whose menacing noises still keep the on-stage actors jumpy. On
Friday the Federal Reserve raised its Federal funds rate a notch -- to 3.25
percent from 3 percent -- and the financial markets acted as if someone had
stolen their champagne. It shouldn't have been a surprise, though. Alan
Greenspan, the Fed chairman, said earlier in the week that such a nudge might be
needed to head off long-term inflation, and many people shrugged it off, saying
things were going so well that a small rise couldn't do much harm. But when the
announcement came, bond prices fell and stocks tumbled, with the Dow industrials
(after flirting with 4,000 earlier in the week) losing 96 points for the day, to
3,871 -- the eighth-biggest drop ever. So has the bull market stumbled, or will
investors decide that 3.25 percent still isn't that high? It's a nervous
weekend.


Solid Job Data (Look Closely)
The job numbers should be crisp, clear guideposts, but you needed a fine-print
user's guide to read January's report, out last week. Yes, unemployment was 6.7
percent, up from December's 6.4. But: the survey's been redesigned (the old one
was missing too many women looking for work), so it's apples vs. oranges. All
things being equal, the Government says, the job picture's improving. And, yes,
payrolls expanded by just 62,000, a third what was expected. But: blame the cold
weather. The bottom line, economists say, is an economy still moving solidly
ahead. This time, we'll have to take it on faith.

Buying Cars, Even in January
Americans must really be primed to buy new cars these days. Neither sleet nor
snow nor ice (nor even more ice) nor collapsing freeways held them back in
January, as sales surged 13.8 percent, beyond even the rosiest forecasts. The
dealers' main worry now is just having enough cars and trucks to sell. Why the
stampede? Clearly, with employment, income and confidence up, Americans are
looking hard at their dented, sputtering antiques -- the average vehicle is now
nearly eight and a half years old, the highest since the early 50's. And one
dealer came up with a grim tidbit of optimism: Because so many cars were totaled
on January's ice, sales are bound to stay strong.

New York Women, Catching Up
Women already know the bad news: men earn more than they do. But the good news
is that the gap is shrinking -- and especially so in New York City. If you're a
woman and a high school graduate, New York was the place to be in the 80's. A
study out last week says women in the city who worked full time in 1989 earned
77.5 cents for each man's dollar, up from 71 cents in 1979. Nationwide, though,
the '89 number was just 66 cents. The study, done by Columbia's Teachers
College, also showed that by 1990 women had become a majority in the city's
labor force -- no doubt because manufacturing jobs are on the decline. Progress,
yes, but for the city's women the next question has to be, "O.K., what about
that other 22.5 cents?"

The Perils of Messing With Milk
The food industry has tinkered with nature for ages -- adding preservatives,
dyes, who-knows-what -- but rarely has there been such an outcry. Perhaps milk
is different -- sacred, somehow -- for there's been a gut reaction against this
round of tampering. Last week a growth hormone designed to increase cows' output
made its debut -- a hormone born of biotechnology -- and several big food
companies quickly moved to limit its use. The F.D.A. insists it's safe, but
stores are balking not for safety reasons but out of fear of what customers will
say.

Volunteering for Emission Limits
If California can do it, so can we! That seemed to be the thinking of 12 Eastern
states last week when they asked the E.P.A. to impose California's stricter auto
emission rules. The governors of the states -- from Maine to Virginia -- wanted
the rules, but if they get Washington to make them do it, they'll have less
rebellion from state legislators, who tend to have lobbyists banging on their
doors.

Does Sculley Know Best?
What is John Sculley up to? A lot of people would love the answer. When the
former Apple chairman made his puzzling decision to join Spectrum Technologies,
had he lost his senses or was he privy to some information about Spectrum's
glittering future? Initially, investors bet on the latter, and the stock soared.
But then came word that top Spectrum executives, who would surely know of any
pots of gold, cashed in a lot of stock after Mr. Sculley joined. To top it off,
the company faces an S.E.C. inquiry, and there was talk of a spat between Mr.
Sculley and Spectrum's president. So last week the company went out of its way
to say Mr. Sculley was busy, busy, busy with acquisitions and joint ventures.

BMW, With a British Accent
Like water in adjacent (leaky) pools, European industry is finding its own
level. Germany's auto makers are known for high quality -- but also for high
labor costs, and that's hurting. Seeking a better balance, BMW last week agreed
to buy the Rover Group for $1.2 billion. For BMW, it was the best way to get an
efficient small-car maker, because in addition to big, trendy Range Rovers, the
British company makes cars like the Metro and Mini. And, more to the point,
British labor costs are roughly half of Germany's. So the sun has clearly set on
one empire: Every big British auto maker is now under foreign control.

I.B.M. and Intel, Drifting Apart
In 1981, mighty I.B.M. bestowed on Intel the right to supply the
microprocessors, the "brains," for its personal computers. But Intel has grown
mighty itself and now dominates this highly profitable market, turning into an
I.B.M. rival. So last week I.B.M., as part of its effort to redefine itself,
pulled back from its ties with Intel, moving toward making its own type of
microchip.

Intel was already turning part of its attention to lower-tech pursuits. The next
day it said it would sponsor the Professional Chess Association, founded by Gary
Kasparov, the world champion. At tournaments, Intel will use computer graphics
and giant video screens to "bring the ancient game of chess into the 21st
century." It might have made it anyway.

Networks Seek Better Ratings
The television folks aren't satisfied with a population that spends most of its
waking hours in front of the tube. No, they want the precise who, what and when
of this national addiction. Nielsen ratings try to provide this, but networks
have long said Nielsen is inaccurate. Last week they ran out of patience,
starting a multimillion-dollar search for another way. The main complaint:
Nielsen undercounts some viewers, costing networks millions of ad dollars. "It
is simply unthinkable," said an NBC executive, "to be locked into yesterday's
methods." With "people meters" out of favor, is tomorrow's method a spy in every
household?

A Whispered Hello to Vietnam
President Clinton is dying to tear down trade walls, but when his finger came to
Vietnam as he worked down the list, an emotion-charged past flooded in -- right
up to the "draft dodger" cries regularly hurled at him. American business,
eyeing a possible $6 billion market, wanted to end the war-era trade embargo,
and many others just wanted to close that painful chapter. But veterans' groups
balked. So when Mr. Clinton ended the embargo last week, he tiptoed up to it --
and went right to the point on everyone's mind by vowing that the move "offers
the best way to resolve the fate of those who remain missing."

A French Aircraft Subsidy
Europe's commercial aircraft subsidies have been a touchy subject on both sides
of the Atlantic for some time now. The way Washington sees it, an Airbus kept
aloft by Government largess is an unfair rival to Boeing and its cousins.
Nonsense, says Airbus: Pentagon and NASA contracts for American plane makers are
just subsidies by another name. France did nothing to cool this tension last
week when it said it would chip in $341 million to prop up the state-owned
Aerospatiale, which owns more than a third of Airbus. Of course, the Airbus A330
has been slow to rival Boeing's 777 -- the first A330's have been grounded by a
landing-gear defect.

The Americas, United in Trade
After passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement, the rest of Latin
America looked at Mexico and said, "What about us?" Washington welcomed the
question, because Latin America is devouring American exports, and the Clinton
Administration's diplomatic tool of choice is trade, not aid. So last week the
Administration said it was drafting a plan for a Western Hemisphere free trade
zone. (Great: Now that we've got "Nafta," we face "Whftz" -- pronounced,
presumably, "Whoofts.") It won't be quick -- 10 to 15 years, probably -- because
Latin nations must first get their economies in order by deregulating markets
and taming inflation. Chile, whose economy has come the furthest, will be the
first in. And if the rest follow, there'll be a single tariff-free market of 750
million people.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs showing daily closes of Spectrum Information Technologies since
April (Source: Datastream), the Dow Jones Industrial average this year (Source:
Datastream) and Growth in U.S. sales of cars, Jan. 1994 vs. Jan. 1993.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Profile;
From Brooklyn, Around the World, To Mobil's Top Job

BYLINE: By AGIS SALPUKAS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 8; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1710 words

DATELINE: FAIRFAX, Va.


Lucio A. Noto, who will soon replace Allen E. Murray atop the Mobil Corporation,
is not typical of the men who have risen to the top of international oil giants.
He's the Brooklyn-born son of the leader of a union local comprising mostly
Italian immigrants. He rose through the ranks at Mobil in planning and
marketing, rather than winning acclaim with big finds in the exploration
division. And he made his reputation not in this country but overseas.

Little-known at headquarters here until recent years, he was until last year a
dark horse in the race to run the $64 billion company that is the nation's
fourth-largest.

But with Mobil looking abroad for an increasing share of its business, Mr.
Noto's accomplishments were hard to overlook. He helped build Mobil's operations
in Japan, then Italy, then Saudi Arabia. He gained a reputation for financial
savvy, detailed knowledge of operations, social skills and sensitivity to other
cultures. All won him friends among the foreign officials and executives with
whom Mobil needed to work.

Now, Mr. Noto, who is 55, has a broader challenge. His predecessor refocused the
company on its core businesses, shedding Montgomery Ward and the Container
Corporation, and began cutting costs in a big way, reducing the work force by
about 15,000 over the past five years to 62,000. Mr. Noto is obligated to
continue that streamlining -- weak operations in France might be among the first
to go -- but also to strike deals to develop new reserves in politically
perilous places like Vietnam, Russia and Kazakhstan as Mobil's major fields
begin to run dry.

He also must find enough customers to justify the company's $8 billion effort to
develop one of the world's largest gas fields, in Qatar, at a time when other
companies are also hurrying to bring on gas production.

And he must execute such risky plans while continuing to satisfy shareholders,
who have become accustomed in recent years to rising dividends and stock prices.
In the past five years Mobil shareholders have received a pre-tax annual return
(combining dividends and stock increases) of about 17 percent, compared with an
average of 13.5 percent among the major oil companies.

Mr. Noto, already the president and chief operating officer, will take over from
Mr. Murray as chairman and chief executive on March 1. The two men differ in
style. Whereas Mr. Murray avoided the limelight, gave few interviews and
disliked informal politicking, particularly in Washington, Mr. Noto feels at
home in such roles and might be more aggressive and outspoken in pursuing the
interests of the industry. He can be expected to communicate in person what
Mobil has been saying in its print advertising campaign since 1972.

He says he is not daunted by the position. "Some people say, 'Well, the glory
days of this industry have passed,' " he said. "I say no to that."

Like his oil-industry counterparts, Mr. Noto is faced with low prices for oil
and gas and stricter environmental requirements for gasoline in many nations.
That will raise operating costs. His challenge is to make his company the
low-cost operator in all phases of his business.

At the same time, Mobil, whose United States reserves are past their peak and
which now has nearly two-thirds of its production abroad, must find new reserves
in foreign lands.

New technology for exploration and drilling, plus the eagerness of many nations
to bring in major oil companies to find new fields, has made Mobil's job abroad
easier. Still, the dangers are high of sinking a lot of money into a country
whose government might change, and where chances are slim of finding major
deposits.

For example, Mobil has received permission from Vietnam to drill in a promising
area called the Blue Dragon in its territorial waters, near the area where the
company had drilled before abandoning its efforts after the Vietnam War. Now
that President Clinton has lifted the Government's post-war trade embargo, that
project can proceed. Yet one of Mobil's own experts, after reviewing the plan
recently, said there is only a 20 percent chance of finding oil or gas in the
region.

"And that's hot -- that's not a bad prospect, 20 percent," Mr. Noto said.

The Qatar gas project is another tough one. It includes a huge plant to liquefy
the gas and an investment in giant tankers to carry it to customers in Japan and
other countries. Mobil still has to line up long-term customers, like utilities
in Japan, and persuade banks and other investors to put up the billions in
financing to see through the project. Mr. Noto wants at least 50 percent of the
money to come from outside the company. The first gas will not flow from the
project until about 1997.

Mr. Noto also said that Mobil may have to get out of some markets in Europe. He
would not say which, but Constantine Fliakos, an analyst at Merrill Lynch, said
Mobil had a weak position in France and may decide to sell its refining
operations and gas stations there.

LUCIO NOTO grew up in Bensonhurst, a tough neighborhood in Brooklyn to which his
parents had moved with their parents from Sicily early in the century. His
father became active in the labor movement, and was later Secretary General of
Local 89 of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, an Italian-speaking
unit.

Mr. Noto, who pushed hand carts and packaged clothing during the summer as a
teen-ager, remembers the day in 1945 when his father packed everyone in his 1938
Oldsmobile, filled canteens with water and drove across the George Washington
Bridge to Englewood Cliffs, N.J., to look for a house. They bought the old
Victorian where Mr. Noto grew up.

A quick mind that could recall details and figures got him into a private high
school, St. Regis, run by Jesuits in Manhattan. Mr. Noto went on to the
University of Notre Dame, where he studied physics and played catcher on the
baseball team. Then came Cornell University, where he got his M.B.A. in 1962.

Out of school, he joined Mobil's planning group and began to court his future
wife, Joan.

By 1968 he was in Tokyo, overseeing teams of Japanese workers that began to
bring Mobil a significant share of the gasoline market there.  He learned some
Japanese and made friends, and this could help him in Mobil's current attempt to
win customers for the Qatar project.

In 1973, he was sent to Italy, as an executive vice president of Mobil Oil
Italiana. He had learned Italian from his grandparents but, he recalls, his
Sicilian dialect was so heavy that he had to take lessons so that Italians could
better understand him.

IN 1979 he went to Saudi Arabia to coordinate Mobil's joint ventures there. He
helped set up a petrochemical plant and refinery with the Saudis, who have the
biggest oil reserves in the world. He made a lot of allies and friends and
caught the eye of Mobil headquarters.

He also made contacts elsewhere in the Middle East. "Lou has close relations
with the Middle Eastern governments which could help the company to open doors,"
said John D. Hervey, an analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette.

Mr. Noto's abilities in entertaining foreign government and industry people were
often crucial to sewing up a deal or easing through a project. He also credits
his wife's skills.

Brought back to New York by Mr. Murray in 1985, Mr. Noto was made vice president
of planning and economics. He became the front-runner for the top job last year,
when he was elected president and chief operating officer.

He credits his rise to the top partly to good fortune. "I was lucky to be in
countries where there were issues that got a lot of attention, so I got a lot of
attention," he said.

He also said that his many years in joint-venture projects, as opposed to
projects solely owned by Mobil, helped keep him thinking of ways to do things
better. "When you have to go into a joint-venture board every month and convince
them that this is the right way to go, it generates a different kind of skill
set that I think is pretty good," Mr. Noto said.

He likes to meet occasionally with recently hired young employees, who ask him
how he made it to the top. He tells them: "There are many ways to get to the
top. And I tell you one of the best ways in my opinion is not to worry about
what's going to happen next. Worry about what you're supposed to do today."

He is not one to keep long hours and to pressure other executives to toil late.
After exercising at home, he gets to work in his Toyota Land Cruiser at about 7
A.M. By 6:45 P.M. he is generally on his way home. "I get tired," he said.

Outside Mobil, Mr. Noto moves easily among writers, artists and the social set,
as he demonstrated last October at the Lotos Club in Manhattan. An Absolut on
the rocks in hand, he worked the crowd and gave a small speech honoring a Slovak
writer, Martin Simecka, with the company's Pegasus Prize for a work in a
language other than English.

Colleagues recall that when Mr. Noto was stationed in Italy, he and his wife
helped sponsor the Spoleto arts festival. He is also an avid collector of
abstract art and has made friends with artists, including the British painter
Albert Irvin.

Yet Mr. Noto also likes to show his Brooklyn roots. He seems comfortable with
working people. He kids employees at all levels and last week enjoyed some
razzing from Calvin Pugh, a maintenance man who is a Dallas Cowboys fan, about
the defeat of the Buffalo Bills in the Super Bowl.

A car buff who lights up when he recalls the orange Maserati he picked up for a
song in Italy and drove on the autostrada when there were no speed limits, Mr.
Noto still likes to get his hands in the tool chest. He tinkered with a Datsun
240Z but botched the job so badly that he had to bring it to the shop to finish
the work. He has no such plans for Mobil.

LUCIO A. NOTO

 Born: April 24, 1938, Brooklyn.

 Education: B.A., University of Notre Dame; M.B.A., Cornell University.

 Family: Wife, Joan; five children aged 15 to 28.

 Drives: 1958 Lancia, 1972 Datsun 240Z, Toyota Land Cruiser.

 Hobbies: Collects and works on cars; collects paintings; golfs.

 Ideal escape: driving an Italian sports car on the autostrada to lunch at a
restaurant in a small Italian city.

NAME: Lucio A. Noto

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lucio A. Noto, who will become chief executive of the Mobil
Corporation on March 1. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Pol Pot, the Mass Murderer Who Is Still Alive and Well

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1198 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand


A BODY COUNT may not be the best way to measure a man's evil, but it is a useful
place to start. And among the century's architects of mass murder, few apart
from Hitler and Stalin could claim more victims than a pudgy, ever-smiling
Cambodian who came to be known by his followers as "Brother No. 1." He was
better known to the outside world by his nom de guerre, Pol Pot, the leader of
the Maoist-inspired Khmer Rouge rebels of Cambodia.

In his crazed, four-year revolution in the 1970's to convert Cambodia into a
Communist state purer than any other, Pol Pot mercilessly dispatched at least
one million Cambodians -- and some experts say many more -- through starvation,
execution and torture.

But there is an important, disquieting distinction between Pol Pot and these
other infamous mass killers of the 20th Century. Surely if Hitler and Stalin
were discovered alive today, millions would rise up to demand that they be
hunted down and brought to account.

But not Pol Pot. For him there has been no such quest for justice. For reasons
that involve both realpolitik and a neighbor's greed, Pol Pot is today a free,
prosperous and apparently unrepentant man who, 15 years after his ouster from
Phnom Penh, continues to plot a return to power. The calls for some sort of
international genocide tribunal for Pol Pot and his aides have not been heard
for years.

Along this dusty stretch of the Thai-Cambodian border, it is reliably reported,
Pol Pot lives in comfort with his second wife -- the first went insane -- and
young daughter, as they move among well-protected Khmer Rouge compounds in
western Cambodia.

He has a well-equipped army of nearly 10,000 soldiers that remains, despite
recent defections and setbacks, the main threat to Cambodia's new, elected
Government. He gives orders to the same henchmen who in the 1970's created the
"killing fields" on his behalf.

Far from being hunted down by his neighbors, Pol Pot is being propped up -- with
money, guns, sanctuary -- by corrupt military commanders and businessmen across
the border in Thailand, who reap vast profits from gems and lumber found in
stretches of western Cambodia under Pol Pot's control.

Pol Pot made his home in Thailand during much of the 1980's. But to ask about
him in border villages is to seek information about what the Thais call a
"peesat" -- a ghost. People here know he exists; some doubtless have seen him,
but few admit it. Pol Pot has long understood that his power stems in part from
the mystery surrounding him -- and the fear it inspires. No journalist has
interviewed him since 1980. The last available photograph of him was taken the
same year.

"He's out there, but a lot of people seem to want to forget that," said David P.
Chandler, whose 1992 book on Pol Pot is considered the definitive biography of
the Khmer Rouge leader.

"It's enormously offensive," he added. "If Cambodia were full of diamonds or
uranium, somebody would have done something about him long ago. But it's not.
It's Cambodia, so nobody gives a hoot."

The Khmer Rouge claims that Pol Pot retired in 1985. But virtually no one who
has closely studied the group in recent years, diplomats and scholars alike,
believes it.

His "retirement" is instead thought to have been a ploy to deceive the major
powers into believing that the Khmer Rouge had put its murderous past behind it
and was entitled to participate in a postwar government. Defectors confirm that
Pol Pot is still in charge. "The Khmer Rouge system does not allow for peaceful
replacement," said Mr. Chandler. "Pol Pot is there for life."

Pol Pot was born Saloth Sar, the son of a farmer whose family had connections to
the Cambodian royal family. Described as good-natured but intellectually
incurious as a boy, he was sent to France in 1949 to study electrical
engineering and there fell under the sway of the French Communist Party. He
returned to Cambodia in the 1950's a dedicated secret Communist.

In 1975, the Khmer Rouge took power in Cambodia, using arms supplied by Vietnam
and China to overthrow the American-backed Government of Lon Nol. At Pol Pot's
order, the Khmer Rouge mounted a draconian social transformation.
Foreign-educated intellectuals, business people and monks were slaughtered along
with anyone else who might challenge a revolution intended to turn Cambodia into
a giant agricultural commune. Cities were emptied, borders sealed.

When Vietnam invaded in December 1978, the carnage directed by Pol Pot had been
confirmed by refugees and documented, yet he was allowed to escape into
Thailand. There, the Government -- with what officials in Thailand say was the
tacit approval of the United States and other nations that saw Vietnam as a
greater threat than the Khmer Rouge -- offered him sanctuary.

'Sweetly Smiling'

The Thai Army built him a compound outside the eastern Thai border town of Trat.
The compound, "Office 87," ringed by Thai and Khmer Rouge soldiers, became Pol
Pot's base for his insurgency against the government installed by Vietnam in
Phnom Penh.

Office 87 also served as a training center for young recruits, and Pol Pot is
remembered by former students there both for mesmerizing lectures on the
Vietnamese "dogs" and for his kindliness. "Part of what so eerie about Pol Pot
is that anyone has met him leaves you with an impression of a man who is sweetly
smiling and terribly deferential, " said a Western diplomat in Bangkok.

In the compound, there were separate houses for Pol Pot, his wife, daughter and
close aides. Diplomats in Bangkok say there have been many reports in recent
years of Pol Pot's travels to the Thai capital for medical care and visits with
Thai officers.

During a dozen years of Cambodian civil war, China, like Thailand a traditional
foe of Vietnam, armed the Khmer Rouge. The United States pushed weapons and
supplies across the border to two non-Communist rebel groups allied with the
Khmer Rouge.

China and the United States used the Thais as a conduit for the arms, and the
Thais gladly obliged. For the Thai Army, Pol Pot is the best sort of business
partner -- reliable and publicity-shy. Thai commanders and traders used the
Khmer Rouge to make millions of dollars from the border trade in gems, lumber
and arms.

Cambodia's civil war ended, at least on paper, in 1991, when the Khmer Rouge,
its allies and the Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government signed a United
Nations peace treaty. But Pol Pot quickly reneged on the deal and the Khmer
Rouge boycotted last spring's internationally supervised elections.

Even as he tried to sabotage the United Nations peacekeeping operation, Pol Pot
retained friends, notably a handful of Thai commanders and business leaders. A
former Thai Army commander has described him as a "good man, a very
misunderstood man."

The danger posed by the alliance became clear again last December, when the Thai
police stopped a truck at the border south of here with weapons intended for the
Khmer Rouge. The Thai military was forced to admit that the arms had come from
its warehouses. Commanders insisted they had been taken without authorization,
an explanation many diplomats found hard to believe.

NAME: Pol Pot

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Pol Pot in 1977. (Gamma-Liaison)(pg.1); The last available
photograph of Pol Pot, taken in the Cambodian jungle, 1980. (Robert
Schwab/Bettmann Archive)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
America Opens the Door To a Vietnam It Never Knew

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER;  Steven Erlanger, a correspondent of The New York
Times in Moscow, was the Southeast Asia correspondent from 1988 to 1991.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 863 words


AN old friend, a Vietnamese diplomat in his 40's, thinks of his life as a
definition of cultural dissonance. A northerner, he remembers French colonial
education before 1954, followed by Chinese Maoism and then Soviet Communism, all
of which left their colonial residues on his Vietnamese soul. Now, once again,
he admits, shrugging, it's the turn of the smiling, big-handed Americans, whom
he fought rather bravely during the Vietnam War. "For us," he once said,
"Chinese is the language of the ancient enemy and brother, from whom we sprang.
French is the language of love. Russian is the language of arguments. English is
the language of money, the language of our future."

The American war in Vietnam -- which for Vietnamese was only the last, bloodiest
and most puzzling chapter of a much longer war for national unification and
independence -- had very little to do with the Vietnamese themselves. The last
time the Americans came in earnest it was in the name of ideology, of
anti-Communism, domino theories and the rest, which happened to coincide with
the moment a young pair of Kennedy brothers felt the need to prove their
toughness to the world.

For Americans, Vietnam encapsulated the death of one kind of national dream,
wrapped up in visions of altruism and purity. It still remains a metaphor for
unfinished healing. The American reaction to the loss of the war, our refusal to
accept normal relations with Vietnam for the last 20 years, puzzles Vietnamese
more than any other fact about the West.

"Can you ever forgive us for winning the war?" an old Vietnamese friend once
asked, musing on the idea that the Vietnamese would have profited most from
losing, given America's well-known generosity to the defeated. Then he said,
almost solemnly: "Americans will never come to terms with the Vietnam War until
they come to terms with Vietnam and the Vietnamese."

In increasing numbers, Americans who have visited Vietnam, to rediscover old
battlefields or just to tour, have found that necessary solace. On my last
visit, two years ago, I found that Vietnamese in general liked and admired
Americans. What American businessmen will also find is that in most important
respects, it is really the south that finally won the war. Vietnam's aging
leadership is bewildered by the decay of a socialist ideology to which they've
devoted their lives. The discipline of wartime was long ago cracked by
corruption and bureaucracy, and by the siren song of the West.

'Living Quickly'

For the young, increasingly in the north as well as in the untamable,
pleasure-seeking south, the only ideology is "song voi," or "living quickly."

Another Vietnamese friend, now in his late 60's, worked during the war as an
agent for the North Vietnamese. Now he tends his birds and books in a large,
walled house in Ho Chi Minh City, where he is still mistrusted by the
authorities, even as they ask him for political advice. All around the house are
cafes, which pump out Western music into the night. Putting his hands over his
ears, he once told me that his friends joke: "It's the revenge of the C.I.A."

During only the last American chapter, more than one million Vietnamese died,
compared with 58,000 Americans. Everywhere you go in Vietnam, north or south,
there are poor families with framed documents on the walls commemorating the
loss of their sons, tens of thousands of them missing in action.

Yet it is the Americans, with some 2,238 official M.I.A.'s in all of Indochina
-- one-quarter the number still outstanding from the Korean War and one-fortieth
of those outstanding from World War II, where the Americans have always had
access to the battlefields -- who continue this grisly accounting of bones.

While it may be, as often charged, that the Vietnamese are withholding remains,
it is the Americans who officially insist, against the available evidence and
simple logic, that some M.I.A.'s may still be alive and held against their will
20 years later.

For the French, who got over their defeat in Vietnam with a great deal more
aplomb, Vietnam has taken on an astounding degree of chic, especially now that
Thailand is so developed. From the soft-focus soap opera of the film "Indochine"
to the soft-porn of "The Lover," Vietnam finds itself an improbable object of
fashion.

These days, after so much poverty and isolation, the Vietnamese are in a hurry.
From the bar girls to the pickpockets, the young businessmen to the nearly
decollectivized farmers, everyone is out to make as much money as they can.
Vietnamese leaders, as in China, are afraid of the political impact of economic
development. But they know they have no choice. Always afraid of new
colonialisms, they are eager for American investment and influence to balance
the Japanese.

Having been divorced from the world for so long, the Vietnamese are rushing now
to meet it more than half-way; the end of the American embargo, and the
restoration of normal relations that is bound to come soon, will be seen as a
final acceptance of Vietnamese territorial integrity. It will also mark the end
of a painful isolation, made longer not only by American folly, but by their
own.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The siren song of Western consumerism is echoed by Kodak's
presence in Hanoi. Olivier Nilsson/Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 586 words



International 3-21

SHELL KILLS 66 IN SARAJEVO
A mortar exploded in the jammed central market of Sarajevo, killing at least 66
people and wounding at least 200. It was the worst massacre since the Serbian
siege of the Bosnian capital began 22 months ago.  1

The United States renewed vague threats of action in Bosnia.  13


TO GUARD JOBS, OR HUMAN RIGHTS?
News analysis: The growing link between American jobs and American exports is
remolding policy toward former political foes. Companies argue that the United
States cannot afford economically to isolate nations like China, or Vietnam.  1

Vietnam is far from the top of corporate America's export list.  11

REASSESSING THE THREAT IN KOREA
Though world attention is focused mostly on North Korea's nuclear weapons
program, the United States is concerned about an equally serious buildup in
conventional troops and equipment. The threat has led American commanders to
revise their approach in the event of an attack on the South.  1

MILAN TRIAL EVOKES 80's EXCESSES
The first trial in Italy's two-year wave of corruption scandals chronicles the
fall of a golden generation that rode a wave of prosperity to designer suits and
corporate jets.  3

Signs of a bombing campaign to sabotage South Africa's vote.  6

Over British objections, Argentina wins a battle to rearm its forces.  8

National 22-38

BECKWITH CONVICTED OF MURDER
Thirty-one years after the civil rights leader Medgar Evers was shot to death in
Mississippi, Byron De La Beckwith, a white supremacist, was convicted of murder
and sentenced to life in prison.  1

CLINTON'S BUDGET PLAN
President Clinton will send Congress a 1995 budget that will propose cutting
about $30 billion from Government programs to finance programs for crime
prevention and homelessness.  1

DIFFERENT PARTY, FAMILIAR BUDGET
News analysis: The budget, the first by a Democratic Administration in 13 years,
can vary only slightly from what a Republican President would have submitted.
34

RELIEF FOR ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
As Los Angeles struggles to pull itself together after the earthquake, its
social fissures have reappeared in an angry debate over whether relief aid
should be provided to illegal immigrants.  22

COMPELLING TESTIMONY IN TRIAL
A wife of the Branch Davidian cult leader discussed suicide pacts, mercy
killings and spiritual beliefs in testimony that left jurors spellbound.  22

BLOW TO HEALTH CARE PLAN
The directors of the National Association of Manufacturers voted not to support
the Administration's health package in its current form.  26

Metro 39-46

30 YEARS AGO TOMORROW
Thirty years ago tomorrow a quartet of cocky young men with thick Liverpudlian
accents and neatly cropped hair that brushed their ears descended on New York
City. It was the Beatles' first visit to America, and neither they nor America
emerged from it the same.  1

WHITMAN CHALLENGES TEACHERS
Gov. Christine Todd Whitman challenged the New Jersey public school teachers'
union with a recertification proposal that would attack teacher tenure and with
a tuition voucher plan for a troubled urban school district.  39

SMOOTHING THE PATH
New York City's Department of Transportation estimates that it will fill 250,000
new potholes this season, a 20 percent increase from last year and about double
what the city faces in an average winter.  39

Neediest Cases 40

Obituaries 48

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 62 words



Vietnam's Business Rush

Now that American companies can trade with Vietnam, several are jumping right
in. But for some, Vietnam is down the list of priorities in Asia, behind markets
like China, Thailand and Indonesia. Page 11.

Zones of Disagreement

New York's request for Federal money for an "empowerment zone" has turned into a
political brawl. Page 39.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Town Rallies Behind an Ousted Chief

BYLINE: By ROBERT HANLEY,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 44;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1298 words

DATELINE: SOUTH HACKENSACK, N.J., Feb. 4


The Township Council zipped through the routine business on its agenda in about
15 minutes and then turned its regular Thursday night meeting into a pep rally
for the former Police Chief, Arthur Montenegro.

About 200 of Mr. Montenegro's supporters branded John J. Fahy, the Bergen County
Prosecutor, a villain for taking over the Police Department, arresting Mr.
Montenegro and forcing his resignation for squelching a cocaine arrest in 1993,
and for charging a popular Councilman, Lucien Zeppone, with running an illegal
betting pool in his saloon on Super Bowl Sunday. They also accused the Council
of doing nothing to block Mr. Fahy and his detectives.

"He embarrassed the whole town," Jimmy Silvestri shouted at the five Councilmen.
"You people didn't do anything. I'd really like to know how powerful you are."

South Hackensack officials had doubts about that themselves. "I can't even get
into the Police Department myself," Mayor Anthony Cerbo said.

Councilman Zeppone, 51, was not there on Thursday night. He stayed away from the
meeting after the town's lawyer, Ralph W. Chandless, said he told Mr. Zeppone
that his presence would pose a conflict of interest.

Councilman Walter Eckel appealed for an end to bickering. "This is an American
tragedy," he said seriously, of the arrests of Mr. Montenegro, 43, and Mr.
Zeppone and the forced resignation of three police officers for illegal
gambling. "If we fight each other, it's only going to get worse."

Little South Hackensack -- insular, clannish and wary of outsiders -- is feeling
besieged, resentful and perplexed these days. A common refrain among its 2,100
residents is: Why bother us about gambling and friends helping friends with a
few parking tickets? What's the harm?

Doesn't Everyone Bet?

"Who don't bet?" asked an 88-year-old man getting a haircut at Tony Joe
D'Ambrosio's barbershop across Huyler Avenue from Mr. Zeppone's saloon, Stats
Sports Bar. "There isn't a factory or office in the state where there aren't
office pools. I bet. Teachers bet. Nuns bet. The police bet."

Mr. D'Ambrosio, 72, and a barber here for 45 years, called Mr. Montenegro a
"nice guy."

"He was just trying to do something good for some friend," he said. "So it was
against the law. What can I say? If one of your friends was in a little trouble,
wouldn't you help him? It's common sense."

The favor that led to Mr. Montenegro's arrest was his order to an officer not to
file narcotics charges against two men he found with less than a gram of cocaine
while stopping a motor vehicle here in March 1993. The Chief, who did not know
the two men, interceded after one of them called a mutual acquaintance from
police headquarters and the acquaintance summoned the Chief. One of the two is
said to be the future son-in-law of a public works employee in town. Mr. Fahy
refuses to identify who asked Mr. Montenegro to step in.

While a Montenegro loyalist shouted at the five Councilmen on Thursday night to
"exterminate the rats" in police ranks, Mr. Fahy said the 17-member department
is functioning smoothly with patrol help from the Bergen County police and from
neighboring towns. And while many in town are upset about the resignation of the
Chief and the three patrolmen and about Mr. Fahy's calling them "bad apples,"
the prosecutor said today that the remaining officers and department brass have
good morale and are in little mood to rally around the four forced out.

After all, he said, it was local officers who wrote the traffic tickets and made
the motor-vehicle arrests and then stood by as the charges were dismissed or
reduced. Only judges or prosecutors have discretion to do that, not police
chiefs, Mr. Fahy continued. In a reflection of the embattled mentality around
the municipal building, patrolmen and ranking officers refused comment on the
forced resignation of Mr. Montenegro and its impact on the department.

Excessive Leniency Alleged

At week's end, after five days of investigation, Mr. Fahy said his detectives
had found an improper reduction of charges in at least six
driving-while-intoxicated cases and in dozens of summonses for automobile moving
violations.

All had occurred in the three years since the Council appointed Mr. Montenegro
chief. While most of the cases involved South Hackensack residents, some of the
drunken-driving cases involved nonresidents with friends in town, Mr. Fahy said.
No evidence of extortion or bribery has been found in the cases, he said.

The prosecutor said his detectives began investigating the ticket-fixing in
mid-January while they were deep into a four-month gambling investigation in
town. He said informeers alerted his office to the situation. He refused to say
if they were disgruntled local policemen.

The gambling inquiry, conducted jointly with the F.B.I. and the New York City
Police Department, was focused on one of the three arrested officers, Anthony
Giaquinto, 29, a five-year veteran of the department, Mr. Fahy said. He said Mr.
Giaquinto had placed bets on sports events with two mob-controlled gambling
operations in New York City -- one on Seaman Avenue in northern Manhattan and
the other on 67th Street in Woodside, Queens. Mr. Fahy said his staff was
looking into Mr. Giaquinto's reputed association with the gamblers.

On Super Bowl Sunday, detectives raided his parents' bar and restaurant,
Giaquinto's Family Restaurant, on Vreeland Avenue, and Councilman Zeppone's
saloon. Mr. Fahy said both places were running $10,000 Super Bowl pools that
were illegal under New Jersey law because each bar took $2,000 in earnings from
the pool.

Nearly $14,600 was seized at Mr. Zeppone's bar, Mr. Fahy said. It is one of the
more popular drinking spots in town, with about 20 television sets along the
walls, flashing lights, loud music and go-go dancers.

All those arrested have pleaded not guilty.

Mr. Fahy said crime is not usually a major problem in this close-knit town
because many families have been here for generations, know each other well, and
keep an eye on one another's homes.

Trouble on Route 46

The biggest crime problem seems to be prostitution and occasional drug use in
the five motels on Route 46, the busy highway at the southern edge of town. Late
in November, a state police undercover racketeering squad made a rare visit,
raided a warehouse and seized more than 600 pounds of cocaine hidden in hollow
steel support beams of a flatbed trailer, said Lieut. Walter Butz of the state
police. The local police did not help with the raid because the investigation
started in neighboring Hudson County, Lieutenant Butz said.

Since midweek friends and family members have been circulating petitions
supporting Chief Montenegro. Arlene Spano gave the Council one copy with 100
signatures on Thursday night, and Laurie Marini was out knocking on doors today
gathering more. The petition called Mr. Montenegro's arrest "totally unjust."

"We have felt safe in his hands and we always have had full confidence in his
judgment," the petition said in part.

Friends call the former Chief a solid citizen who served three tours of duty in
Vietnam and came home to join the Police Department 19 years ago. They noted
that he often ran fund-raisers: for the Police Athletic League, for children
with terminal cancer at Hackensack Medical Center and for a dinner cruise for
graduating high school seniors last spring.

At Thursday's Council meeting, Councilman James Anzevino said the whole town was
hurt by the arrests of Chief Montenegro and Mr. Zeppone and the resignation of
the three officers. "Don't lose faith in them," he said. "We'll pull through
this like a good family."

Councilman Nick Brando added, "It's very important to say our prayers for these
people."


LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: At the end of the Township Council meeting on Thursday,
residents of South Hackensack, N.J., expressed support for a police chief who
had been forced from office. Arlene Spano presented a petition supporting him.
(Sam D'Amico for The New York Times); Arthur Montenegro, the former Police Chief
in South Hackensack. (William E. Sauro/The New York Times)

Map shows the location of South Hackensack Township.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Trade vs. Human Rights

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1457 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 5


The raging arguments over relations with Vietnam and China are at the core of a
sharpening debate in American foreign policy. In a world where every nation's
motto is now "export or die," where should the United States draw the line
between its desire to export its values and its increasing requirement to export
its goods?

During the cold war, the main debate was between idealists who argued that
relations with other countries should depend on their human rights behavior and
realists who argued that the United States could not afford militarily to
isolate dictatorships in places like the Philippines or Iran, because their
support was needed against Moscow.

Today, the idealists are still advocating human rights. But increasingly they
are finding themselves debating not with hawkish generals, but with General
Electric and General Motors, who argue that the United States cannot afford
economically to isolate the fastest growing economies, like China and Vietnam.

Economics vs. Human Rights

"There are still security considerations, but increasingly the thrust of the
debate in foreign policy today is economics versus human rights," said Winston
Lord, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs. "When I
was working for Henry Kissinger in the 1970's, I tended to meet with
think-tankers and academics, purely on political-security issues. Today, I find
myself going from a meeting with Amnesty International or Asia Watch in the
morning to one with the Chamber of Commerce in the afternoon. That is where the
big divide is. I think we can promote the interests of both. But clearly in the
short run there are sometimes tough trade-offs."

Mike Jendrzejczyk, the Washington director of the human rights organization Asia
Watch, says he has also seen the change: "In the old days, when Chinese or
Indonesian dissidents came to the States I would only bring them to Congress or
the State Department. Now I try to arrange appointments for them to talk to
business people. Sometimes the business people agree, sometimes they don't. But
many of them now feel they really have a stake in how the human rights debate
plays out. This is all very recent."

What has recast this debate? It's all in the numbers. In 1970, United States
merchandise exports were 4.2 percent of the gross national product and
merchandise imports were 3.9 percent. Today, merchandise exports are 7.2 percent
of G.N.P. and imports 9.3 percent. Labor Department statistics indicate that
American jobs related to exports pay, an average of 20 percent more than those
focused exclusively on the domestic economy.

Trade-Related Jobs in U.S.

Two decades ago, virtually no Americans made a living from trade with China.
Today, some 200,000 Americans are employed in the sale of $9 billion worth of
products a year there -- including 14 percent of the sales of Boeing aircraft.
Millions more depend on low-cost Chinese shirts, dresses and sweaters to clothe
their families. Vietnam? The potential investment marketplace in Vietnam will
reach $8 billion in the next five years, including everything from airport
construction to power generation, a recent report by the U.S.-ASEAN Council
said.

Nearby India, Indonesia and Myanmar, formerly Burma, represent even bigger
potential markets, but also with widespread human rights abuses.

It is fitting that President Clinton should be the one to have to sort out these
tough choices. He came into office preaching two themes on foreign policy: that
he would give a higher priority to human rights than the Bush Administration and
that he would give a higher priority to trade in foreign relations than his
predecessors. Now he is being forced to translate that straddle into policy.

In the case of Vietnam, Mr. Clinton tried to bridge the gap by arguing that the
more Americans were allowed to visit and do business in Vietnam, the more
chances there would be to encourage the Vietnamese to pursue the cases of
missing Americans.

White House officials insisted that economic motives were not involved. But only
10 hours after Mr. Clinton spoke, American Express signed an agreement with a
Vietnamese bank to pave the way for use of its credit cards in Vietnam. And the
Pepsico started a cola war in Ho Chi Minh City with its rival, Coca-Cola.
Veterans' groups cried "sellout," but most of the American public seemed
accepting.

Difficulty With China

China is more difficult. On May 28, when the President renewed China's favorable
trade status, which allows it to export its products to the United States at the
lowest possible tariffs, he laid down five human rights conditions that Beijing
would have to meet to win another renewal this June. These included accounting
for political prisoners, allowing them to be visited by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and ending the use of prison labor for exports to the
United States.

So far, American officials say, the Chinese have not done enough, creating the
prospect that the Administration might actually have to withdraw China's trade
benefits. Senator Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana, argues that this would be to
"drop the trade equivalent of a nuclear bomb."

With that danger in mind, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen and the President's
economic adviser Robert Rubin have put out another carrot to Beijing: meet the
President's conditions and the Clinton Administration will effectively retire
the weapon of most favored nation status once and for all.

This is where things get interesting. The strongest critics of China in Congress
say they hope that Beijing will meet the conditions of the President's executive
order and that there will not be a revocation of the trade advantages. But they
add that there is no way they are going to retire the trade weapon, which is
part of American law: section 402 of the Trade Act of 1974, better known as the
Jackson-Vanik amendment.

"Jackson-Vanik ain't going away," said the House majority leader, Richard
Gephardt of Missouri.

Another Mechanism Sought

In an effort to change that, Administration officials have asked the heads of
major companies doing business in Beijing to come up with some mechanisms that
the White House can propose to Congress that would be effective in pressing
China toward more human rights compliance without threatening a revocation of
trade.

But "most of those arguing for using something other than trade sanctions don't
have an alternative," argued Representative Nancy Pelosi, the California
Democrat who has led the China human rights cause in Congress. She said the
leverage of most favored nation status should definitely be kept around as a
tool, not simply to keep China from backsliding on human rights, but to use as a
lever in resolving the many trade disputes with Beijing.

"We spent trillions of dollars fighting the cold war," Ms. Pelosi said, "and now
that the cold war is over, I hope we don't say that what that struggle was about
was access to cheap labor and potential markets. Let's not forget: it was also
about freedom. Is our message to the world going to be, 'If you are small and
economically insignificant, we intend to advocate for human rights in your
country, but if you have potentially huge markets we should find another
strategy to influence your behavior?' "

The Power of Congress

This brewing argument between the Administration and Congress is a reminder of
something else. When foreign policy is dominated by security matters, the
executive branch almost always takes the lead and Congress, with its ambiguous
war powers authority, follows. But when trade is the instrument of foreign
policy, Congress -- which has constitutional authority for regulating commerce
-- can easily have its say and force the Administration to follow, said Gary
Hufbauer, senior fellow at the Institute for International Economics.

That is another reason, Administration officials say, why they urgently have to
find an effective tool for influencing the human rights behavior of other
countries without cutting off trade. Not so easy.

"In a world without the East-West divide," said Jeffrey Garten, Undersecretary
of Commerce for International Trade, "commercial competition is now much more
fierce and our ability to enlist other countries to join us in using economic
leverage to pursue noneconomic goals -- such as human rights or environmental
standards -- is diminishing. At a minimum, we are going to have to intensify our
multilateral diplomacy to figure out how to encourage other countries to join us
in pressing for human rights. Because if we can't, and we are forced to act
unilaterally, we lose in two ways: we lose commercially and we don't achieve the
values we hold dear."

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Some Companies Sit Out the Rush to Vietnam

BYLINE: By LOUIS UCHITELLE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 665 words

DATELINE: NAPLES, Fla., Feb. 5


Now that American companies can trade with Vietnam, several are jumping right
in. But despite the emotional impact of President Clinton's decision to lift the
trade embargo, for corporate America Vietnam is down the list of priorities in
Asia, behind booming economies like China, Thailand and Indonesia.

Some companies rushed this week to announce deals with Vietnam. Pepsico started
to bottle soft drinks in Ho Chi Minh City. American Express said it would soon
issue credit cards. United Airlines said it would begin scheduled service
between Los Angeles and Ho Chi Minh City and Northwest Airlines wants to make
scheduled flights there. And Caterpillar said it would soon sell parts to repair
Army bulldozers that the North Vietnamese had captured after Vietnam fell to the
North in 1975.

A Small Market

Despite this flurry of activity, many corporate executives said Vietnam was
still too small a marketplace to get their immediate attention.

The President's announcement on Thursday came as senior executives from 125
companies gathered here for the semi-annual directors meeting of the National
Association of Manufacturers. But health insurance and labor relations, not
Vietnam, were the main concerns at the two-day meeting.

"Our corporate future is not going to rise or fall on Vietnam," said Laurence C.
Seifert, vice president of global manufacturing at American Telephone and
Telegraph. "We provide some long-distance telephone service, mainly to
Vietnamese in the United States who call their relatives in Vietnam. This
business might rise. But the big market is China. We are exporting telephone
equipment to China."

Still, more than 30 United States companies have opened offices in Vietnam,
including Citibank, Bank of America, General Electric, Baker Mackenzie, Philip
Morris, I.B.M., Digital Equipment and Motorola.

The Boeing Company and Caterpillar have talked with Vietnam Government agencies
about buying airliners and bulldozers when the embargo was lifted. And the Mobil
Corporation has an option to explore for oil offshore.

A Two-Speed Strategy

But many American executives reacted to the new business freedom the way Warren
Batts did: sell right away the few things that the Vietnamese really want, and
go slow on the rest.

Mr. Batts is the chairman of Premark International Inc., a manufacturer of
Tupperware and commercial kitchen equipment. Premark plans to sell the kitchen
equipment to German, French and Japanese companies that are building hotels and
investing in Vietnam. "We have the arrangements; we just needed the freedom to
do it," Mr. Batts said.

The National Association of Manufacturers, representing 12,000 companies, had
petitioned the White House last October to lift the embargo, noting among other
things that Vietnam, with its 72 million people, "should be viewed as an
important country in the fastest-growing region in the world."

That competition has been a problem for Boeing. "We had a preliminary agreement
with Viet Nam Airlines to sell them 737's, but time passed and we could not
sell, and they went with Airbus," Lawrence W. Clarkson, a vice president of
Boeing, said. The Vietnamese bought six A320s, giving Airbus an edge for future
purchases of small jetliners. "But the Vietnamese are also in the market for
larger airliners," Mr. Clarkson said, "and they will be an important customer
for us over the long run."

A Market for Parts

Caterpillar has an advantage. When the North Vietnamese overran South Vietnam,
they seized a thousand bulldozers that Caterpillar had sold to the United States
armed forces. The Vietnamese have been using the machines ever since, stripping
some for parts to keep others operating, said Don V. Fites, the chairman of
Caterpillar.

The company will sell parts immediately for the aging bulldozers -- and earth
moving equipment later. Mr. Fites said that over the long run, Vietnam might buy
as much as $1 billion of Caterpillar's earth-moving equipment.


LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Approves Sale of Warplanes to Argentina

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL C. NASH,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 683 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES, Feb. 5


Almost 12 years after losing the Falkland Islands War to Britain, Argentina has
won a diplomatic battle to rearm its military over British objections.

Earlier this week, the United States agreed to sell the Government of President
Carlos Saul Menem 36 A4M Skyhawk jet attack planes with advanced radar
technology in an effort to requip Argentina's air force.

For more than two years, Britain had pressed the United States to stop the $250
million sale of the Skyhawks, arguing that such planes endangered the security
of the Falkland islands, which Argentine forces seized in 1982 and held until
British forces drove them off later in the year.

"The British were so stubborn about this," said one State Department official,
who insisted on anonymity. "Menem has renounced the use of force to get back the
Falklands, he has cut the size of the Argentine military, he has been a leading
advocate for nonproliferation in the region, and the British refused to credit
him for it."

Britain had argued that though Mr. Menem may have adopted a policy of
nonviolence as a means to recover the Falklands, which Argentines call the
Malvinas, the weapons last longer than the politician and that a future
Argentine Government might use the planes to threaten the islands.

Argentina invaded the Falklands on April 2, 1982, occupying them for 74 days,
until surrendering June 15 to British forces. During the war 250 British and 577
Argentine soldiers were killed, and the Argentine military, particularly its air
force, nearly destroyed.

Diplomatic ties between the two countries, cut during the war, were restored in
1990, under Mr. Menem.

For Argentina, which has had a democratic government for more than 10 years, the
announcement of the sale took on symbolic importance, an indication that the
isolation created by the Falklands War had finally ended.

The Skyhawk, built by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, was first flown in
1956, but the version going to Argentina first appeared in 1970 and was used
extensively during the Vietnam War. The plane is regarded as a very effective in
a dogfight because it has a small turning radius.

During the Falklands war the older A-4 Skyhawk was the backbone of the Argentine
Air Force, though it was no match for the British Harrier and Tornado jets. By
the end of the war almost all of Argentina's fighter planes, including most of
its Skyhawks, were either destroyed or so battered that they could not fly
again. Military analysts here say the country now has only two dozen flyable
aircraft.

Key to the dispute between the United States and Britain was over the type of
radar that would be included in the Skyhawks. Argentina had sought to buy an
advanced radar, manufactured by the Westinghouse Corporation, call the APG-66
and used in American F-16 fighters. Britain had argued for a radar with far less
capability.

In the end the United States decided on a compromise, selling a downgraded
version of the Westinghouse radar, called the ARG-1, that can only lock weapons
onto targets that are within sight of the pilot.

State Department officials said the subsonic Skyhawks would be no match for the
supersonic British Tornados stationed on the Falklands, and thus pose no threat
to the security of the islands. Officials have said that according to a Defense
Department analysis, Britain would not even have to increase the number of
planes its bases in the Falklands, unofficially thought to be no more than four.

"The Skyhawks cannot see beyond the horizon with the radar they will have," a
State Department official said. "Two or three British Tornados, which can see
beyond the horizon, coming out of the Falklands would wreak havoc with the whole
squadron of the Skyhawks. They would be blown out of the sky before they knew
what hit them."

Of most importance to Washington was that the sale of the planes would help
preserve the balance of power in the southern part of Latin America.

State Department officials said that with the sale of the Skyhawks, Argentina,
Brazil and Chile would have roughly equal air strength.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ON PRO BASKETBALL;
The Big Bottom Line: Coleman Will Play

BYLINE: By Harvey Araton

SECTION: Section 8; Page 4; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 845 words


If news media leaks really kill deals, the President's budget would still be in
Congress, he would already have thrown in the towel on health care and the trade
embargo on Vietnam would have gone on forever.

Nothing in this country would ever get done. John Madden would've spent the rest
of his broadcasting career at CBS. Michael Jackson would've changed his mind and
gone to trial. Jeff Gillooly would not have implicated the love of his life.

Word gets out, life goes on, except when the New Jersey Nets are negotiating a
contract.

Agents have their own selfish agendas, so why do I think Harold MacDonald was
closer to the truth in the who-dun-what Derrick Coleman negotiation follies last
week?

It wasn't MacDonald who set a deadline and banged on the Nets' door demanding a
contract. It isn't MacDonald who has a documented history of agreeing to
marriage, then waffling when it's time to put up the down payment on the hall.

There are newspaper morgues all over New York with clippings containing Willis
Reed's angry denials that Jim Valvano was ever offered a contract to coach the
Nets, an outright lie. There is Reed's sworn testimony that the Nets didn't
match Detroit's offer sheet to restricted free agent Terry Mills because Mills
didn't want to play for them, a pitiful excuse. Reed is a genuine New York
sports legend and a marvelous evaluator of basketball talent. But the Nets'
senior vice president is usually in a no-win position of creating a positive
marketing spin for a franchise that has been spinning its wheels in a ditch.

This Coleman dilemma wouldn't be quite as daunting had the Nets not stripped
themselves of assets the last two years with characteristic negotiating inertia.
No one wants to surrender a talent like Coleman, but the decision to sign him or
trade him would not be so dire if Mills, Chris Dudley and Mookie Blaylock were
still part of the Nets' talent base. There is no exact formula for leverage.
Coleman may not be Michael Jordan or Larry Bird, but he sure looks pretty darn
attractive lining up alongside Benoit Benjamin and Chris Morris.

Besides Coleman, Kenny Anderson and Chuck Daly, the Nets don't have much. Their
credibility as a viable franchise has been questioned again and again, not just
by fans and the news media, but by the league and its players. Forget Roy Boe's
selling Julius Erving in 1976, which might as well be 1776. Half the players
today think Jordan invented basketball, but they all know something about teams
like the Nets and the Los Angeles Clippers. They know them as graveyards for
championship ambition.

That's all in the equation of what defines leverage for a particular player, or
team. Charlotte gave Larry Johnson $84 million in large part to protect its
23,000 nightly ticket base. If the Nets had a reputation as a more combative
franchise, they could deal Coleman for a couple of players, then declare
themselves in the market for prospective free agent forwards like Danny Manning
or Horace Grant. They would have options. The reality is that Manning, stuck
five years with the Clippers, and Grant, used to winning in Chicago, would be
desperate before they returned the Nets' calls.

No matter how hard radio sports talkies try to establish what Coleman's true
worth is, there is no definitive answer to that question. Some enjoy comparing
his work ethic unfavorably to Patrick Ewing's. They forget how Ewing regularly
begged off practice with tender knees until Pat Riley persuaded him to "practice
with pain."

There are a lot of New Yorkers now championing Ewing who were calling him a
greedy loser when he dragged the Knicks through arbitration while trying to
become a free agent three summers ago. Now that Coleman is demanding big bucks
to sign, the tone of the attacks have become similarly strident, to the point
where you sometimes have to wonder if the specter of a black man with a clear
sense of power and autonomy strikes an uncomfortable chord.

Unless the box score in my Wednesday morning newspaper was in error, it seemed
that Coleman blocked nine Seattle SuperSonics shots in a 1-point Nets victory
Tuesday night. This Russellesque feat against the team with the league's best
record went pretty much ignored while talkies and callers raged that he's not
worth the bucks.

It's said that Coleman doesn't pack fans into Byrne Meadowlands Arena, but on
page 222 of the Chicago media guide, it says that the Bulls averaged 11,000 plus
for home games during Jordan's first two seasons. Fans come out for winning
teams. Whose fault is it that the Nets are mediocre, Coleman's or management's?

He has his bad nights, his run-ins with coaches and teammates. He is moody and
occasionally volatile. Charles Barkley wasn't exactly a bald diplomat in
Philadelphia. He didn't win too many games there either, once his team began to
look like Coleman's.

I don't have an answer for the Nets. It's their money. It's their credibility.
Someone will pay Coleman something to play somewhere. He'll survive.

Will the Nets?

I can't answer that one either.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: February 6, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1449 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   3   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A
                computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss
                and is accused by her of sexual harassment.

 2      2  78   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 3      3  14   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 4      4   2   FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of
                mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a
                sylvan Vermont town.

 5      5   3   BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent
                deaths.

 6      7  43   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 7      6   2   HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B. Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) Three
                American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German activities
                in Buenos Aires in 1942.

 8      9  24   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 9      8  47   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret presents problems for a young boy.

 10    15   7   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &
                Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates
                a child's mysterious death.

 11    10  17   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                and a poem.

 12         1   VOYAGER, by Diana Gabaldon. (Delacorte, $21.95.) A woman finds
                love while commuting between 18th- and 20th-century Scotland.

 13    11   8   THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A
                collection of stories about American men.

 14*        7   THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Talese/Doubleday,
                $23.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly
                reappears in their lives.

 15    14  13   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A writer's family
                life is endangered by a madman.

 16*   12   9   THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of
                Israel from 1948 to 1967.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  39   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2      2   7   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 3      8   4   SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A
                psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.

 4      3  12   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More
                comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 5      4  24   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 6      5  22   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 7      6  18   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 8      7  10   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                100, reflect on their lives.

 9      9  16   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 10    11  78   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 11*   10  18   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 12    12  27   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 13    13   3   FLY FISHING THROUGH THE MIDLIFE CRISIS, by Howell Raines.
                (Morrow, $22.) A journalist looks at middle age through the
                prism of his favorite sport.

 14    15   4   A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Knopf, $27.50.) The
                development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years in Judaism,
                Christianity and Islam.

 15    14   9   LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The
                country singer's memoirs, with an account of her relations with
                daughters Wynonna and Ashley.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  15   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.

 2      3  37   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 3      4   3   MAGIC EYE, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when
                scrutinized at length.

 4      2  28   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 22, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's choices of recent books of particular interest)

BEYOND DESPAIR: Three Lectures and a Conversation With Philip Roth, by Aharon
Appelfeld. (Fromm, $17.50.) The Israeli novelist argues that literature can and
must deal with the Holocaust or give up its pretensions to be a vehicle of
spiritual apprehension.

THE BINGO PALACE, by Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $23.) Three decent people
look for love on a windblown prairie in this novel whose daily life is enriched
by supernatural events and the presence of Indian spirits.

BITTER WINDS: A Memoir of My Years in China's Gulag, by Harry Wu and Carolyn
Wakeman. (Robert L. Bernstein/Wiley, $22.95.) Mr. Wu's memoir of 19 years in
labor camps is grimly familiar as to abuse and deprivation but grotesque and
surreal in its account of acting out each new political rectification campaign
right in the heart of the prison system.

THE CAVEMAN'S VALENTINE, by George Dawes Green. (Warner, $19.95.) Romulus
Ledbetter, Mr. Green's protagonist, is a homeless, black, paranoid private eye
who can be roused to propriety only by a case as interesting as the one Mr.
Green has dreamed up for his first novel.

CROSSING THE RIVER, by Caryl Phillips. (Knopf, $22.) A novel, covering two and a
half centuries, that presents a brilliantly coherent mythified vision of the
irreversible African diaspora.

A FROLIC OF HIS OWN, by William Gaddis. (Poseidon, $25.) Mr. Gaddis's fourth
novel, easier to like than his previous work, constructs a harsh, misanthropic
but hilarious comedy from the language of law and litigation.

GOING NATIVE, by Stephen Wright. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) A road novel
that explodes the conventions of the genre as a weird, dangerous shape-shifting
protagonist remakes his identity on the way to California.

HOW WE DIE: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf,
$24.) The author, a physician, surgeon and teacher for 35 years, offers a wise,
humane and cultivated examination of what happens to people when they die,
omitting none of the clinical detail.

IMAGES: My Life in Film, by Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $27.95.) At 75, the great
Swedish film maker confronts and reveals himself as artist and man in this
evocation of his career, based on a fresh viewing of all his movies.

JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES. Volume 2: The Economist as Saviour 1920-1937, by Robert
Skidelsky. (Allen Lane/Penguin, $37.50.) How Keynes reshaped the world's
economy, made a lot of money and married a ballerina, by an economics professor
whose mastery of many subjects seems to match Keynes's own.

JOSEPHINE: The Hungry Heart, by Jean-Claude Baker and Chris Chase. (Random
House, $27.50.) Prodigious research and outstanding narrative fluency mark this
biography of Josephine Baker (1906-75), the irresistible American institution of
French revues, cabaret and film.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Reader by Reader and Town by Town, A New Novelist Builds a Following

BYLINE: By Michael Norman;  Michael Norman, a former reporter for The New York
Times, is an associate professor of journalism at New York University and the
author of "These Good Men," a memoir of American troops in Vietnam.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 5583 words


This essay is the second of two parts about the marketing of a first novel and
the beginning of a writer's career.

"Art must be practiced as a trade, at all events in our time. This is the age of
trade."
   George Gissing
   "New Grub Street" (1891)

WHEN Marly Rusoff is lucky, a book sells itself. When she's not, a handle can be
hard to come by.

"Well, I think that Mark Richard is going to be remembered as one of the most
celebrated writers of his generation." She sighs. "And that's not a publicist's
hype." Then she winces. "It's difficult," says Doubleday's vice president and
associate publisher. "When you say he's part Melville, part King James Bible,
part Faulkner, you feel like an idiot. It's hard to describe."

Perhaps she should be oblique, she suggests, especially this week, a week in
early May 1993, just before the book is published. Waiting for the approbation
or opprobrium of the critics, the prudent publicist affects a certain
uncertainty. "Mark Richard may be called the Joseph Conrad of our day," she
says. "Who knows?" And then she smiles.

Ms. Rusoff learned the business from the selling floor up. The daughter of a
bookbinder, she owned a bookstore in Minneapolis, then went to work as a sales
representative for Simon & Schuster, crisscrossing the cold brown hills of South
Dakota with boxes of books in the trunk of her car. She came to New York and
worked in the publicity department at Houghton Mifflin, then in 1990 moved to
Doubleday, where she now creates the "publishing plan" for 25 to 30 books a
year. In a trade of tin-pot reputations where hype is the order of the day, she
is spoken of with respect. She won't oversell a book, they say; she doesn't try
to pass off a second fiddle as a concertmeister.

Today she's groping for words. The book that she's trying to sell, "Fishboy," by
Mark Richard, a first novel, has a thin story, almost no plot and dense language
that requires close reading. The narrator is a ghost who tells his life story,
recounting a dark fable about an abandoned child, more fish than human, reborn
in a swamp, who goes to sea in the company of a crew of cutthroats and
grotesques. Such work is hardly what Hollywood would call "high concept." And,
like all literary fiction, it will have to fight for a place on the bookstore
shelves.

The audience for such fiction, "serious readers," as Philip Roth calls them, is
tiny: perhaps 120,000, says Mr. Roth; more likely, say others, much less. In
this marginal market, if a first novel sells 10,000 or 15,000 copies, that is
considered a victory. The writers of literary fiction sometimes "break out"
early with a "big book" that appeals to a general audience, but for the most
part they build their reputations slowly, book by book, reader by reader.

On the surface, Mark Richard would appear to have certain advantages. His
publisher, Doubleday, a division of Bantam Doubleday Dell, which is owned by the
German corporation Bertelsmann, is one of the largest, oldest and most
successful concerns in the industry. His agent is the well-respected Georges
Borchardt. His editor is Nan A. Talese, who, under her own imprint, publishes
both critical and popular successes, among them Margaret Atwood and Pat Conroy.

Mark Richard (pronounced ree-SHARD), 37 years old, has been working for some
time to position himself. He came to New York in 1985 and in the eight years
since then, his short stories have appeared in major publications like Esquire
and The New Yorker. Along the way, some of his stories were collected and
published by Alfred A. Knopf in "The Ice at the Bottom of the World," which won
the PEN/Hemingway prize and led to a Whiting Foundation grant.

Hungry for success, Mr. Richard is also willing to do just about anything to
help sell his first novel. He and Ms. Rusoff have talked about a four-city
publicity jaunt to be followed by a driving tour of the South, with signings and
readings at 28 bookstores from Texas to Virginia.

For the moment, however, all plans wait.

Next week is the book's official publication date -- in effect, when the company
formally releases its product to the critics and the public. Without the
reviewers' warranty -- or, in its absence, widespread word-of-mouth or interest
generated by feature articles in major magazines and newspapers -- "Fishboy"
will have little chance.

Ms. Rusoff has spent a good deal of time, on the telephone or by letter, trying
to convince the editors of the major newspaper book review sections -- The New
York Times, The Washington Post, The Chicago Tribune, The Los Angeles Times, The
Philadelphia Inquirer, Newsday -- that "Fishboy" was worth a look. (At one
point, she was calling the book a "fever-dream" and the author "kin to Garcia
Marquez.") Now, a week away from publication, she's worried. "In the past," she
says, looking down at the novel's deep blue cover, "I've seen books like this
get trashed."

Every year for the last 10 years, American publishers have released an average
of 45,000 new titles. Roughly 10 percent of these are fiction -- including
mysteries, melodramas, romances, military sagas, thrillers and so on. Many are
derivative, written to formula -- a different kind of "Presumed Innocent,"
another "Hunt for Red October."

Richard Eder, the Pulitzer Prize-winning book critic for The Los Angeles Times
and Newsday, whose reviews are available nationwide on the Los Angeles Times
Syndicate, figures that he looks at maybe 200 first novels a year. Every week, a
load of books and bound galleys is delivered to his Boston office. He arranges
them in piles on the floor, then sits down among them to browse. He reads here,
he reads there. If a sentence catches his eye, he keeps reading. Twice a week,
he writes about something he's read -- usually, but not always, a work of
fiction. His reviews reach an audience of between three and four million people.

One day last spring, "Fishboy" arrived at Mr. Eder's apartment. He pulled the
proof copy from its cardboard mailing envelope and put it in a pile of seven or
eight others. His method of culling is, well, metaphorical: "I taste them, I
sniff them, I lift them up. There's a kind of a smell about a book I'm not going
to review." Like most critics, he looks for literary staples: a Norman Mailer, a
John Updike. Absent a known commodity, he takes a "cursory sniff" at new
products. Here he indulges his tastes. He does not like Southern Gothic fiction
or American domestic realism -- "which includes a lot of good, tidy literature"
-- or anything over 1,000 pages long. He "loves" examples of magic realism, "but
I don't think it works that often, so I look for them." And thus he turned to
"Fishboy."

Mr. Eder knew that the author had won a Whiting grant, which "was kind of like a
friend saying, 'This guy is worth a look.' " So he opened the bound galleys and
started to read: "I began as a boy, as a human-being boy, a boy who fled to sea,
a boy with a whistling lisp and the silken-tipped fingers of another class. A
boy . . . thrown from a car into a side-road swamp. A child born again there,
slithering out of the sack. . . ."

MR. EDER put the galleys down. "The first two or three pages were
indecipherable." But he did not toss "Fishboy" away. He rarely judges a novel by
its opening pages because "God knows, if Theodore Dreiser were on my floor and I
read the first 50 pages, I wouldn't have reviewed him." He picked the galleys up
again; he read about an ax fight, a mermaid, a helmsman turned inside out and a
mate who hated the cook so much that he killed him. Then he turned to his
computer and wrote an 800-word review:

"Richard's novel is a trifle . . . a hefty dose of spirits. The fumes
occasionally overpower it, and the author's heady images stagger grandiosely. .
. . Its hallucinatory ins and outs read like a particularly laborious recipe
from the magic-realism cookbook. . . . There is something downright plucky and
resourceful about the young narrator. He is an altered state Huck Finn. What he
lacks is a river. . . . Richard has written an essentially literary adventure.
His hero floats feistily -- but on a book, not a raft."

What Mr. Eder intended was, as he later explained, "a mixed review." He admired
the bold effort, the author's mythic echoes and literary allusions, but,
essentially, Mr. Eder thought "Fishboy" had failed. "Huck Finn" without a
"river" was clearly a metaphor for the book's chief weakness: its lack of a
clear story. "Fishboy," he said in an interview, "floated around in a fog."

Mr. Eder's review, the first major review of Mark Richard's book, appeared in
Newsday and The Los Angeles Times on May 6, 1993. And in New York the people at
Doubleday were hardly downcast.

Marly Rusoff is on the telephone. "We're having a frantic day, but I want to
refer you to Richard Eder's review. It's a really fun review. It's given me a
much lighter heart about the book. He calls it 'an altered state Huck Finn.' So
it's, as we've been saying, an American classic. He gives it a good review, but
what I love about it is, it makes the book sound like so much fun. I've always
been a little shy about talking about how much fun the book is because you have
an idiot, a dead sheriff, two convicts, a murder, so this gives me the courage
to tell people what a terrifically fun book this is."

Ms. Rusoff's reading of Richard Eder's review could be taken as an example of
what the longtime editor Ted Solotaroff has termed the "cognitive dissonance"
that makes American publishing sometimes seem like never-never land. Was Ms.
Rusoff trying to wrap a technical failure in the cloak of a critical success? Or
was she simply looking for material to help with the handle, the pitch -- and
Mr. Eder's review had the kind of "buzzy lines" she'd been hoping for?

"Now I can talk about it as 'an altered state Huck Finn.' You pick up things
along the way. With a first novel, you have to have some endorsement beyond
yours and a couple of the author's friends'. You have to build up a bunch of
material. Now I can probably get some momentum from this. I've read positive
reviews that are so boring you'd never consider spending $25 on the book. A
selling review is a review that people might talk about. It goes beyond
appearing in print; it becomes part of conversation. And word-of-mouth is really
what works in the end. 'Altered state Huck Finn' -- yes, that's something people
will talk about."

Tonight Mark Richard's friend Pearson Marx is throwing a party for "Fishboy" in
her posh Upper East Side apartment. It is a catered affair with champagne and
smoked fish, ham and turkey. Doubleday is represented by Nan Talese (sporting a
black beret), Marly Rusoff (a tentative smile) and various young and attractive
supernumeraries. An assembly of the author's friends are here, as well as his
mother and sister. David Hirshey, the deputy editor at Esquire, is in
attendance, standing in a circle of literary youngbloods clustered around Gay
Talese, Ms. Talese's husband.

Some book parties are promotional stunts; the publishing house asks its
well-known authors to lend their cachet to a newcomer and invites the press to
watch as everyone walks around offering congratulations and rubbing elbows.
Other parties, like this one, are simply part of the tradition of celebrating
someone's work. Tonight's affair is private (the author asked the only reporter
in the room to leave his notebook at home), a small break from the serious
business, a few moments when "Fishboy" is nothing but a book.

Back at work, Marly Rusoff is trolling. She's been faxing Mr. Eder's review to
feature editors and radio and television producers. The author, she's been
telling them, is good copy -- a teen-ager from Virginia who became the youngest
disk jockey in the country, a college boy who went to sea on fishing boats, a
writer in the Southern tradition who has made a myth that's fun to read.

Now and then she gets a nibble -- National Public Radio, which attracts a
significant book-buying audience, wants to know more -- but no one will commit
to an interview. Mr. Eder's review is not nearly enough to create the "buzz"
that flowers into the "phenomenon" that demands attention. Everyone seems to be
waiting -- waiting for The New York Times.

The New York Times Book Review does not always make or break a book. But, say
book publicists, its influence is such that critics and editors across the
country regularly follow its lead. More than 8,000 books and bound galleys are
sent to the Book Review every year; only about 2,500 titles end up being
featured in its pages. The packages arrive at the Book Review's gray offices in
waist-high rolling mail bins. Staff workers toss out anything judged
inappropriate for review (romance novels, genre westerns, game books, how-to
books, textbooks and so on) -- the sorts of titles the Book Review has decided
not to cover or, say its editors, books that its readers don't expect to find in
its pages. The survivors, about 100 titles a week, are divided among eight
preview editors who screen books and bound galleys, make assignments and
shepherd reviews into print.

THE previewers record their impressions for the master files. Some of their
comments cut to the quick. "Deeply dry," said one, about a book exploring
military strategy in the Middle East. "No, deadly dry." Others are more prosaic:
"This semi-memoir" about the Warsaw ghetto "is more a document than a book for a
general audience." Occasionally, a previewer has some fun: "A veddy British
journalist (now a freelance television producer) has veddy interesting (and
sometimes veddy troubling) adventures wandering around the islands of the South
Pacific. She becomes veddy concerned about the despoliation of paradise -- but
not veddy concerned about the neglected state of her own prose."

Every Thursday morning, the eight preview editors gather around an eighth-floor
conference table with Rebecca Sinkler, Marvin Siegel and Robert Harris, the
editor, deputy editor and assistant editor of the Book Review. The preview
editors present the books they think are worthy, then make suggestions -- from a
wide-ranging group of scholars, novelists, journalists, historians, editors and
experts in various fields -- about who might write the review that will appear
in print.

"We fall on their suggestions and try to tear them apart," said Ms. Sinkler. The
editors, she said, aim for "lively and informed matches of reviewer and book."
They also try to avoid conflicts of interest, even deeply hidden ones: "We might
say Y can't review X because she was sleeping with X's agent's first husband."
And there are all kinds of other questions. "If you have a book that's sheer
misogyny, do you give it to a radical feminist? No."

WHEN the bound galleys of "Fishboy" arrived at The New York Times, the previewer
was ambivalent: "Richard's collection of short stories was an uneven, bleakly
modernist, sometimes chillingly effective piece of work. His new novel, a sort
of absurdist nautical fairy tale (which the publisher, alas, is calling a
reinvention of the sea language and myths found in Melville and Conrad), is a
similarly mixed bag. A young boy hangs about a strange, female-populated fishing
station, scarfing oysters and yearning for the sea. Strange boats come and go.
He is involved in what might be a murder. He is taken aboard a boat. He sees
strange things. He returns. Sometimes these encounters are described in an
interesting way, in vivid images. But the point of it all often seems lost in
the posturing."

That Thursday the consensus around the conference table was that -- because of
the first reading of the book itself and the competition from other, seemingly
stronger titles -- "Fishboy" did not warrant a full review. It was assigned to a
freelance journalist, Margot Mifflin, who had written regularly for the Book
Review for several years and was known to have a taste for modern fiction. She
was asked to write what is known as a "brief," a 200- to 300-word paragraph for
the In Short page.

On occasion, reviewers have such a strong reaction to a book that they ask their
editors for more space. Sometimes they get it, sometimes they don't; sometimes
there's space, sometimes the reviewer is off the mark. Ms. Mifflin told the
previewer who had made the assignment that she loved the book. The editors had
come to trust her judgment, they said. They knew she was not simply angling for
a byline.

Ms. Sinkler took a hard look at the book and, in the end, decided that "Fishboy"
was the kind of work "on which reasonable people could disagree"; it also
appeared to have a quality she admired -- it seemed "ambitious," the kind of
writing that takes chances. So she was persuaded to "bump it up" to a 600-word
review that ran on the bottom of page 7 on May 16.

The posturing modernist was now, in Ms. Mifflin's words, a writer with a
"seemingly fathomless imagination" who "has folded a host of exquisitely
rendered tales into a stunning novel."

"I'll take that, yes-sir-ee-bob, I'll take that any day of the week."

His agent, Georges Borchardt, has just called to read from a copy of the Book
Review and Mr. Richard, who is packing for a quick publicity trip, is ebullient.
"Georges says the most important thing is to get noticed. And I want the book to
get noticed. I'm not trying to put it in every home, but I do want to shove it
from shore and get it sailing on its own."

The next day he leaves for a short four-city publicity tour -- Miami, San
Francisco, Seattle, Toronto. Most of the 8,000 copies from the first printing
have been shipped to the stores. Now all the author has to do is persuade
readers to buy them.

Mr. Richard will not sell hundreds at each stop. There will be no queues in the
streets outside bookstores, no clamoring for his signature on the title page. In
fact, the spot sales on tour count for little. Literary fiction is hand-sold
slowly across time and the hand that matters most is the bookseller's. So the
smart author tries to meet as many clerks and managers and bookstore owners as
he or she can, hoping that when someone wanders up to the register "looking for
a good book," the bookseller will recommend him.

The trip took eight days. In Miami, he gave a reading and answered questions at
Mitchell Kaplan's store Books & Books. For the most part, it is the
independently owned bookstores (16,765 of them in the United States) and not the
large chain stores (12,853) that take a chance on new work.

The literary reading, a cross between abject salesmanship and performance art,
is an old form of cultural conversation, but it can serve the modern author in
many ways. Serious fiction needs a following to survive and often the 20 or 30
people who attend a reading at a bookstore become fans of the writer for life.

Any reading turns on the personality of the author. Some can't emote, others
can't stop. "I've done a thousand author readings, and I've found that talent
and humility are not first cousins," said Meg O'Brien, who interviewed Mr.
Richard in Miami for her show "Cover to Cover" on WLRN, a public radio station.
"But Mark said all the right things. Every one of those 20 people there fell in
love with him."

Mark Richard has been writing, off and on, since childhood. When he reached
puberty, his voice dropped dramatically, and at age 13 he went to work as a disk
jockey. After high school, he studied journalism at Washington & Lee University
in Virginia, but a professor who took an interest in his work started to push
him toward literature -- Poe and Dickens, Faulkner, Fitzgerald and Twain. Mr.
Richard left school for a while, worked on fishing boats along the Eastern
Seaboard, then returned, finished his degree and in the years that followed
bounced from one job to another: photographer, Xerox machine operator, envelope
stuffer, newspaperman. He moved to Virginia Beach, lived in a "nasty place" at
the edge of a honky-tonk strip and divided his nights between a typewriter and a
spot at the bar at a gin mill called the Thunderbird Lounge.

Now and then, Mr. Richard would send his work to New York, to Esquire magazine,
where it would end up in a slush pile in Tom Jenks's office. "But the stories
always popped out," said Mr. Jenks, who was then the magazine's associate
fiction editor. "They were filled with yearning and longing." The writer had
talent, but little technique and no discipline. "Sometimes I'd work on his
manuscripts and send them back," Mr. Jenks said, "but he was always resistant to
revising them. Instead I'd get four more stories."

In 1985, on a vacation to North Carolina's Outer Banks, Mr. Jenks finally met
the author. At one point that day, as Mr. Richard remembers it, Mr. Jenks
offered some advice: "Tom said, 'You want to play hardball fiction? You've got
to come to New York.' " The industry was in New York, and so was a large
community of fellow travelers. He needed to meet editors and mix with other
authors, Mr. Jenks told him; he needed to become serious about his work. Six
months later, Mr. Jenks got a call at his desk in Manhattan. "I went around to
the Old Town Bar on 18th Street off Broadway and there he was," said Mr. Jenks.
"He had on Maui shorts, a T-shirt and sandals. He said, 'Here I am. What do I do
now?' "

Mr. Richard went on to publish a few stories in Esquire and other magazines, but
the fees were modest and in the years that followed he lived hand to mouth,
often on the largess of friends. At one point he was so impoverished that he was
eating the baby food in the apartment where he was house-sitting. About that
time, two editors from Esquire invited him to lunch. As Mr. Jenks tells the
story, one of them "noticed that Mark only ate half of his sandwich and wrapped
the other half up to take with him. They said, 'That's ridiculous. We don't
treat our writers like that,' and the magazine arranged for him to get an
advance on his next story."

Along the way, on Mr. Jenks's advice, Mr. Richard had taken a writing course
with Gordon Lish, an influential editor at Knopf who offers expensive tutorials
and often places the work of his students in The Quarterly, his small literary
magazine. After the course, Mr. Lish offered Mr. Richard a contract for a
collection of short stories, "The Ice at the Bottom of the World." (Mr. Richard
will not talk about the terms of the contract, but it was probably a modest
one.) Later, with Mr. Jenks's help, he picked up an agent, Georges Borchardt.

Mr. Richard started "Fishboy" a few years after he came to New York. He'd just
read "Far Tortuga" by Peter Matthiessen, a novel that inspired him to experiment
with a story, written in dialect, about a Caribbean fisherman. Soon he dropped
the dialect and changed the locale. But the story wasn't working, so he kept
rewriting it. Gradually, a character called Fishboy emerged: "He was a minor
character at first, but he was always the one saying something interesting. He
said, 'I began as a boy, a human-being boy,' which implied to me that he ended
up as something else. But I didn't know what." Fishboy took over the story, and
by 1991 the story had evolved into a novel.

At that point, unhappy with the way Knopf had handled his story collection, Mr.
Richard began to think about switching publishers. Meanwhile, at a party, he met
Nan Talese. She'd read his collection and admired his work. He told her about
"Fishboy" and some other projects. A short time later, Ms. Talese called his
agent, Mr. Borchardt. After reading the manuscript of "Fishboy" and hearing
about Mr. Richard's plans, she offered a three-book contract.

Miami's reading in a small room at Books & Books was packed, but in San
Francisco only a handful of people filled the seats. In Seattle, the number grew
to 50; then, in Toronto at an arts festival, there were 100. Mr. Richard came
home happy, but spent. Who, he wondered, was buying his book? His first night
back in his apartment, he walked in his sleep and woke up in his living room.

On Monday, Ms. Talese called with just the right tonic: they were going back to
press, she said; from the initial print run of 8,000, only 150 books were left
in the warehouse and she was about to order a second printing of 2,500. And
there was more. The author had been booked on National Public Radio, the "Fresh
Air" show -- 2 million regular listeners at 150 stations around the country, an
audience, according to the network's market research, that includes a large
number of educated book buyers.

It was Ms. Rusoff who had wangled the gig. The show's host, Terry Gross, rarely
interviews fledgling novelists. They tend toward shop talk, said one of the
producers, Amy Salit, and nothing can kill a radio show quicker than a
disquisition on intertextual analysis. "But Marly called us so many times," she
said. "She was so persistent. She sent us reviews. Then Terry read the book and
the writing was good. And his personal experience tied into it, so there was
something interesting to talk about."

A month after the show, Mr. Richard began a 28-bookstore tour through the South.
He flew to Texas, borrowed a 1979 Cadillac Sedan de Ville from an old friend,
Dolphin Overton, and set out to sell his book.

As it turned out, he was not the only author to take to the open road last
summer. Paul Kafka, the author of "Love Enter" from Houghton Mifflin, visited 62
cities as he logged 18,000 miles in a 1983 Oldsmobile station wagon. And it is
likely that others were touring the hinterlands as well.

"They know if they're not out there peddling, the book won't get the attention
it deserves," said Leigh Haber, vice president and director of publicity and
advertising at Harcourt Brace. "Writers are no longer content to sit by while
publishers market their books."

Marly Rusoff had worked with Mr. Richard to plan a trip. (The cost of the two
trips, plus postcards, fliers, T-shirts and the like, as well as the cost of
local "co-op" ads to promote the readings, and finally 1,100 galley copies sent
to independent bookstores across the country -- in short, the cost of promoting
"Fishboy" -- came to about $12,000, or $1 a book, which is the industry
standard.) They set the schedule, then tried to drum up publicity for each
reading by calling ahead to the local newspaper, and to radio and television
stations near each bookstore. By the time he was ready to leave, they had
managed to marry a number of readings to interviews.

His route took him roughly from Austin, Tex., to Washington. Here and there, he
paused to make a few notes, an ad hoc journal of life on the road:

"Out of Kingsville, 72,740 miles on speedometer. . . . Visit to chain-saw art
store. . . . Old fat woman abuses child rough-housing pet dog. . . . Tequila on
screened porch. . . .

"Good crowd at Europa Books in Austin. Invited to University of Texas to see
rare book room, 'Ulysses' manuscript. . . ."

"Stopped in Waco at the What-a-Burger for directions to David Koresh compound.
Got T-shirt. . . ."

"Thunderstorm busted reading at Borders in Dallas. Went on call-in talk show.
Came after two white supremacists. . . . This guy says, 'I want to know, this
Fishboy, is he a fish or a boy? I jus' wish he'd make up his mind'. . . .

"Lake Charles, La. Stayed with Uncle James and Aunt Kitten. Saw alligators in
game preserve and stepped on two snakes. . . .'

It is late June, and as Mr. Richard nears Wilmington, N.C. (76,359 miles on the
speedometer), Ms. Talese sends him a message. "Warehouse empty," it says. "Going
into third printing." He is delighted that 2,500 more copies of his book will be
coming off the presses, but tired, melancholy even. At the beginning of the
summer, he had said, "I'll do anything to push this into the stores." Now he is
finding the whole business a little depressing: "You go to these bookstores and
the owners are still hung over from the person they were doing the reading with
the night before. At one place a guy asked me, 'When are we going to see your
next novel?' I said, 'The way the money's going, sooner than expected.' "

He decides to stay in a down-at-the-heels hotel at Wrightsville Beach outside
Wilmington. He needs some time to "decompress," he says, to soak in the surf and
stare at the saw grass and myrtle along the dunes. That
night, however, as the Cadillac turns into the parking lot of the Galleria
Shopping Plaza and stops in front of Bristol Books, he is still restless. "Bet
there will be between three and five people here tonight," he says.

The manager, his wife and four smiling clerks welcome Mr. Richard warmly, not a
crapulent eye in the bunch. "Fishboy" and "The Ice at the Bottom of the World"
are stacked neatly on a cart by the cash register. The manager steers the author
to the front of the room, and soon the air is filled with his story.

A dozen people have settled down to listen, but a tall man with a beard and,
apparently, an appetite decides to wander the stacks. Each swing takes him past
the refreshment table. He looks at a book on astronomy and wolfs down four
cookies; he fingers a book on health and gobbles two pieces of cheese. When the
reading is finished, he stops his grazing and wanders over to the cart that
holds Mr. Richard's books. He picks up a copy of "Fishboy," eyes the price
($19.95) and puts it back. Then he sees "The Ice at the Bottom of the World" in
paperback ($7.95). He takes up the book, finishes off a cracker, and gives the
book to Mr. Richard to sign.

After closing, the clerks check the totals: 14 copies of "Fishboy" and 8 copies
of "The Ice at the Bottom of the World." For a brief moment, Mark Richard is a
best seller.

And on he went through North Carolina. At McIntyres Books in Pittsboro, the
reading was packed. He did well in Manteo too, then went to Norfolk, Va. ("I
appeared on a television talk show with two anchors who had no idea who I was.
On a commercial break, the woman turned to me and said, 'Is this a book about
children?' ") Williamsburg was next, then Richmond, Washington and, finally,
home.

"Maybe I won't have to do this with the next book," he said, as the fall and his
38th birthday approached. "I really want to go hide somewhere and just do work.
I'm done."

But "Fishboy" wasn't. Mr. Richard gave a reading in Iowa City, then went west on
an assignment for Esquire, then returned to Virginia for some work with the BBC
and some more book promotion. The reviews continued right through September, and
in mid-November he read in South Carolina at a national meeting of state arts
directors.

Ms. Rusoff calculates that Doubleday has sold, to date, 11,700 copies of
"Fishboy" out of the 13,000 that were printed. Mr. Richard's little book has had
a good "sell-through," as they say in the trade. In other words, it is being
read. And this June, when Anchor Books publishes "Fishboy" in paperback, his
readership is likely to grow.

His agent was "pleased," but cautious. Mr. Richard was "pointed in the right
direction," but he still had a lot of work ahead of him, said Georges Borchardt.
"After all, he's only written two books."

His publicist was "extremely" pleased. "If it's not the beginning of a
successful career," Ms. Rusoff said with a wink, "then it's the beginning of a
cult."

His editor was characteristically ebullient. With "literary first fiction," Ms.
Talese said, "huge numbers are not as important as committed readers."

It appeared to be a case of commerce and culture serving each other. The company
probably made a little money and brought a promising writer into its fold. For
his part, the author found a home and began to woo an audience for his work.

The example of Mark Richard and "Fishboy" would delight a cultural
deconstructionist: its conclusions are inconclusive and contradictory.

Critics in the industry say that for every "Fishboy," there are probably dozens
of failures -- books that get no reviews, that don't even sell out their first
printings. And many editors worry, with good reason, that the economics of the
business and the unchecked cupidity of the conglomerateers have turned American
publishing into a vast counting house that has long since lost the spirit of art
and ideas. "The heads of publishing companies have never been literary
idealists," said Edward Burlingame, who for many years had his own imprint at
HarperCollins. "They wanted to make money, but they wanted respect, to
contribute to the culture. Now it's, 'What's the profit?' "

Boosters in the industry dismiss the requiems and wax romantic about the
creative spirit. They insist that in a quiet corner of many houses there is at
least one editor agitating for literature. The optimists have faith that no
matter how avaricious the age, literature will endure. "Good writers," said
Deborah Futter, an editor at Doubleday, "will keep writing even if success
eludes them because they feel compelled to write."

That may be true, or it may be what editors tell themselves before they send yet
another first novel out to the stores.

Mark Richard is working on a second novel now -- "Babyhead," a political satire
set in the South. Like most writers, he is not inclined to discuss a work in
progress. All he will say is that compared with "Fishboy," it is "more
grounded." One wonders: Is he still as bold, as adventurous when he's turning
out his sentences? Or has a hard summer hustling his book persuaded him to stick
his nose in the wind before he sits down to write?

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: GRAMERCY PARK;
The Kenmore: Crime Haven, but Also Home

BYLINE: By MARVINE HOWE

SECTION: Section 13; Page 8; Column 4; The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 681 words


Nathanael West, the author, lived at the Kenmore Hotel, Dashiell Hammett wrote
part of "The Maltese Falcon" there, and S. J. Perleman regularly stopped by for
lunch and a swim in the pool. Today, the Kenmore, at 23d Street and Lexington
Avenue, is described by city officials and the police as one of the city's worst
single-room-occupancy hotels.

For several years, the 23-story, 650-room building has been "the epicenter of
crime in the neighborhood," said Police Officer Scott Kimmins, whose beat covers
the Kenmore. Last year it was the site of 58 arrests, most on narcotics charges.
In the last few weeks a drug dealer was arrested for stabbing a resident,
Officer Kimmins said, and a woman was jailed for assaulting a fellow tenant and
stealing her money and food stamps. A few months ago, an elderly woman survived
being stabbed and stuffed in a closet.

In 1993 alone, the building was cited for 362 violations by the Buildings
Department, the Department of Housing Preservation and Development and the
Department of Health.

"We are now working with a variety of government and private agencies to find a
permanent solution to this terrible situation in the next several weeks," said
State Senator Roy M. Goodman, who has been working for months on the Kenmore
problem.  The Manhattan District Attorney's Office and the United States
Attorney for the Southern District are looking into seizing the hotel under
Federal forfeiture laws, and the city's Corporation Counsel is seeking an
organization to manage the hotel under the Nuisance Abatement Law, city
officials said.

But Tran Dinh Truong, owner of the hotel, contended in an interview last week
that he had corrected most of the violations, that he had hired 24-hour security
guards and that he phones the police when drug dealers come into the hotel.
Calling himself a victim, he said he is losing $50,000 a month on the hotel and
can't afford the property taxes. He said 125 of the 370 tenants were not paying
rent and he has filed suits against 16 of them.

A shipowner in South Vietnam, Mr. Tran came to the United States in 1975 and
purchased several hotels, including the Hotel Carter on 43d Street near Eighth
Avenue.

The city sued Mr. Tran in 1983 and 1984 for failure to correct violations at the
Carter and stopped using it as a welfare hotel in 1988. In 1990, he was relieved
as the Bankruptcy Court-appointed administrator of the Times Square Hotel,
because he failed to remedy more than 1,000 violations of housing, health and
fire codes, officials said.

Touring the Kenmore last weekend, a visitor saw piles of refuse, crack vials and
fluttering pigeons in unoccupied rooms, gaping holes in ceilings and walls,
cockroaches and exposed electrical wires. Only one elevator was operating,
without a light. Men's and women's bathrooms were on alternating floors but used
indiscriminately.

O'Neil Gray, a 24-year-old student in physical therapy at Hunter College, pays $
283 a month and has been at the Kenmore for three years. He recently changed
rooms because of rodents. His new room is better, he said, but light fixtures
are broken, the floor needs repairs and for two weeks during the icy blast there
was no heat.

When Bridey Kennedy, 67, came to the Kenmore in 1960, she recalled, "it was a
decent place." She pays $45.20 a week for her tiny but tidy compartment. Now,
she said, "it's no good, anywhere you look: heat problems, leaks, no security,
drug addicts."

Isolated from the rest of the hotel, the third floor is set off as a student
hostel with carpets, clean painted walls and a kitchenette. Rudy Habermacher,
from Birmingham, England, arrived just before Christmas and pays $17 a day.
"It's a mess in the lobby because there are always drug dealers around, but they
never hassle us and we have our own keys to the floor," he said.

The only vestige of the Kenmore's former elegance is the huge mosaic pool in the
basement. The owner recently began working on the area, installing mirrors and
marble tiles; he said he plans to lease the pool to a private company.   MARVINE
HOWE

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Bridey Kennedy, left, has complained about drugs and security
at the Kenmore, owned by Tran Dinh Truong. (Photographs by Stephanie Berger for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
In Film Noir, the Past Is Present and Perfect

BYLINE: By JAMES GREENBERG;   James Greenberg, a freelance journalist, was a
film critic and reporter for Daily Variety and an editor of American Film
magazine.

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 9;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2120 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


IN "RESERVOIR DOGS," QUENTIN Tarantino's darkly comic heist film, an efficient,
amoral gangster played by Michael Madsen challenges the hotheaded
professionalism of his partner in crime, played by Harvey Keitel. "I bet you're
a big Lee Marvin fan," he tells Mr. Keitel.

By evoking Marvin, the quintessential heavy who was famous for throwing scalding
coffee in Gloria Grahame's face in "The Big Heat" back in 1953, Mr. Tarantino is
tacitly acknowledging where his film comes from. But, unlike many of his
film-literate contemporaries who copied the style of postwar film noir, Mr.
Tarantino had the good sense to create something original.

"Younger film makers making early films are attracted to the style and imagery
of noir, and maybe do not understand or choose to explore the psychological
dimensions as much as the stylistic conventions," says John Bailey, the
cinematographer for "In the Line of Fire" and "The Big Chill." "In strictly
visual terms, the idea of film noir has been shredded, masticated, consumed and
regurgitated."

Hardly a cohesive or calculated movement, film noir (the name was coined by
admiring French critics), originally referred to low-budget films from the 40's
to the mid-50's with a shared dark vision. Diffused and random sources of light
suggested a place where the sun was no longer the center of the universe.

The current cinematic landscape is littered with the excesses of overeager
directors playing with the ominous shadows and tough-guy poses of film noir. At
best superficially entertaining, films like the remake of "D.O.A." (1988),
directed by Rocky Morton and Annabel Jankel, James Foley's "After Dark, My
Sweet" and Dennis Hopper's "Hot Spot" (both from 1990) did little to update the
social tensions that were the underpinnings of the genre. Even Stephen Frears's
critically well-received "Grifters," also in 1990, spoke more of Raymond
Chandler's Los Angeles than the modern city where it was set.

In the new film "Golden Gate," the director John Madden uses, in one scene
alone, a swooping camera motion to close in on a dark, rainy alley lighted by a
flashing neon cocktail sign where the hero, Matt Dillon, stands in a trench coat
and hat, smoking a cigarette, thinking about the mistakes of his life. Recent
film noirs churned out by Hollywood, including Showtime's "Fallen Angels"
television series last fall and the film "Romeo Is Bleeding," which opened on
Friday, suggest that the genre has lost the power to express any ideas of its
own.

"I don't think that film noir is dead or used up or a cliche as much as it
experiences periodic rebirth and rediscovery," says Mr. Bailey. "Whenever we
have any moment of deep societal rift or disruption in America, one of the ways
we can express it metaphorically is through the ideas and behavior in film
noir." At least two such modern films successfully tapped the futility and
frustration of Vietnam: John Borman's "Point Blank" (released in 1967 while the
war was still going on) and Martin Scorsese's postwar nightmare, "Taxi Driver,"
made in 1976. The noir formula was further updated last fall in Steve Kloves's
"Flesh and Bone," a tale of a misfit grappling with his past, filmed in broad
daylight in the open spaces of Texas.

Realism was never a goal of film noir. The plots -- usually involving a morally
indecisive man corrupted by a practical woman who knows what she wants -- were
preposterous and often impossible to follow. (Raymond Chandler himself was said
to be baffled by one of the murders in "The Big Sleep," the 1946 film based on
his novel.) What mattered most was the moral dilemma of the characters. The
typical noir hero was a returning soldier alienated from the life he had left
behind. Men in barrooms in every two-bit town in America said, as did the hero
in the 1947 film "Crossfire": "A guy like me after the war hates himself because
he's scared to get going again."

Uncomfortable in the real world, noir heroes were constantly mulling the
mistakes of the past or the possibilities for the future, spilling their guts in
voice-over narration. When it came time to make a choice about how to live, they
usually made the wrong one. Robert Towne, the screenwriter of "Chinatown," and
the writer and director of "Tequila Sunrise," says, "The noir hero is
essentially someone who is born under a black cloud, who has some character
deficiency and is drawn to a dark fate, who is deeply self-destructive and meets
a girl who is rotten and says to him, 'Let's be rotten together.' "

A bad experience in the Army or some other wound becomes the turning point for
the noir hero. Life is sour, and he's bitter. "Whichever way you turn, fate
steps out a foot to trip you," says the star-crossed lover in the 1945 film
"Detour." When a Robert Mitchum or even a little-known B-movie actor like John
Dall in the 1949 movie "Gun Crazy" appeared on the screen, the audience sensed
that these were people who had been kicked in the teeth by life. Film noirs were
movies about adults, made for adults who had just been through a war.

Today, most movies are made for teen-agers, and actors rarely convey the same
sense of world-weary experience. In 1961 Robert Mitchum was slated to star as
the drifter in an adaptation of a novel by Charles Williams; 30 years later,
when the novel was filmed as "The Hot Spot," Don Johnson had the role of the
drifter.

Drew Barrymore waving a gun in the recent remake of "Gun Crazy," titled
"Guncrazy," suggests little more than a child playing with a toy. When she and
her boyfriend go on the lam, they are not making a gesture of existential angst
as much as copying what they have seen in the movies. Life imitates pulp
fiction.

The tough-guy novels and short stories by Cornell Woolrich, James M. Cain and
other (sometimes unpublished) authors that were the source material for such
films are not being written today. The film noirs turned out by today's
generation of film makers are based solely on the movies they saw growing up.

"There seem to be nine million of these new movies -- always with a couple of
sadistic Eurotrash guys with Uzi's on a rain-slicked street," grouses the pulp
author James Ellroy, who wrote the novel "L.A. Confidential." "It's as if people
studied the old film noirs but didn't understand the social subtext of it all.
There's no fall from grace, because the kids that made these movies never
believed in anything other than the movies themselves to begin with."

This is not to say the 90's are free of alienation and displacement, but the
anxiety is less specific and more free-floating than that which returning G.I.'s
felt after World War II. The classic noir hero conveys a certain naivete, regret
and sadness about being led astray, a response that may no longer be
appropriate. With the sheer saturation of information, no one is innocent
anymore.

It's unlikely that a contemporary audience would have the patience to watch the
sleepy-eyed Mr. Mitchum take his time to think things over before he is spurred
to action in a 1947 film like "Out of the Past." The lassitude and ennui of noir
characters do not suit contemporary taste. Apathy and boredom have injected a
moral numbness into modern heroes that often erupts in spontaneous acts of
violence: Christian Slater goes ballistic in last year's "True Romance," written
by Mr. Tarantino; Lena Olin kills gleefully for personal gain in "Romeo Is
Bleeding."

Visually, the direction of mainstream American cinema in the last 20 years has
gone against the noir grain toward a greater sense of realism, to re-create
reality instead of deconstruct it. The world of film noir was artificial,
largely a studio creation.

Black-and-white photography captured the polarities of good and evil in a way
that is immediately more graphic than color can suggest. Chiaroscuro lighting,
disorienting angles and stark, fragmented sets were used to manipulate the mood
because there was little money to do it through production design. Joseph H.
Lewis's innovative use of a camera mounted on the back seat of a getaway car in
"Gun Crazy" was an on-the-spot solution to a problem. It was threadbare film
making depicting threadbare lives.

There is a kind of elemental vigor in film noir that loses its vitality when a
movie is overproduced. "Romeo Is Bleeding" perhaps tries too hard, with a
slow-motion murder, an overhead shot looking down into a toilet and numerous
other touches we have seen before.

On the other hand, the television series "Fallen Angels," which recently came
out on videotape, may not have tried hard enough; it is film noir lite. The six
half-hour episodes of varying quality, shot by different directors including Tom
Cruise, Tom Hanks and Steven Soderbergh, are little more than shaggy dog stories
dressed up in noir clothes. As Mr. Bailey, the cinematographer, says of the
series, "When the visual trappings have reached the point of half-hour episodic
TV, then the genre truly is a carcass."

Mr. Bailey ran into his own problems when he tried to direct a modern film noir.
"China Moon" -- which opens next month and stars Ed Harris as a detective and
Madeleine Stowe as a femme fatale who leads him to his downfall -- presents a
classic film noir setup. But when Mr. Bailey tested the film with preview
audiences, he noticed that people were not responding to crane shots and other
stylistic homages he had thrown in. "They either found those allusions not to
carry any kind of coded message or it was totally unimportant to them," he says.

"So, as I continued to cut the film, a lot of these stylistic touches were pared
away and I was left with the essence of noir, which was behavior, psychology and
the dramatic interaction of characters."

Still, there is something primal about noir material that entices film makers.
The stories dramatize conflict distilled to its essence: sex, money and power.
The latest director to take on the genre is Mr. Soderbergh (who made "Sex, Lies
and Videotape" in 1989 and "King of the Hill" last year). Mr. Soderbergh is
about to remake the 1948 noir film "Criss Cross," which starred Burt Lancaster,
Yvonne DeCarlo and Dan Duryea as the ill-fated triangle. The director says,
however, that he has no desire to emulate the visual trappings of earlier film
noirs or to get into a contest to prove "my shadow's longer than yours."

Instead, he is fascinated by the notion of ordinary people who convince
themselves that they can cross the line to get something they want without
paying for it. The film, which will be titled "The Underneath," is about a man
whose obsession with his ex-wife tempts him to suspend his moral code.

"He thinks, 'I can get away with it. I'll only do this one thing, and I'll get
what I want and I'll be happy and go back to being that ordinary person,' " says
Mr. Soderbergh. "It's the ideas behind noir that are interesting to me, not
pastiche or homage."

To succeed at reinventing the genre, Mr. Soderbergh and others will have to tap
the heart of darkness as each generation experiences it, without making it look
like the 40's. There are still more noir stories to be told. Certainly there are
protagonists who feel isolated and don't understand the actions of the people
around them. As in other periods of national uncertainty, the 90's may well
provide material for the renewal of the genre.



YOU KNOW IT'S NOIR IF . . .

* Someone is drinking black coffee in a roadhouse.

* A neon sign blinks on and off, perhaps with one letter missing.

* Everyone is wearing hats.

* A ceiling fan slowly revolves, even in the dead of winter.

* A hero spills his guts in voice-over narration.

* People smoke unfiltered cigarettes; ashtrays overflow.

* There's a hard-bitten dame named Velma.

* A guy drinks whisky (straight) in a barroom during the day.

* A woman smokes, drinks and sings -- all at the same time.

* Streets are wet and glistening, even when there's no trace of rain.

* A muted trumpet moans plaintively in the night.

* Everyone wears trenchcoats, and men have pocket handkerchiefs.

* A body lies face down in a pool of blood.

* Tabloid headlines scream about a crime wave.

* Shadows stretch the length of an alley.

* Venetian blinds etch striped shadows across people, and on walls.

* Faces are seen in shadowy close-ups.

* Scenes dissolve in foggy fade-outs.

* Street lamps cast pockets of light.

* A character emotes in front of a mirror.

* Light shines through a winding wooden

 staircase.

* Oblique camera angles make the world appear to be tilting.

* The movie seems to be in black and white -- even if it's in color.--

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Madeleine Stowe in "China Moon," opening next month -- The
essence of noir remains. (Orion Pictures)(pg. 15); Shadows -- A spooky George
Raft on the telephone in "Red Light" (1949). Alley Cat -- Googie Withers in
"Night and the City," a 1950 film remade in 1992 with Robert DeNiro. Mug --
Edward G. Robinson in "The Woman in the Window." Hats -- George Raft, center,
and William Bendix, right above, in "Race Street." Dames -- Peggy Castle, right,
in "The Long Wait" (1954) with de rigueur cigarette and gun. Tabloid Headlines
-- Block type screams about a manhunt in "I Walk Alone," 1947. Neon -- Dick
Wesell in "Dick Tracy Versus Cueball" (1946). Murder -- Right, in "Foreign
Intrigue." (Photographs from MOVIE STILL ARCHIVES)(pg. 1)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 602 words



The Economy

Many employers have turned to open-ended H.M.O.'s, having found in them a way to
tame rising health care costs while giving employees freedom to choose their own
doctors and hospitals. These point-of-service plans have gone from a little-used
option to become the nation's fastest-growing type of health plan. [Page A1.]

Insurers are expected to announce losses of $2.5 billion from the Los Angeles
earthquake, making it the third-most-expensive disaster ever for insurers. The
total damage is now estimated at $20 billion or slightly less. [D1.]

Antiregulation forces in Congress won their first big skirmish of the year,
derailing a bill to elevate the Environmental Protection Agency to a Cabinet
department. [A1.]

Americans do not believe that prices will stay fairly stable and interest rates
will stay low, despite years of slowing inflation. Their lack of faith belies
the Fed's decision to raise interest rates on Friday. News Analysis. [D4.]

The process of making one french fry look like another has come at a high cost,
a report has found. [A10.]

International

Japanese auto makers are taking steps to regain the U.S. market share they lost
over the last two years, or at least to stop it from slipping further. But some
analysts are pessimistic about their prospects. [D1.]

Vietnam is witnessing the opening volleys of the Cola War, with Coke and Pepsi
already battling in Ho Chi Minh City. [D1.]

Slovakia's dour mood stands in contrast, a year after independence, with trends
in the Czech Republic. [A5.]

Companies

Shea & Gould was widely considered the quintessential New York law firm, with a
spit-in-your-eye brashness that defied the traditions of white-shoe firms. It
was run as a benevolent dictatorship until the mid-1980's, when its founders
turned the reins over to an executive committee that never stopped quarreling.
The partners recently voted to disband the firm. [A1.]

The Media Business

The San Jose Mercury News offers a variety of electronic services, putting it
ahead of most newspapers at turning predictions about the electronic future into
a real offering. [D1.] The electronic extension of The Mercury News got its
first big test during the Los Angeles earthquake. [D6.]

A new editor in chief wants to re-establish Esquire as a writer's magazine,
taking it back to its roots. [D6.]

NBC is going ahead with a two-hour special featuring Michael Jackson, but
several advertising agency executives said they would not recommend that any
client buy time on the show, even though its ratings are expected to be strong.
Bill Carter: Television. [D6.]

Ryan & Partners has hired Neil Drossman, a copywriter known for humorous
campaigns for products as disparate as cat food and carpets. The small New York
shop will become Ryan Drossman & Partners. Stuart Elliott: Advertising. [D7.]

Today's Columns

The fate of the long stock market rally is in the hands of individual investors,
who poured $128 billion into equity mutual funds in 1993 alone, experts on Wall
Street say. Since 1990, individuals have used every dip in the Dow as a chance
to go bargain hunting, and their buying has pushed prices back up. Investors
will be watching carefully to see if that is the response today after a
96.24-point plunge in the Dow on Friday. Market Place. [D1.]

The first big international policy announcement under the new Patent Office
Commissioner signaled the virtual abandonment of the World Intellectual Property
Organization treaty that was 10 years in the making. Teresa Riordan: Patents.
[D2.]

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Lieut. Gen. Eugene Tighe Jr., 72; Led Study on American P.O.W.'s

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 440 words


Lieut. Gen. Eugene F. Tighe Jr., who headed the Defense Intelligence Agency from
1978 to 1981 and investigated the possibility that of American prisoners of war
remained in Indochina, died on Jan. 29 at his home in San Diego. He was 72.

The cause was prostate cancer, said his son Steven.

General Tighe, who retired from the Air Force in 1981, spoke out before
Congressional panels and in other settings about American prisoners of war and
other subjects related to military intelligence.

He headed a Pentagon panel that concluded in 1986, after a five-month review of
intelligence files, that American prisoners of war were still alive in Vietnam
and other parts of Southeast Asia. That was the first time in years that a
Defense Department investigation had found that Vietnam might indeed still hold
American prisoners of war. The report prompted dissent from many in the
military, especially among those who felt that General Tighe was a zealot about
the issue.

Career in Intelligence

He said at the time that his panel could not say how many of the missing
Americans were alive. The panel also concluded that there had been no effort by
the military to conceal evidence that Americans were still being held.

The General was named director of the intelligence agency by President Jimmy
Carter after serving as assistant Air Force chief of staff for intelligence. He
retired from the Air Force after 39 years of active and reserve Air Force and
Army duty, which included service as an officer with an antiaircraft battery
during World War II in the southwest Pacific, Korea and Vietnam.

Before becoming the director of the agency, he had been its deputy director and
acting director for two years. He had also held the senior intelligence
positions at the headquarters of the United States Air Force, the Strategic Air
Command, the United States Pacific command and the Air Force in the Pacific.

He was born in New Raymer, Colo., and grew up there and in Los Angeles. He was
drafted into the Army in 1942 and became a reserve officer in the Air Force in
1946. He earned a bachelor's degree in 1949 from Loyola University in Los
Angeles, and went on active Air Force duty the next year.

In retirement he was an international-security consultant, served on corporate
boards and was a regent of Loyola Marymount University in Los Angeles.

In addition to his son Steven C., of Bronxville, N.Y., his survivors include his
wife of more than 40 years, the former Gwen Turk; two other sons, Maj. Eugene F.
Tighe, of Washington and Dr. Thomas Tighe, of Fresno, Calif.; six sisters; a
brother, and three grandchildren.

NAME: Eugene F. Tighe Jr.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lieut. Gen. Eugene F. Tighe Jr. (Associated Press, 1986)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

New Vietnam Combat: Coke vs. Pepsi

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1074 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Feb. 6


In what seems the realization of the worst nightmare of a generation of
dedicated Vietnamese Communists, the Vietnam War has now given way to the
opening volleys of the Cola War.

In the first days after a 19-year-old American trade embargo against Vietnam was
lifted, most large American consumer products companies are still nowhere to be
seen here. Their people are not yet in place; their advertising campaigns are
still weeks away.

But not Coke and Pepsi. The two soft-drink giants, those potent symbols of
American capitalism, are already battling in the streets of the country's
largest city -- the southern Vietnamese city once called Saigon -- at the start
of a campaign for the hearts and minds of Vietnam's 71 million people.

"The enthusiasm among the Vietnamese is unbelievable," Barry J. Shea, Southeast
Asian president of Pepsi-Cola International, said. "And we think Pepsi has the
opportunity to totally dominate."

A Booming Market

After leading a tour of the modern assembly line on the outskirts of Ho Chi Minh
City where Pepsi began production only hours after President Clinton announced
the end of the embargo, Mr. Shea was asked about the challenge from Coke in
Vietnam. "To describe it as war may be a little strong," he said. "But we're
certainly not friendly."

Both companies predict that within a decade, Vietnamese soft-drink sales could
amount to hundreds of millions of dollars a year, making it potentially one of
Asia's largest markets.

About 40 million cases of soft drinks -- there are 24 bottles in a case -- are
currently sold each year in Vietnam. Soft-drink analysts think the number could
rise to more than 200 million cases in several years, given Vietnam's booming
economy and its embrace of the free market.

Both Coke and Pepsi expect to sell a 10-ounce bottle for the equivalent of 15
cents, far less than in the United States but a substantial amount in Vietnam,
which is still one of the world's poorest countries. Its per-capita income is
less than $500 a year.

Pepsi comes to Vietnam with a disadvantage. Many Vietnamese, especially in the
distant countryside, have never heard of it. Pepsi had just opened its first
bottling plant in South Vietnam when the country was overrun by the north in
1975.

By that time, Coca-Cola had been in Vietnam for more than a decade and was
selling nearly 20 million cases, or 480 million bottles, a year. The collapse of
South Vietnam forced it to abandon its five bottling plants.

But Coke stayed behind in Vietnam even after the last American soldiers had
pulled out. For years, Coke has been finding its way into Vietnam, usually
smuggled by the shipload from Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand. Today Coke
remains the soft drink of choice for millions of Vietnamese, north and south,
including senior Communist Party officials who can be seen guzzling Coke at
official receptions.

'A Legacy Here'

"Coca-Cola has a legacy here," Mark Ohlson, the region manager of Coca-Cola
Indochina, said. "When they think of cola, they think of us. And I don't see any
reason for that to change."

Coke's new advertising slogan emphasizes the fact that it is not new to Vietnam:
"Vui Mung Gap Lai Cac Ban," or Good to See You Again.

Sipping Vietnamese tea in the lobby of a plush Saigon hotel, Mr. Ohlson said he
had not been flustered by the early publicity blitz staged by Pepsi, which is
advertising itself with billboards that proclaim it "Su Lua Chon Cua The He
Moi," -- the Choice of a New Generation.

Pepsi opened the cola war just before noon on Friday here, seven hours after the
White House announcement, when bottles of Pepsi began rolling off the assembly
line of the International Beverages Company, which is Pepsi's partner in
Vietnam. The company is a joint venture between the city government and a
Singapore company.

The Pepsi concentrate had been sitting here for weeks, awaiting action from
Washington. The first day's production, 40,000 bottles, was trucked to the
center of the city and passed out as free samples, along with some cans. The
result in some parts of the city was a near-riot. "They were climbing over each
other," Mr. Shea said.

On Friday evening, Pepsi broadcast its first television commercials. This week,
it is scheduled to begin a larger television advertising campaign featuring Miss
Vietnam, Ha Kieu Anh, who is 18."I would say that she's Vietnam's current
sweetheart -- talented, ambitious, optimistic, with a lot of dreams for a better
Vietnam," John Englehart, general manager of Ogilvy & Mather Thailand, the
advertising firm behind the campaign, said. "We were thrilled to have her."

Slower to Bottle

Although it has already shipped in six tons of advertising signs and other
publicity materials, Coke's publicity campaign has been muted by comparison.
Coke production is not expected to start in Vietnam for two or three weeks. The
concentrate and its trademark glass bottles are still not here yet. For now,
Coke will flood the market with bottles imported from other parts of Asia.

Coke's partner is the Vietnamese Government, and company officials concede that
the Government-owned bottling plant that will produce Coke requires some
refitting and expansion. The Pepsi plant, by comparison, is the most modern
soft-drink factory in Vietnam.

Coke's television commercials are ready, but it has so far been unable to buy
advertising time, which is sold out for the next several days because of local
ads linked to Tet, the lunar new year, which begins Thursday. Pepsi is getting
its commercials broadcast because it bought the advertising time that its
partner had prebooked for other, non-American soft drinks.

Mr. Ohlson said a delay of a few days for the television campaign posed no
problem, given Coke's name recognition in Vietnam.

"Two days or five days or two weeks, it's not going to make a difference," he
said of the television campaign. "The thing is, when you are the No. 1 soft
drink, it's very important that you maintain a good image. There's no reason to
be frenetic."

Indeed, Pepsi's feverish return to streets of Ho Chi Minh City this weekend did
leave a bad taste in a few mouths. The first day's production of the drink
tasted funny. The plant had used a type of carbon dioxide that gave the fizz an
unpleasant sulfuric taste, typical of Vietnamese soft drinks. "As soon as we
tasted it, we changed the CO2 supplier," Mr. Shea said. "Now, it's perfect."

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Coke and Pepsi, the soft-drink giants that are symbols of
American capitalism, are already battling in Ho Chi Minh City, just days after
the end of the American trade embargo. A painter worked on a sign for Coca-Cola.
(Rahidka Chalasani for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The War Is Over

BYLINE: By Elmo Zumwalt;  Elmo Zumwalt, Navy Chief of Staff from 1970 to 1974,
is chairman of the Agent Orange Coordinating Council, a veterans' organization.

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 482 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON


It will surprise many people with whom I have worked on behalf of missing
servicemen from the Vietnam War that I applaud President Clinton's decision to
lift trade sanctions against Vietnam. The veterans' groups that have criticized
the President should be aware that commencing trade with Vietnam can help the
P.O.W./M.I.A. cause. Yesterday's announcement that Hanoi will release the
remains of additional American soldiers is a promising first step.

In July 1993, Mr. Clinton indicated four areas in which Vietnamese assistance in
the search for missing Americans was needed. An intensive diplomatic effort,
with Vietnamese cooperation, has achieved significant progress in all four:

* Remains. Last year, the remains of 67 servicemen came home. This was the third
highest total in any year since the war's end.

* Discrepancies. The military has calculated that 196 servicemen were known to
be alive after the incidents leading to their disappearance. In 1993, 82 of
those unknown cases were confirmed to have died. Hundreds of reported sightings
of live American prisoners have been investigated on the ground in Vietnam since
1991, but none have produced evidence that Americans are captive today.

* Vietnamese documents. For the first time, we have received records from
Vietnamese anti-aircraft units that were posted along the Ho Chi Minh trail,
from a key wartime military-political unit and from Hanoi's postwar
investigations to locate Americans' remains. At least 24,000 documents and
artifacts, more than had been received in the entire postwar period, were
released.

* Cooperation with Laos. In August, the Vietnamese and the Laotians agreed to
U.S. requests for trilateral investigations along their border and the Ho Chi
Minh trail. The first operation, in December, located some remains and several
crash sites to be excavated in coming months.

Although Vietnamese officials have been very helpful, there are thousands of
acres still to be examined and many potential witnesses still to be identified.
Lifting the embargo will make it possible for Americans to scour the country and
talk to civilians in villages and rural areas.

The President should make sure that the relatives of those missing in action
have access to all the locations they need to explore. Then they will see for
themselves how helpful the Vietnamese people are being. In addition, having an
official U.S. diplomatic presence in Vietnam will be of great help to the
effort.

I lost a son as a result of his exposure to Agent Orange in Vietnam. As a parent
and a wartime commander, I know the anguish these families feel. They need to
know what happened to their loved ones, or at least that all that can be done
has been done. This can happen only if we put aside bitterness and revenge, lift
the trade sanctions, recognize the Government and begin the peaceful penetration
of Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 8, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Aide Sees More Help by Hanoi on M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 681 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Feb. 7


The Defense Department official in Vietnam leading the investigation of the fate
of Americans missing from the Vietnam War predicted today that President
Clinton's decision to lift the 19-year-old trade embargo on Vietnam would result
in greater cooperation from Hanoi.

The investigator, Lieut. Col. John C. Cray, made the comments after attending a
somber ceremony at Noi Bai International Airport here to watch Vietnamese
officials turn over what are believed to be the remains of at least 12 Americans
who died in the war.

"We're at a peak in terms of cooperation from Vietnam," Colonel Cray said in an
interview. "They have made a decision -- and they had made it in the past year,
year and a half -- to cooperate with us. We have every indication that the
cooperation will continue."

"Some people have said it will diminish the cooperation," he said of the lifting
of the embargo. "But I don't think so. I think it's going to enhance it."

He said the Vietnamese must continue to cooperate because "the world is watching
them -- the families are watching, veterans groups are watching, we are
watching."

The Administration has come under criticism from some veterans' groups and the
families of missing Americans over Mr. Clinton's decision last week to lift the
trade embargo. The embargo was imposed after the North Vietnamese Army toppled
the Government of South Vietnam in 1975.

Veterans groups and some families have asserted that by lifting the embargo, the
President has lost his leverage to force Vietnam to cooperate in the search for
the 2,238 Americans still listed as missing in action in Indochina.

"I think the President still has leverage," said Colonel Cray, who is based in
Hanoi as commander of the Pentagon's Joint Task Force for Full Accounting. "What
I would tell the family members is that the people who are working this issue
are extremely committed, that they are doing the best they can, and that their
qualifications are tremendous. We're servicemen searching for servicemen."

Defense Department officials said that the airport ceremony today was planned
weeks before Mr. Clinton's announcement on the embargo, and that the timing was
a coincidence.

Still, the dawning of a new relationship between the two former enemies gives
special significance to today's ceremony, in which Vietnamese officials
presented the United States with 13 small wooden boxes that, Pentagon
investigators believe, contain the bones, bone fragments and teeth of at least
12 Americans who died in the war.

Sixty-seven sets of remains were given to the United States last year.

In a ritual repeated many times in recent years, each of the boxes was opened
this morning on the warm, windswept tarmac for a final inspection by Vietnamese
and American officials before they were nailed shut.

A team of white-gloved American servicemen representing all four branches of the
military gently lifted each of the boxes into its own sealed aluminum container.
After American flags were placed on the containers, they were taken aboard an
American C-141 transport plane for a flight to Hawaii, where military forensic
pathologists will try to identify the remains, a process that can take years.

The Defense Department opened an office in Hanoi in 1991 to oversee its search
for Americans missing from the war, and early on American investigators
complained about the level of cooperation that they received from the
Vietnamese.

But Colonel Cray and other American investigators said today that there had been
a notable improvement in Hanoi's attitude, and that the new spirit of
cooperation had eliminated many of the logistical headaches and delays faced in
the early stages of the search.

In the last year, Colonel Cray said, the Vietnamese agreed to make available
several Vietnamese Army generals for interviews about their knowledge of the
fate of American prisoners of war. In some cases, he said, the interviews had
provided the Defense Department with valuable information about the location of
prisoner camps where Americans may have died.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 8, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS;
Shelling Gives Clinton Chance to Change

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1190 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 7


For many months now, President Clinton has temporized on the war in Bosnia,
finding one reason or another to avoid American involvement. Prudence, his
backers call it. Dithering, say his critics.

Now, in the wake of the sickening slaughter in Sarajevo's central marketplace on
Saturday, there are signs that the politics of the matter may be changing. The
frightful television images of the carnage may have broken, or at least dented,
the shell of American public indifference. At the least, they have given the
President as good an opportunity to act firmly in Bosnia as he is likely to get.

But tonight, as he and his advisers wrestled with the question again, as hard
pressed as Laocoon and his sons struggling with the serpents, it was unclear
whether Mr. Clinton would finally decide to do so.

In November, Secretary of State Warren Christopher told a Senate committee that
"television images cannot be the North Star of America's foreign policy," and on
Bosnia, they were not. Two months ago, only 26 percent of the respondents in a
CBS News poll said they thought the United States had a responsibility to act,
as opposed to 65 percent who said that it did not.

There was little outcry two weeks ago when the President scarcely mentioned the
strife in Bosnia and Herzegovina in his State of the Union speech.

Shift in Public Opinion

But in the last 48 hours, the anecdotal evidence -- chat on radio talk shows,
calls to Congressional offices -- suggests a shift. Some people, at least, are
starting to worry as much about the nation seeming callous and selfish as about
the potential for a new geopolitical quagmire.

Or so it looks from Washington. Bob Dole, the Kansas Republican who leads his
party in the Senate, is no mindless hawk; grievously wounded in World War II, he
hesitates before advocating military intervention. He can also read the
sentiment on Capitol Hill as well as anybody who serves there.

So when he called on the President on Sunday to order air strikes and said such
a decision would have "strong bipartisan support in Congress," it was taken here
as a signal that doing nothing might not be the safest course any longer.

The questions this week are these: Does Mr. Clinton wish to seize the moment?
Does he detect a shift in the wind, and is it strong enough? Does he think the
cause is worth spending some of his precious political capital?

Does this man who won the Presidency by promising to concentrate on problems at
home dare roll the dice abroad just when the most important initiative of his
Presidency, health-care reform, needs all the time and effort he can lavish on
it?

Clearly, there are risks. American pilots might be shot down and captured and
tortured, for example, which might lead to calls for a wider American role.
Richard Johnson, the former head of the State Department's Yugoslav desk,
recently quoted one of his bosses, Under Secretary of State Peter Tarnoff, as
saying that intervention "would destroy the American Presidency."

The Vietnam War is a vivid and recent example of what inept and unwise military
adventures can do to Presidents, if not the Presidency. But it is also true that
Presidents can turn public opinion, if their timing is right, their purposes are
clear and their concentration is intense.

President Bush did it in the months before the Persian Gulf war, and Mr. Clinton
did it, belatedly, on the North American Free Trade Agreement.

Senator Richard Lugar of Indiana and Morton I. Abramowitz, president of the
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, both think that the moment for
boldness has come on the strife in the Balkans.

"The United States," said Mr. Abramowitz, a retired Foreign Service officer,
"has to decide whether it is going to continue to be a pseudo-moralizer or lead
the West in resolving one of the most profound political and moral crises of our
time."

Mr. Lugar, the leading Republican spokesman on foreign affairs in Congress,
said: "They have been hoping that Bosnia would go away, disappear from the front
pages and the TV news. But surely the President knows now that it won't. He must
take a leadership role he doesn't want, that he's uncomfortable with, that's
risky, because he's the only person in the world who can do it."

Reluctance to Act

For its part, the Administration has spent the last two days sounding anything
but bold. The problem, Mr. Clinton said on Sunday, is the allies, who have not
wanted air strikes because such action might prompt retaliation against their
troops on the ground. The problem, a White House official said, can be solved
only through renewed peace negotiations. The problem, a State Department
official said, is that no one can prove that the Serbians fired the mortar round
that hit the marketplace.

It has been precisely that kind of bureaucratese that has masked a reluctance to
act in the past and has led to endless meetings, studies, recommendations and
consultations. What was advertised by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in
Brussels last month as a real, tough-minded threat to use force looked more
tentative and conditional on close inspection. On the ground, in fact, nothing
happened.

Two years of ringing words and paltry actions from the West have bred skepticism
and cynicism. There was a lot of that in Washington today, particularly about
the insistence that ironclad proof of Serbian involvement was needed before
acting, when it is clear that hundreds of other mortar rounds that have killed
and maimed in Sarajevo, if not this one, were fired by Serbian gunners.

Some Action May Be Imminent

But it may be that some limited action is imminent. The British have been the
leading European foes of air strikes, along with the Russians, but a senior
British official said his Government, the other Europeans and the United States
"are trying to work something out, for real, by Wednesday." To him, he said, it
is clear that "the price of unity is going to be great, but that of disunity
greater."

Mr. Christopher was said by one of his associates to be moving, slowly but
surely, toward the pro-bombing posture of Anthony Lake, Mr. Clinton's national
security adviser, and Madeline K. Albright, the United States delegate to the
United Nations.

Representative Lee A. Hamilton, the Indiana Democrat who is chairman of the
House Foreign Affairs Committee, said he detected "much greater urgency" than
before at the White House. Within days, he suggested, there is a probability of
air strikes limited to the hills around Sarajevo and perhaps also the perimeters
of two other besieged towns, Srebrenica and Tuzla.

"This would be entirely within the context of giving them some breathing room
and trying to get the negotiations going again," he said. "No rolling back of
Serbian gains. No attempt to reverse the outcome of the war. But it would mark
an end to the endless diddle-daddle we have seen."

A big problem with that, of course, is that successful peace negotiations would
require the United States to send troops to help enforce it, and that would be a
riskier undertaking for Mr. Clinton than air strikes.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 8, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Legendary Giant Sloth Sought by Scientists In Amazon Rain Forest

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words


AN American biologist and a team of scientists, technicians and Indian guides
are preparing to penetrate the trackless rain forest of western Brazil in
pursuit of a South American counterpart of the fabled Himalayan yeti.

The object of this quest, headed by Dr. David C. Oren, an American ornithologist
employed by the Brazilian Government, is an animal Dr. Oren believes to be a
human-size ground sloth, belonging to a family thought by paleontologists to be
long extinct.

Accounts by Indians of the Amazon region describe the elusive animal as
terrifying and dangerous, physically powerful and equipped with some kind of
chemical defense capable of paralyzing opponents. Dr. Oren, a staff scientist at
the Goeldi Natural History Museum in Belem, Brazil, said by telephone that he
had conducted more than 100 interviews in the last nine years with Indians and
rubber tappers who told of having had contacts with the creature.

Dr. Oren acknowledges that he has had trouble persuading other scientists of the
possibility that the creature is anything more than a local myth.

Among the American biologists he has sought to interest in the search is Dr.
Malcolm C. McKenna, a paleontologist at the American Museum of Natural History
in New York City. Dr. McKenna is dubious.

"While there is always a chance of discovering some previously unknown large
animal somewhere in the world, just as it is possible to discover some new
island in mid-ocean," Dr. McKenna said, "the likelihood is too small to draw me
away from my work here. You can't just go chasing each rumor of a sasquatch or
yeti.

"On the other hand, discoveries of large new animals have sometimes surprised
scientists: a large ungulate in post-war Vietnam; the okapi, discovered in
Africa in 1900, a new peccary in the South American Chaco region believed to be
extinct since the Pleistocene epoch. You never know."

But Dr. McKenna said it would take more than word-of-mouth accounts to convince
scientists of the reality of a ground sloth living in the Amazon Basin. "I think
scientists will insist on seeing at least a chunk of it," he said. "Even a
photograph won't do."

Dr. Oren agrees that to convince skeptics he would have to bring the creature
back, dead or alive.

"We'll be bringing tranquilizing dart guns," he said, "although it may be
difficult to use them effectively." Most Indian accounts of the creature
describe it as having an extremely tough skin that cannot be easily penetrated.

"That description tallies with fossil remains of a family of extinct ground
sloths known as the mylodontids," he said. "These animals had dermal ossicles --
bony armor plating embedded in the skin."

Reports have long circulated about a "mapinguari," a legendary and terrifying
manlike creature of the vast Amazon rain forest, but when scientists took an
interest at all, Dr. Oren said, they tended to guess that the animal, if it
existed, might be some kind of primate.

"But when I began hearing accounts of a creature with shaggy red hair,
backward-turned feet and a monkeylike face, I realized that witnesses might have
encountered a ground sloth, closely related to extinct giant sloths known only
from their fossils."

Three families of sloths are known, and only two genuses, both of them tree
dwellers, are known to have survived to the present day, Dr. Oren said. The
common three-toed sloth is a lethargic creature that seems to live in slow
motion, and is considered a family member of the megatheriids, known mostly from
fossils.

The much rarer modern two-toed sloth, a surviving member of the megalonychid
family, is less "slothful," Dr. Oren said, and can move swiftly and forcefully
if threatened. The third family of sloths, the extinct, ground-dwelling
mylodontids, grew to the size of large bears and were apparently very active.

The mapinguari, as Indians call the supposed forest creature, is apparently
smaller than fossil members of the family, standing only about six feet tall
when walking on its hind feet, but weighing some 500 pounds, and with jaws and
feet powerful enough to rip palm trees apart. The creature is said to subsist
largely on palm hearts and other vegetable delicacies of the rain forest.

Agreement on Appearance

The mapinguari is also described as having a thunderous voice that can sound
quite human, and that has deceived human visitors to its habitat into thinking
that another human was nearby.

Purported sightings of the creatures over a wide area generally agree on its
appearance, Dr. Oren said, including descriptions of a ridge of manelike fur
along the animal's neck and back.

"The Indians are very frightened of it, but some of them are anxious to capture
one to prove to outsiders that it exists," Dr. Oren said. "Ten of these Indians
will accompany our expedition."

Provided Dr. Oren and his group obtain necessary government permits in time,
they hope to set out during the first week of March, and expect to remain in the
rain forest for about a month. To reach the interior of the State of Acre near
the point where the frontiers of Brazil meet those of Peru and Bolivia -- one of
the regions where sightings have been reported -- the group will travel to an
Indian village, then up-river by boat, and then by foot, at least two days'
march into the trackless forest. The creature is apparently never sighted along
waterways where there is human habitation, but only in the depths of the forest.

A major motive for the search, Dr. Oren said, is to demonstrate that a large
number of species in the Amazon Basin remain unknown to science but are
nevertheless worthy of protection and conservation.

"My whole reason for being in the Amazon as a scientist," Dr. Oren said, "is to
survey its enormous variety of species. If this ground sloth exists, it may be
the largest land mammal in South America, and yet it is still unknown to
science. If we find it, we will have proof that there are vast biological riches
here that still await discovery."

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (pg. C6)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 8, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Long May We Argue Over History

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 517 words



To the Editor:

In "Opinion vs. Reality in an Age of Pundits" (Critic's Notebook, Jan. 28),
Michiko Kakutani complains that on campuses "the idea of objective knowledge has
also come under assault from radical multiculturalists, who see history as an
ideological battleground for control of a nation's memory." She worries about a
"relativistic universe in which all theories -- however reprehensible or
preposterous -- must be accorded respect, a universe in which truths are
replaced by opinions." Ms. Kakutani suggests that this sorry state of affairs is
a recent development, as opposed to an earlier time when "truth" and "reality"
were not in quotation marks.

What Ms. Kakutani ignores is that history has always been taught ideologically.
In my native England, I was taught history in a traditional school that had
managed to resist every advance in public education of the last two centuries.
The English Civil War was presented to us as the story of the hoodlum Cromwell
and his ignorant rabble, who for a brief period managed to topple Britain's most
prized institution before, thankfully, royalty and normality were restored, and
the troublemakers were put in their places.

Only many years later did I read the work of the radical English historian
Christopher Hill and discover an entirely different side to that event, one that
took seriously the claims of the Roundheads and their supporters. In my
schooling, the history of the empire was taught as a spirited tale of the
civilizing of the world by an increasingly glorious Britannia. No wonder our
history lessons ended in 1914, when the pink areas representing the British
Empire in our atlases were at their most extensive.

Here in the United States, history has also been taught within similar
ideological constraints. The presentation of the Vietnam War in most history
textbooks would likely be hotly contested by many Vietnamese. The story of the
conquest of the West would be different as told by native Americans. Ms.
Kakutani laments the replacement of truths by opinions, and facts do indeed
provide the truth of what happened in the West, or Vietnam or the English Civil
War.

But there are no single "truthful" answers to history's important questions,
such as how do we assess the morality of United States intervention in Vietnam,
or would England have fared better under Parliament or the King, or was
imperialism only exploitation or exploitation plus an important modernizing
influence?

All these events, like all history, were lived ideologically, so they are of
course still open to ideological questions. Any interesting discussion of them
is ideological. It is fashionable these days to complain of the "encroachment of
ideology" into academia, but it has always been there.

The complaining only started when one dominant ideological interpretation, which
the complainers like to present as "truth," came under challenge from others
that can make an equal claim. History lessons may be noisy as a result, but
history itself was never quiet.

RICHARD SEAGER
Palisades, N.Y., Jan. 31, 1994

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS;
Allied Threat: Is It Credible?

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 885 words

DATELINE: BONN, Feb. 8


The effectiveness of a NATO threat to bomb the Bosnian Serb forces around
Sarajevo will depend almost entirely on how determined the United States is to
lead the allies in carrying out the threat if the Serbs disregard it.

As NATO representatives prepared to meet in Brussels on Wednesday to discuss
whether, how and when to carry out the bombing, public outrage in France,
Britain and the United States over the deaths of 68 people in Sarajevo in a
mortar attack last weekend made military intervention seem more likely than at
any time since NATO first threatened bombing last August.

But NATO's decisions are made unanimously, and there are still many reasons why
it could end up making what President Clinton called "another empty threat."

The allies are less divided than they were in May, when Secretary of State
Warren Christopher first came to them with a proposal to use air power to try to
bring about a negotiated settlement of the Bosnian war. France, which rejected
the idea last year, has apparently become a convert to military action, despite
the risk of Serbian retaliation against its 6,000 troops serving with the United
Nations in Bosnia and Croatia.

On Monday, the 12-nation European Union threatened yet again to use "all the
means necessary, including the use of air power" unless the siege of Sarajevo
ended.

Britain Is Cautious

Britain, somewhat more reluctantly, seems to be moving closer to the French
view, though British officials caution that the bombs should not start falling
until NATO military officials have carefully thought out plans to protect the
United Nations forces.

But Greece, which holds the rotating presidency of the European Union, and
Canada, which has 2,000 troops with the United Nations peacekeeping forces in
Bosnia and Croatia, remain reluctant to go ahead with air strikes, though they
have repeatedly agreed to threaten them. The Greeks believe that the Serbs have
been unfairly blamed for the violence, and the Canadians fear for the safety of
their troops.

Germany, which has no troops in Bosnia, says air strikes should not be ruled
out, but will be cautious about urging action on its allies. It appears that the
catalyst, if there is to be one, will be the United States.

For nearly two years, the European allies have tried to bring about a negotiated
settlement to the war, and they have also rejected the idea that one could be
imposed by outside military force. The reluctance to cross the Rubicon remains
strong, unless the bombing has carefully spelled-out, limited objectives like
removing the artillery from the hills around Sarajevo.

"You can't ask the Europeans whether they think you should bomb, because the
Europeans are not united," said an official in Europe who sympathizes with the
President's plight. "You have to tell them what you want them to do and tell
them you are prepared to do it without their backing if necessary."

U.S. Rebuffed Last Spring

The Europeans rebuffed the Clinton Administration last spring when Mr.
Christopher proposed lifting the arms embargo on all of former Yugoslavia to
give the Bosnian Muslims a chance to arm themselves, and bombing Serbian
artillery positions and supply lines unless the Serbs agreed to peace.

Frustration over past failures has created a climate of extreme caution and even
distrust among the allies.  Some officials here suspect that one reason the
French had changed their minds was that they were looking for a way to make the
United States seem responsible if they decided to pull their peacekeeping forces
out of Bosnia.

French officials dismiss this concern as baseless, but Foreign Minister Alain
Juppe has said repeatedly that France was wondering whether there was any point
in keeping its troops in Bosnia if none of the combatants wanted peace. Britain,
moreover, plans to reconsider its deployment after this winter.

European and American officials here agree that the only way to impose peace in
Bosnia now would be by sending in a large international force -- and that the
costs and risks of doing that are unacceptably high.

A limited bombing campaign against Serbian military targets could also embolden
Bosnia's Muslim-dominated Government to fight on with even greater determination
and thus prolong the war, some officials fear.

U.S. Refused to Press Muslims

The French tried last month to get the Clinton Administration to put pressure on
the Bosnian Government to accept a European Union peace plan that would
partition the country among its three main ethnic groups, but the United States
refused because it believed that the Muslims should not be forced to accept a
deal legitimizing Serbian and Croatian conquests.

A French foreign policy analyst, Dominique Moisi, said, "France believes the
fighting is intensifying because the Muslims think they have more to gain by
continuing to fight than by making peace."

Mr. Moisi said France was also worried about the potential for a militant Muslim
republic in the Balkans. Those fears are shared in Bonn.

If air strikes do begin, they could take the alliance down the slippery slope of
an open-ended military involvement like the Vietnam War.

"Like everything else in Bosnia," a European diplomat said today, "the choice is
between bad, very bad and awful."


LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Two French soldiers from the United Nations force in Sarajevo on
alert Tuesday in a deserted building. (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Shipping From Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 44 words

DATELINE: OAKLAND, Calif., Feb. 8


American President Lines began regular container transportation service today
linking Vietnam with major markets in North America, Asia and Europe. The
shipping company plans to call on Ho Chi Minh City four times a week and at
Haiphong and Da Nang twice a week.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Stop Slouching Toward the Vietnam War's End

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 442 words


To the Editor:

There is something disheartening and humiliating about the way the United States
is sidling into normal relations with Vietnam (front page, Feb. 4). This is not
the way a strong and confident republic behaves.

Our Government is tiptoeing toward ending the embargo on dealings with the
people who drove us out of their land 19 years ago. We seem to be doing it, at
last, mainly for commercial reasons (Japanese businessmen may be doing too well
there), not because it's the right thing to do, morally and practically.

The excuse for so many years of this ungraceful posture is that our former
"enemy" was not doing enough to help us find the remains of Americans still
listed as missing in action.

A few facts for those who have chosen to forget that ugly war:

* The Pentagon now lists about 2,000 as unaccounted for (70 to 90 cases still
need more investigation, the Pentagon says -- the rest are considered dead).

* From the Korean War in the early 1950's the missing in action number is about
8,000.

* The official number for missing in action in World War II is around 78,000 --
their commemoration is at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Arlington National
Cemetery.

So the accounting of the slaughter in Vietnam is not all that incomplete. And we
might remember, with a wince, that the number of missing in action from the
Vietnamese side is 100 times greater than from ours -- about 200,000.

The American search for the missing in action has been a grisly bureaucratic
enterprise. In addition to the adventurous racketeers who have preyed on
grieving families with faked photos and tales of prisoners still in jungle
stockades, there have been endless high-level trips to Vietnam by officials and
politicians seeking to get more help from the Vietnamese in the search for
remains.

It is hard, especially in this nationalistic age, for a country to admit that it
was wrong when it went to war. And we are not at all doing that as we edge
toward normalizing relations with Vietnam. It is particularly difficult for
President Clinton, with his (not discreditable) record of avoiding service in a
war he opposed on principle, to make a semi-peace with the former foe.

So more credit to him for taking this half-step.

However, would it not have been better, more virtuous, if we had been able to do
this without all the contortions of policy and rhetorical cant, compounded by
commercial motives? Could we not have simply turned over this page of history,
established normal diplomatic relations, and declared that the dreadful,
mistaken Vietnam War was finally over?

BLAIR CLARK
 New York, Feb. 4, 1994

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
The Cost Of Free Speech

BYLINE: ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 737 words


Can't beat the mail in this line of work: 20 pounds of documents in a class
action suit, a list of questions from kids about violent lyrics in rap music,
holy cards, invective, insults (sometimes all three from the same person), the
occasional rebuttal in free verse, the heartfelt stories.

But even amidst the plaintive, the curious and the bizarre, the newsletter of
the Living Truth Ministries in Austin, Tex., stands out.

The newsletter, called Flashpoint, is a kind of freewheeling smorgasbord of
conspiracy theories, as mesmerizing as a hypnotist's watch.  "What is the
shocking truth about the unmarked black helicopters now being observed in Texas,
Idaho, California and other locations throughout America?" asks a recent issue.
There's the alleged link between multinational corporations, the Yale secret
society Skull and Bones and the "Communist butchers in Vietnam." There's the
real story behind Attorney General Janet Reno: "An oddball radical, she owns 35
pet peacocks, all named Horace!"

The current Flashpoint flashpoint is, naturally, Hillary Rodham Clinton.  Along
with the usual strong woman/ evil witch material, Texe Marrs, a former Air Force
officer and former faculty member at the University of Texas who runs the
ministry, identifies Mrs. Clinton as a "doctrinaire Marxist" who has recruited
"other America-hating subversives for key administration posts" and who communes
with the spirit of Eleanor Roosevelt.

Once you get past the fact that Mr. Marrs can't tell the difference between a
liberal and a Marxist -- and between admiration for and communicating with the
dead -- you have to come to one conclusion. This is some great nation, in which
such nonsense comes under the rubric of the free exchange of ideas.

Except that in this case it's not free at all. You pay. In the corner of each of
the 25,000 issues of Flashpoint that go out each month is a little legend
identifying Living Truth Ministries as a "non-profit org." According to Postal
Service analysts, postage for nonprofit organizations was subsidized at a cost
to the taxpayer of more than $500 million last year. "Obviously," says a
spokesman about the price of a stamp, "this hastens rate increases."

What a peculiarly American scenario. Through the simple expedient of filling out
postal form 3624, attaching a Federal tax form and a financial statement,
thousands of organizations have their postage underwritten by the Government,
some of them organizations that use their mailings to attack Federal handouts
and Government spending.

There are probably pragmatists who would argue that all that underwriting
balances out, and that much of it goes to groups as universally beloved as the
March of Dimes and the American Cancer Society.

But it drives me wild to know that even a single cent of my money goes to pay
for the mailings of the National Rifle Association and Operation Rescue, and
that money they save on postage helps them support gun-friendly candidates and
clinic blockades. Just as it would drive others nuts to know that they help
underwrite literature sent out by Planned Parenthood and the National Abortion
Rights Action League.

It's hard to figure out the public good involved in having government subsidize
Flashpoint, except to feed the fantasies of those who believe in the
"Kissinger-Rockefeller cabal" and to provide a few laughs for those who do not.
While the prepster membership of Yale's Skull and Bones had led some to
hypothesize that meetings are largely devoted to arguing about whether squash is
manlier than tennis, Flashpoint concludes that Bonesmen are "occultists" in
"America's most diabolical secret society."

What that adds up to isn't completely clear, although it has something to do
with the C.I.A., the K.G.B., the Council on Foreign Relations and the Trilateral
Commission.

As the arguments about political correctness linger on like a very bad cold,
it's worth remembering that postal correctness, at least, is not a problem. Not
when Mr. Marrs is in constant, government-subsidized communication with those
who believe Donna Shalala, Madeleine Albright and the other women of the Clinton
Administration are part of a "longstanding, serpentine network of international
revolutionaries." It's a great big open-minded nation that can sustain and even
encourage this sort of thing. I just wish my stamps were going to cure
malignancy, not create it.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 555 words



The Economy

The Clinton Administration will propose a broad, 10-year plan to force the
Pentagon and other Federal agencies to cede control of a big block of the
nation's airwaves and make them available for new commercial technologies. [Page
D1.]

The Internal Revenue Service made a compromise offer to settle billions of
dollars in disputed tax deductions from the corporate takeover wave of the
1980's. [D1.]

The Clinton Administration will wait until November to deal with some thorny
labor issues. [D2.]

Companies

Growing support among medical exports for treating ulcers with antimicrobial
drugs may cut the $7 billion annual worldwide sales of five widely used drugs.
[A1.]

Ford Motor reported the biggest year-to-year financial turnaround in its
history, with a $2.5 billion profit for 1993. [D1.]

Texaco said it would settle a longstanding lawsuit with Louisiana by including
an unusual promise to invest $152 million in the state's battered energy
industry. [D2.]

General Motors' Electronic Data Systems unit reported a 14 percent gain in its
fourth-quarter earnings. [D3.]

Sheraton Hotels will buy Ciga Hotels, the troubled Italian lodging group. [D3.]

Firming up a line of succession, TRW named Peter S. Hellman assistant president.
[D3.]

Spectrum Information Technologies filed a $300 million lawsuit against its
former chairman, John Sculley. [D3.]

A cable television group opposed plans by the Pacific Telesis to build a video
and data superhighway, saying telephone customers would pay for the project.
[D3.]

Bloomberg Financial Markets will create a television news service, but viewers
will need a satellite dish to see it. [D19.]

The Plaza Hotel may be sold, as banks that share ownership with Donald Trump
consider an offer. [B3.]

A Federal appeals court ruled that New York State could enforce California's
strict auto emissions program. [B2.]

The Teamsters Union is facing internal schisms and financial pressures, which
were highlighted in Monday's one-day strike against United Parcel Service.
[A16.]

Markets

The stock market posted convincing gains as investors bid up stocks across the
board.[D6.]

Interest rates ended a four-day advance and turned lower on good investor demand
at yesterday's 10-year note auction. [D14.]

Oil prices dropped as the market sensed that the end of cold weather across the
country might ease demand. [D17.]

The dollar eased against the yen on fear that American and Japanese leaders
would not reach a trade deal. [D17.]

International

Investment is booming in Colombia now that the Government there has sharply cut
tariffs and adopted market policies. [D1.]

Today's Columns

Some Japanese bank stocks could be lifted by a little-noticed initiative buried
in the country's $140 billion economic stimulus program. Market Place. [D1.]

It's Coke vs. Pepsi and United Airlines vs. Northwest in the post-embargo battle
to win the hearts and wallets of the Vietnamese. But can Vietnam grow fast
enough to justify an aggressive marketing effort? Peter Passell: Economic Scene.
[D2.]

Bloom FCA, which tried mightily to raise its New York profile, will merge with
Groupe FCA, a large French agency that has the same parent, Publicis Group.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising. [D19.]

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Boeing Seeks Vietnam Sales

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 4;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 146 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, Feb. 9


The Boeing Company forecast today that the state-owned Vietnam Airlines could
buy 60 to 80 new jets worth $3 billion to $5 billion in the next 15 years.

A spokeswoman, Valarie Kusuda-Smick, said Boeing officials had been in talks
with Vietnam Airlines for two years and had generated interest in the 737, 757
and 767 models and possibly the 747. Boeing will be able to sell to Vietnam now
that the United States has lifted its trade embargo.

Even before the embargo was lifted, Vietnam Airlines was using two 737's and two
767's under arrangements in which the planes were piloted by leasing company
employees, not painted with the carrier's colors and not allowed to stay
overnight in Vietnam.

Boeing said the airline had a strong foundation, with Vietnam's population of 70
million and a Vietnamese community of about 1.5 million in the United States to
draw on.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Economic Scene;
Vietnam may be too poor to justify a big business incursion.

BYLINE: By Peter Passell

SECTION: Section D;  Page 2;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 846 words


IT'S Coke vs. Pepsi and United Airlines vs. Northwest in the post-embargo battle
to win the hearts and wallets of the Vietnamese. These and dozens of other
American name brands are sure to be welcomed, both because Vietnam is aching to
end its psychological isolation and because American businesses are positioned
to sell what the country wants most.

But there is a real question of whether Vietnam can grow fast enough to justify
an aggressive marketing effort. While David Dollar, an economist at the World
Bank, is "cautiously optimistic" that Vietnam will soon break out of the pack of
the world's poorest countries, the obstacles are formidable.

The most immediate problems are wretched physical infrastructure (trains,
planes, telephones, power plants) along with an absence of free market
institutions (banking, property rights, contract law). But Adam Fforde, an
Australian consultant specializing in the Vietnamese economy, thinks the
Government may lose control over budget and credit policies -- a weakness that
dogs Russia and is casting a shadow over China's development.

And even if Vietnam has the discipline to complete the transition from
socialism, it is far from clear that America will play a significant part in its
immediate future. Irwin Robinson, head of the United States-Vietnam Chamber of
Commerce in New York City, says that "the President's proclamation ending the
embargo is a one-way street:" Unless the Administration also lifts the heavy
tariffs on Vietnamese goods, they will be priced out of the American market.

The end of the embargo allows American companies to sell or invest virtually as
they please in Vietnam. And that puts Americans in a better position than one
might expect in light of the fact that they must play catch-up with established
Japanese, Taiwan, French, German and Thai businesses.

For one thing, Mr. Dollar says, Vietnam's greatest needs are in things that
America produces well and relatively cheaply: industrial machinery,
telecommunications equipment, financial services. For another, Mr. Robinson
says, the Vietnamese are eager to offset the regional influence of China and
Japan with a strong American presence. Last but not least, the Vietnamese retain
great (some would say exaggerated) respect for the technology of their former
adversary.

The fly in the trade soup is that Vietnam does not have "most favored nation"
status -- the automatic benefit of the generous tariff reductions negotiated by
America and its trade partners since World War II. To be eligible, the President
must certify that Vietnam permits open emigration, a delicate matter in view of
the wish of many liberals to retain the option to deny the same trade status to
China on human-rights grounds. But unless Washington bends, Vietnam will surely
be tempted to buy from countries that permit easier access for Vietnamese goods.

In any event, Vietnam may not have much to sell to anyone, anytime soon. On the
plus side, the country is blessed with an educated labor force, enough arable
land and oil to be self-sufficient in food and energy at high levels of
consumption and, miracle of miracles, state enterprises that make a profit.

What's more, it embarked on a successful regimen of economic "shock therapy" in
1989, wiping out price controls while clamping down on both budget deficits and
bank credit. Inflation was contained, apparently without reducing national
income, and exporters weathered the collapse of Soviet trade far better than
their counterparts in more heavily industrialized Eastern Europe. "There is a
lot of dynamism" in the economy, says John Whalley, a development economist at
the University of Western Ontario. "I see a lot of parallels with South Korea in
the 1950's," he added.

But it is easy to lose perspective. Income per person is still in the same
league as the destitute nations of sub-Saharan Africa. And while the Vietnamese
economy has performed magnificently in the last few years, the next few may
prove tougher.

Mr. Fforde's primary concern is inflation driven by slippage in fiscal and
banking discipline. The tax system, he notes, is primitive and ill equipped to
deal with private enterprise. And the Government's revenue problems may soon be
worsened by state-owned monopolies' waning power to charge enough prices to
cover their bloated costs.

The Pacific Basin Research Institute, a Maryland research group, focuses on the
strains on the expenditure side of the budget equation. Personal incomes are
already twice as high in Ho Chi Minh City as in Hanoi, and four times as much as
in the highlands. If this gap between the capitalist-minded south and the deeply
impoverished, largely rural north should widen yet more, the Government may feel
obliged to compensate the losers with inflationary loans or subsidies.

It is hard to find an analyst who is bearish on the long-term prospects for
Vietnam's growth, or pessimistic about America's long-term chances of forging
links of mutual economic interest. The operative question, though, is how long
is long?


LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

'Schindler' Nominated for 12 Oscars

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 2007 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Feb. 9


To the surprise of absolutely no one, "Schindler's List," Steven Spielberg's
Holocaust drama, dominated the 66th annual Academy Award nominations, announced
here early today.

The film received 12 nominations, including best picture, best actor (Liam
Neeson), best supporting actor (Ralph Fiennes) and best director (Mr.
Spielberg). The two runners-up, with eight nominations each, were Jane Campion's
drama "The Piano" and James Ivory's "Remains of the Day."

The other films nominated for best picture were "The Fugitive," "In the Name of
the Father," "The Piano" and "The Remains of the Day." The winners, to be
selected by voters in the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, will be
announced on March 21.

With the exception of "The Fugitive," the action-thriller starring Harrison
Ford, the best-picture nominees were all made abroad and are hardly the type of
films that appeal to mainstream audiences. And although Mr. Spielberg is the
most successful director of all time, "Schindler's List" is a risky,
black-and-white, three-hour-plus film that is probably the least commercial but
most artistically successful work of his career. "The Piano," "The Remains of
the Day" and "In the Name of the Father" are all small-budget movies, and two of
them were directed by foreigners: Ms. Campion, an Australian, directed "The
Piano," and Jim Sheridan, an Irishman, directed "In the Name of the Father."

Besides Mr. Neeson, the nominees for best actor were Daniel Day-Lewis for "In
the Name of the Father," Laurence Fishburne for "What's Love Got to Do With It,"
Tom Hanks for "Philadelphia" and Anthony Hopkins for "The Remains of the Day."

Nominated for best actress were Holly Hunter for "The Piano," Emma Thompson for
"The Remains of the Day," Debra Winger for "Shadowlands," Angela Bassett for
"What's Love Got to Do With It" and Stockard Channing for "Six Degrees of
Separation."

2 Double Nominations

Both Ms. Thompson and Ms. Hunter were also nominated for best supporting
actress, the first time in the history of the Academy Awards that two actors
have received two nominations in the same year. Ms. Thompson's supporting role
was in "In the Name of the Father," and Ms. Hunter's was in "The Firm." The
other nominations in the category went to Rosie Perez for "Fearless," Anna
Paquin for "The Piano" and Winona Ryder for "The Age of Innocence."

Tommy Lee Jones was nominated for best supporting actor for his performance in
"The Fugitive." Leonardo DiCaprio was nominated for "What's Eating Gilbert
Grape," John Malkovich for "In the Line of Fire," Pete Postlethwaite for "In the
Name of the Father," and Mr. Fiennes for "Schindler's List."

Mr. Spielberg has yet to win an Oscar as best director despite such enormous
successes as "E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial," and "Close Encounters of the Third
Kind." But the director, who last year also made "Jurassic Park," the
highest-grossing film of all time, is favored to win this time. His rivals are
Mr. Sheridan for "In the Name of the Father," Ms. Campion for "The Piano," James
Ivory for "The Remains of the Day" and Robert Altman for "Short Cuts."

Mr. Spielberg, who said the nominations for "Schindler's List" left him "out of
breath," called them "overwhelming."

"This is a very special moment for all of us who have dedicated ourselves to
this subject," he said. "We are sharing this together and want to thank the
members of the academy and each of the branches that made this such an
unforgettable day."

Its even dozen nominations ties "Schindler's List" with a number of other films,
most recently "Dances With Wolves," which received 12 in 1991. The record, 14,
was set by "All About Eve" in 1951.

The Surprises

If the nominations for the Spielberg movie weren't a surprise, some of the
others were. And so were some of the omissions.

For instance, "Philadelphia," the first studio-made drama dealing with AIDS, was
shut out of the nominations for best picture and best director. Martin
Scorsese's "Age of Innocence" received only one major nomination (Ms. Ryder for
best supporting actress) and one for the adaptation. And Michael Nyman did not
receive a nomination for the score of "The Piano."

At the same time, "In The Name of The Father," based on the true story of an
Irishman wrongly convicted of a terrorist act, was nominated for seven awards,
including best picture and best actor (Mr. Day-Lewis) and best director (Mr.
Sheridan).

Another surprise was the nominations of Mr. Fishburne and Ms. Bassett for
"What's Love Got to Do With It," a drama about the tormented marriage of the pop
singers Ike and Tina Turner. The film received strong reviews but was not a big
box-office success.

Nerves, Then High Spirits

Qualifying as a mild surprise, in Hollywood at least, was the nomination of Ms.
Channing as best actress for repeating the role she created on Broadway in the
MGMadaptation of "Six Degrees of Separation."

Reached in a San Francisco hotel, Ms. Channing said she woke up early (the
nominations were announced before dawn to get maximum exposure on the early
television shows) but was too nervous to turn on the television set. "I'm a jerk
like everybody else," she said with a laugh. "It's like I'm in high school."

She added: "When the phone didn't ring, I thought, 'I may as well just forget
about it, rehearse my 'keep up my good spirits' speech.' " Finally, her manager
called.

A Time to Capitalize

"Six Degrees," based on the John Guare play, is expected to benefit at the box
office from her nomination, as are numerous other nominees. "Schindler's List,"
for example, went to 750 theaters from 350 last week and is expected to expand
further in the next few weeks amid a major television and newspaper campaign
promoting its Oscar nominations. "In the Name of the Father," is going to 500
theaters from 150 this week.

"Certainly what these nominations do is give both of our pictures a lot more
visibility and validation in the marketplace," said Tom Pollock, chairman of the
MCA Motion Picture Group, which includes Universal. Among the studios,
Universal, which made both "Schindler's List" and "In the Name of the Father,"
led the pack with 23 nominations.

"The Piano," made by Miramax, and "The Remains of the Day," a Columbia film,
will also expand significantly around the country because of their nominations
for best film. "What's Love Got to Do With It" will be rereleased this weekend,
as will "The Fugitive."

Ismail Merchant, the producer of "The Remains of the Day," said that his film
would expand to 250 theaters from 174 this weekend, and the nominations would
prove enormously beneficial overseas and on video and cable.

Not Everyone Is Excited

But the film's screenwriter, Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, who has won two Academy
Awards for previous films with the Merchant-Ivory team and was nominated for a
third today, was characteristically low-key about it. "I wouldn't know about
this, but Ismail told me," she said from her New York apartment. "Very few
people I know would be interested."

Mrs. Jhabvala's rivals in the category of best sceenplay based on previously
published material are Steven Zaillian for "Schindler's List," Terry George and
Jim Sheridan for "In the Name of the Father," William Nicholson for
"Shadowlands," and Jay Cocks and Martin Scorsese for "The Age of Innocence."

Another nominee, Gary Ross, who wrote "Dave," said he was especially pleased
that his film was one of two comedies honored. "It's nice that people recognize
good work for more than just drama," he said. "There doesn't have to be one type
of Oscar."

The other comedy nominated for best screenplay written directly for the movies
was "Sleepless in Seattle," written by Nora Ephron, David S. Ward and Jeff Arch.
Other films nominated in this category were "The Piano," written by Ms. Campion;
"Philadelphia," written by Ron Nyswaner, and "In the Line of Fire," written by
Jeff Maguire.

The Nominees Are . . .

These are the nominees for the 66th annual Academy Awards:

 PICTURE

"The Fugitive," Warner Brothers

"In the Name of the Father," Universal

"The Piano," Miramax

"The Remains of the Day," Columbia

"Schindler's List," Universal

ACTOR

Daniel Day-Lewis, "In the Name of the Father"

Laurence Fishburne, "What's Love Got to Do With It"

Tom Hanks, "Philadelphia"

Anthony Hopkins, "The Remains of the Day"

Liam Neeson, "Schindler's List"

ACTRESS

Angela Bassett, "What's Love Got to Do With It"

Stockard Channing, "Six Degrees of Separation"

Holly Hunter, "The Piano"

Emma Thompson, "The Remains of the Day"

Debra Winger, "Shadowlands"

SUPPORTING ACTOR

Leonardo DiCaprio, "What's Eating Gilbert Grape"

Ralph Fiennes, "Schindler's List"

Tommy Lee Jones, "The Fugitive"

John Malkovich, "In the Line of Fire"

Pete Postlethwaite, "In the Name of the Father"

SUPPORTING ACTRESS

Holly Hunter, "The Firm"

Anna Paquin, "The Piano"

Rosie Perez, "Fearless"

Winona Ryder, "The Age of Innocence"

Emma Thompson, "In the Name of the Father"

DIRECTOR

Jim Sheridan, "In the Name of the Father"

Jane Campion, "The Piano"

James Ivory, "The Remains of the Day"

Steven Spielberg, "Schindler's List"

Robert Altman, "Short Cuts"

ORIGINAL SCREENPLAY

Gary Ross, "Dave"

Jeff Maguire, "In the Line of Fire"

Ron Nyswaner, "Philadelphia"

Jane Campion, "The Piano"

Nora Ephron, David S. Ward and Jeff Arch for "Sleepless in Seattle"

ADAPTED SCREENPLAY

Jay Cocks and Martin Scorsese, "The Age of Innocence"

Terry George and Jim Sheridan, "In the Name of the Father"

Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, "The Remains of the Day"

Steven Zaillian, "Schindler's List"

William Nicholson, "Shadowlands"

FOREIGN FILM

"Belle Epoque," Spain

"Farewell My Concubine," Hong Kong

"Hedd Wyn," Britain

"The Scent of Green Papaya," Vietnam

"The Wedding Banquet," Taiwan

ART DIRECTION

"Addams Family Values"

"The Age of Innocence"

"Orlando"

"The Remains of the Day"

"Schindler's List"

CINEMATOGRAPHY

"Farewell My Concubine"

"The Fugitive"

"The Piano"

"Schindler's List"

"Searching for Bobby Fischer"

COSTUME DESIGN

"The Age of Innocence"

"Orlando"

"The Piano"

"The Remains of the Day"

"Schindler's List"

DOCUMENTARY FEATURE

"The Broadcast Tapes of Peter"

"Children of Fate"

"For Better or for Worse"

"I Am a Promise: The Children of Stanton Elementary School"

"The War Room"

DOCUMENTARY SHORT SUBJECT

"Blood Ties: The Life and Work of Sally Mann"

"Chicks in White Satin"

"Defending Our Lives"

FILM EDITING

"The Fugitive"

"In the Line of Fire"

"In the Name of the Father"

"The Piano"

"Schindler's List"

MAKEUP

"Mrs. Doubtfire"

"Philadelphia"

"Schindler's List"

MUSIC ORIGINAL SCORE

Elmer Bernstein, "The Age of Innocence"

Dave Grusin, "The Firm"

James Newton Howard, "The Fugitive"

Richard Robbins, "The Remains of the Day"

John Williams, "Schindler's List"

MUSIC ORIGINAL SONG

"Again," "Poetic Justice"

"The Day I Fall in Love," "Beethoven's 2d"

"Philadelphia," "Philadelphia"

"Streets of Philadelphia," "Philadelphia"

"A Wink and a Smile," "Sleepless in Seattle"

ANIMATED SHORT FILM

"Blindscape"

"The Mighty River"

"Small Talk"

"The Village"

"The Wrong Trousers"

LIVE ACTION SHORT FILM

"Black Rider"

"Down on the Waterfront"

"The Dutch Master"

"Partners"

"The Screw (La Vis)"

SOUND

"Cliffhanger"

"The Fugitive"

"Geronimo: An American Legend"

"Jurassic Park"

"Schindler's List"

SOUND EFFECTS EDITING

"Cliffhanger"

"The Fugitive"

"Jurassic Park"

VISUAL EFFECTS

"Cliffhanger"

"Jurassic Park"

"The Nightmare Before Christmas"


 These Academy Awards were previously announced:

Technical Award of Merit: Panavision Inc. for lens development

Technical Award of Merit: Manfred G. Michelson of Technical Film Systems Inc.
for film processor development

Gordon E. Sawyer Technical Award: Petro Vlahos, for his technical contributions
to the motion picture industry

Jean Hersholt Award: Paul Newman for his humanitarian efforts

Honorary Award: Deborah Kerr for career achievement

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Liam Neeson, left, and Ben Kingsley in a scene from
"Schindler's List." (David James/Universal Pictures); Tom Hanks in
"Philadelphia." (Ken Regan/Camera 5/Tri-Star Pictures); Holly Hunter and Anna
Paquin in "The Piano." (Miramax); Anthony Hopkins and Emma Thompson in "The
Remains of the Day." (Derrick Santini/Columbia Pictures)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Populist Challenge in California Race

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;   Page 14;   Column 4;   National Desk

LENGTH: 981 words

DATELINE: SACRAMENTO, Calif., Feb. 10


Picking up where Ross Perot and Edmund G. Brown Jr. left off in the 1992
Presidential campaign, Tom Hayden is running for governor of California on what
he calls a crusade against the influence of special interests in politics.

Mr. Hayden, whose political career started in the protests against the Vietnam
War in the 1960's, said he was not in the race to win. But his announcement on
Wednesday stunned politicians in this state capital and could significantly
shift the dynamics of what is shaping up to be a hard-fought race in a big
state.

Republicans here said Mr. Hayden's decision would help the Republican incumbent,
Gov. Pete Wilson, by fragmenting Democratic voters in the primary on June 7, in
which Mr. Hayden is taking on Kathleen Brown, the state Treasurer, and John
Garamendi, the state insurance commissioner.

Mr. Hayden, a 54-year-old state senator from Santa Monica, said in an interview
today that he was running because of a "tacit silence among Republicans and
Democrats about campaign reform and lobbying reform." Mr. Hayden, wealthy since
he won a large divorce settlement after splitting with the actress Jane Fonda in
1989, would not need to raise much money for a statewide campaign.

$94 Gift Limits

Like Mr. Brown, a former governor of California and Ms. Brown's brother, Mr.
Hayden said he would not run 30-second television commercials and would accept
only small contributions -- no more than $94 a person ("94 for Reform" is his
slogan).

Mr. Hayden has long challenged the establishment; before he married Ms. Fonda,
he was a defendant in the Chicago Seven case arising from his protests at the
Democratic convention in 1968.

In concentrating on political reform, Mr. Hayden already has plenty of
ammunition: Ms. Brown, who announced her candidacy this week, has so far raised
far more than $5 million; Mr. Garamendi has more than $1 million. The nominee of
each party is expected to raise as much as $25 million.

"It's the ideal situation for Wilson," the House Speaker, Willie L. Brown, a
Democrat, said today. He said Ms. Brown, as the front runner in the polls at
this early stage, would be hurt because she would be forced to be more specific
about her positions during the primary. "Whether it's a crime issue or a race
issue," the Speaker said, "she's got to say it now." But others assert that Ms.
Brown could benefit because the entry of the liberal Mr. Hayden in the race will
make her appear more moderate.

Mr. Brown said in an interview that he was pleased to see Mr. Hayden in the
race. "I'm glad he's putting the issue of political reform front and center."
Mr. Brown declined to compare his Presidential quest to that of Mr. Hayden,
saying he is curious about whether Mr. Hayden will tap his own money.

Noncommittal Brother

Asked whether he would endorse his sister in the primary, Mr. Brown replied:
"I'm staying out of the campaign. I'm certainly urging my sister to get out
front on political reform."

Mr. Hayden in an interview on the Senate floor rejected any comparison to Mr.
Perot or Mr. Brown. "I would ask voters to judge me on the merits and not let
immediate stereotypes characterize me," he said. "I don't want to make
comparisons. You may. My point is that I think that there's a message of reform
that needs to be voiced, and the alternative is the suffocation of silence. If I
can be a magnet that redirects debate to reform, my mission is satisfied."

Asked about how much money he planned to spend on a campaign or whether any of
it would come from his personal fortune, Mr. Hayden said, "That's unknown."

He said he would rely on a grass-roots organization and a belief that "the free
press still can reach as many people as television commercials." And he insisted
that he did not see himself as a spoiler, saying, "I'm not trying to defeat them
but to unleash a debate and a movement to which they respond."

In a speech on Wednesday, Mr. Hayden, who was elected to the State Assembly in
1982, said he decided to run on the night before the filing deadline on
Wednesday because "the earthquake of Jan. 17 jolted me into a greater urgency."

Republican Questions

Some Republicans questioned whether Mr. Hayden was a legitimate populist voice
against big money in politics given his own fortune.

"It borders on hypocrisy -- running on taking no more than 94 bucks is all right
if you've got plenty of your own money," said Kenneth L. Maddy, the state Senate
Republican leader. "You can be holier than thou all you want. It's one thing to
limit how much you receive, but the issue is how much you spend." But Mr. Maddy
conceded that his colleague across the aisle would be "forcing the issue in a
way that no one likes, even Wilson."

In his 1992 campaign for the State Senate, Mr. Hayden spent an estimated
$750,000 in a three-way primary, a large amount for such a race.

Mr. Hayden said he would withdraw from the race if the other candidates speak
out on his agenda, which includes public financing of campaigns and outlawing
political action committees. But thus far, that is not happening. The Brown
campaign issued a statement saying that Ms. Brown would continue to emphasize
creating jobs, eliminating violence and reforming schools, "no matter who else
joins the race." Mr. Garamendi was not much more forthcoming, saying, "I welcome
a discussion of the issues raised by Tom Hayden."

Given voters' worries about the economy, the fallout from the earthquake and
other matters, Herbert E. Alexander, a political science professor at the
University of Southern California, questioned whether Mr. Hayden would succeed
in making campaign reform an important issue. "He's trying to force this as an
issue," Mr. Alexander said. "But I don't know that Brown or Garamendi will adopt
it in a way that will make it a prime issue that would satisfy Hayden or his
supporters."


NAME: Tom Hayden

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tom Hayden in Los Angeles on Wednesday as he announced his
candidacy for the Democratic nomination for Governor of California. (Associated
Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

With Inquiry Into Toys for Tots, Marines Regroup

BYLINE: By CONSTANCE L. HAYS

SECTION: Section B;   Page 1;   Column 2;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 914 words


The Marine Corps Reserve's Toys for Tots Foundation had all the right
ingredients: a worthy cause, a board packed with beribboned Marines, a
direct-mail campaign with a message that tugged at the heartstrings. "I wish you
could be there to see the miracle happen when the sadness of these children
turns instantly to joy," one letter pleaded, by way of asking for a check.

But these days the foundation is under scrutiny from many quarters for the way
it conducted itself, from the actual fund raising to the way the money was
spent. Of $9.7 million collected through direct mail between September 1992 and
December 1993, none went to purchase toys, although some toys were bought with
corporate donations, said Lieut. Gen. Matthew T. Cooper, a retired Marine
commander who was appointed president and chief executive of the foundation last
fall. "It all went to pay the expenses of direct mail," he said.

Holes in the Bookkeeping

In April the chairman and president, Jerry L. King, was dismissed after board
members discovered he had been convicted of tax evasion and other crimes, all
unrelated to his foundation work. An audit after he left found glaring holes in
bookkeeping procedures, like a $1 million purchase order sent to Hong Kong in
1993 that was undocumented.

And a report released this month by the Philanthropic Advisory Service, a branch
of the Council of Better Business Bureaus, notes the absence of any oversight by
the foundation's board: among other signs of mismanagement, there had been no
board-approved budget until 1993, four years after the foundation was
incorporated, with Mr. King at the helm.

"It's highly unusual," said Bennett M. Weiner, the director of the advisory
service, whose report was the subject of an article yesterday in The Washington
Post. "It does speak to some very serious concerns within the management and
finances of the charity."

The United States Attorney's office in Buffalo is investigating Mr. King's role
in the foundation, which has since been reorganized and moved from Amherst,
N.Y., near Buffalo, to Quantico, Va. Last year the United States postal
inspector in Newark began looking into the foundation's direct-mail operation
after complaints from state residents. For example, the first set of direct-mail
pleas was actually a test to assess the foundation's fund-raising prospects. But
none of the 730,000 letters indicated that it was a test. The money that came in
from the mailing -- $220,000 -- was put toward the next mailing.

"We've embarrassed ourselves," said General Cooper, who commanded a rifle
company in Vietnam and was named president of the foundation last September. He
had no previous affiliation with it, he said, although two members of the
previous board remain active.

'Made a Mistake'

"We kicked one into the grandstand," he said. "I'm hoping the American people
and the corporation presidents will recognize we've made a mistake."

The Toys for Tots program started in 1947, when a Marine Corps spouse in Los
Angeles made a rag doll and could find no child to give it to, said Maj. Betsy
Sweatt, a spokeswoman for the United States Marine Corps Reserve in New Orleans.
Toys and money are collected town by town, she said, and distributed locally as
well. This year 7.5 million toys were collected, with extras going to flood
victims in the Midwest.

But the foundation is not really part of the program, she added. "They're a
separate and distinct organization," she said. "They provide support in the form
of toys and promotional material. They're more at the national level."

Some question whether a national organization was even necessary. "They've been
around for 30-some years, and they never raised money from the public before,"
said Daniel Langan, a spokesman for the National Charities Information Bureau in
Manhattan. "They didn't need it."

But General Cooper said money that traditionally had flowed from Defense
Department budgets to promote Toys for Tots, with banners and fliers, among
other things, had dried up by the late 1980's. "We needed a way to pay for these
materials so they would have successful campaigns," he said.

An Expanded Board

Since the revelations about the foundation's mismanagement, he said, the board
has been expanded to 10 members (the original had just 5, and all were marines
or reservists). The mailing list will likely be cut back, and the office has
been moved to a smaller, free space in Quantico from its more lavish one near
Buffalo. The foundation's lawyer, Col. Gordon Gannon Jr., who was also a board
member, resigned his paid position, General Cooper said.

And while the board once did not even approve budgets, now there is an annual
budget review process as well as bylaws intended to prevent conflicts of
interest.

General Cooper said he did not know what had happened to the money described in
the audit as virtually unaccounted for -- $1 million in 1993, plus about
$520,000 in agents' fees, freight charges and excess payments. "We laid the
evidence and the documents we had at the Department of Justice," he said. "They
may come back and say there's nothing wrong."

Mr. King could not be reached yesterday by telephone at his home in Snyder, N.Y.
Attempts to obtain comment from his lawyer, Patrick J. Brown, were also
unsuccessful.

"This shouldn't have happened," the general said. "I cannot explain why it
happened, but it shouldn't have, and we're not going to let it happen again."

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Revisiting Vietnam on Fantasy's Odd Battlefields

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C;   Page 35;   Column 1;   Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 985 words



Warrior Dreams
Paramilitary Culture in Post-Vietnam America
By James William Gibson
357 pages. Hill & Wang. $23.

With the involvement (and withdrawal) of American forces in Vietnam, the old
ideals of movie machismo underwent a violent sea change. The old gunslinger
ballads gave way to bloodier and more morally ambiguous sagas (movies
like"Shane" were replaced by movies like "The Wild Bunch"), and then in the
mid-1970's, the genre of the western itself seemed ready to fade away and die.
Meanwhile, however, a new brand of movie hero began to make his way to the
screen: Clint Eastwood's Dirty Harry, a renegade cop willing to break all the
rules; Charles Bronson's one-man vigilante team in "Death Wish" (and "Death Wish
2," "3" and "4") and, of course, Sylvester Stallone's pumped-up ex-Green Beret,
John Rambo.

The immense popularity of such heroes, the scholar James William Gibson argues
in his new book "Warrior Dreams," both represented and galvanized the emergence
of a highly energized new paramilitary culture that offered its aficionados an
escape from the social, political and economic confusions of post-Vietnam
America.

"It is hardly surprising, then," writes Mr. Gibson, "that American men --
lacking confidence in the government and the economy, troubled by the changing
relations between the sexes, uncertain of their identity or their future --
began to dream, to fantasize about the powers and features of another kind of
man who could retake and reorder the world. And the hero of all these dreams was
the paramilitary warrior. In the New War he fights the battles of Vietnam a
thousand times, each time winning decisively. Terrorists and drug dealers are
blasted into oblivion. Illegal aliens inside the United States and the hordes of
nonwhites in the third world are returned by force to their proper place. Women
are revealed as dangerous temptresses who have to be mastered, avoided, or
terminated."


In the course of amplifying this thesis, Mr. Gibson, who teaches sociology and
history at California State University in Long Beach, pelts the reader with lots
of information. He notes the rise of the "techno-thriller" -- exemplified by Tom
Clancy's noisy, clattering novels -- and an increase in warrior magazines like
Soldier of Fortune. He documents the escalating sales of military weapons like
the Uzi and the AK-47, and chronicles the growing popularity of combat schools
and firing ranges.

Substantial portions of this volume are devoted to descriptions of a Soldier of
Fortune convention, a course in shooting combat pistols and a war-game retreat,
where men use paint-ball guns to play at killing one another.

As Mr. Gibson sees it, such warrior fantasies began to seep dangerously into
real life during the 1970's and 80's, as "the line between doers and wannabe's
often blurred." Paramilitary zealots placed ads in Soldier of Fortune to hire
themselves out as mercenaries and hit men; the head of a neo-Nazi group, in
search of recruits to his cause, bought the magazine's mailing list. In the
1980's, Mr. Gibson reports, right-wing extremist groups like the Order (which
plotted the assassination of the radio announcer Alan Berg in Colorado), began a
stepped-up campaign of racist violence.

The same decade, he adds, also witnessed the emergence of psychotic killers who
saw themselves as warriors, including James Oliver Huberty, who in 1984 opened
fire in a McDonald's restaurant in San Ysidro, Calif., killing 21 and wounding
19; and Patrick Purdy, who used an AK-47 in a Stockton, Calif., schoolyard in
1989 to gun down 5 Southeast Asian children and wound 29 others.

It is Mr. Gibson's contention that American warrior mythology had reverberations
on a governmental level as well. Ronald Reagan's Star Wars rhetoric, the
invasion of Grenada, covert support of the contras in Central America, Oliver
North's theatrics, the invasion of Panama and the Persian Gulf war: all, Mr.
Gibson suggests, can be viewed through the lens of America's "post-Vietnam
warrior culture."


Although Mr. Gibson lays out his arguments in energetic, readable prose and
displays a keen reportorial eye for events he has witnessed, his overall
analysis often feels simplistic, derivative and lacking in historical
perspective. He fails to situate the new paramilitary ethos of the warrior fully
in relationship to America's violent history and its historical faith in the
redemptive possibilities of violence. He makes only passing references to the
groundbreaking work of the historian Richard Slotkin, but at the same time takes
many of his central ideas from Mr. Slotkin's monumental three-volume work on the
frontier myth ("Regeneration Through Violence," "The Fatal Environment" and
"Gunfighter Nation"). In many cases, Mr. Gibson simply extrapolates Mr.
Slotkin's observations to the contemporary American scene, sometimes adding
small editorial asides of his own.

These asides tend to be highly subjective, and poorly grounded in factual
analysis. Mr. Gibson offhandedly dismisses the gun-control debate, for instance,
as "the worst kind of fetishism, in which focusing on a part of the dreadful
reality of the decade -- combat weapons -- became a substitute for confronting
what America had become."

What are Mr. Gibson's own recommendations for reducing the appeal of warrior
mythologies and making America a kinder, gentler place? Well, he suggests that
adventure sports (mountain climbing, scuba diving) might provide men with a
healthy outlet for their warrior impulses, and that increased male participation
in child-rearing might help men to become "more emotionally expressive and less
psychologically distant."

Such casually tossed-off suggestions hardly seem like the answer to the culture
of violence delineated in these pages, and they ultimately trivialize the very
subject Mr. Gibson has labored so hard to explicate in "Warrior Dreams."

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: James William Gibson

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Sports of The Times;
The Games, The Splendor, The Horror

BYLINE: By IRA BERKOW

SECTION: Section B;   Page 9;   Column 1;   Sports Desk

LENGTH: 767 words

DATELINE: LILLEHAMMER, Norway


FROM the mountain site of the Olympic Stadium, where the curved stands and the
colorful flags are in order for the opening ceremony of the 1994 Winter Games
tomorrow, one can gaze out on the town below.

On a cold, clear afternoon the scene is resplendent in Nordic beauty, in
serenity, in peace. Everything is cloaked in the white of snow: all the houses,
the shops, the cars and buses, and the people -- the people in their parkas,
boots and funny snow hats going about their daily tasks.

It is difficult, if not nearly impossible, to imagine all this coming to a
sudden and terrible stop. It is difficult to imagine many of those people lying
dead or wounded, their blood staining the snow. It is difficult to imagine the
blue and red and yellow houses with lace curtains and snow-capped roofs and
chimneys -- looking small in the distance like sugar-topped gingerbread houses
-- shattered by mortars and grenades and sniper fire.

And it is difficult to imagine the screams and the tears, the Olympic venues
turned into skeletal structures, and the Olympic Stadium itself a mass graveyard
filled with hundreds and hundreds of tombstones.

"Ten years ago, nobody in Sarajevo could have imagined it either," said Svein
Tornas, the campaign manager for and one of the originators of the Lillehammer
Olympic Aid organization. "But that is exactly what has happened to Sarajevo."

Ten years ago this week, the 1984 Winter Olympics began in Sarajevo with all the
gaiety and promise of this one. Within a few years, war broke out.

Tornas has worked with missionary organizations in ravaged places like Cambodia
and Bangladesh and Vietnam. From his home in Oslo, he watched on television the
1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville and the Summer Games in Barcelona.

"I felt there was no sense of any kind of the Olympic ideal, of caring about
your fellow man, of remembering Sarajevo," said Tornas, sitting now in his small
office here. He is 53, with gray hair and light-colored, earnest eyes. "All I
saw was people fighting for gold. It was all about commercialism. I went to the
library and looked up what the Olympic ideals were supposed to be. In the
Olympic Charter it states that aim of the Games is to 'educate young people in
the spirit of understanding and friendship, thus contributing to building a
better and more peaceful world.' All that had vanished."

Since Norway was to hold the Games next, Tornas thought, "maybe we can do
something." He went to the Lillehammer Olympic Organizing Committee and
discovered that a few people there had been thinking along the same lines. Thus,
the Lillehammer Olympic Aid group.

Starting last May, there was a spirited nationwide campaign to collect
donations, and the aid group, along with the Norwegian Red Cross and church
groups, raised about $7 million. They used the money to buy and send 500
wood-burning stoves to Bosnia because there is no gas or electricity "and people
are freezing there," Tornas said. They sent food and medicine. And they helped
build a clinic in the Kosevo Hospital, close by the cemetery that was once the
Olympic Stadium.

Tornas had gained the aid of several top-flight Norwegian Olympians, including
the cross-country skier Vegard Ulvang, a three-time gold medal winner in
Albertville and a national hero. Ulvang, eager to help, went on a mission to
Sarajevo in November, and wound up on the floor of the clinic as it was shelled.

Dr. Ragnal Stiel of Oslo agreed to operate the clinic. His specialty is
spinal-cord injuries, of which there are now many, and the treatment of those
who have been tortured, raped and have suffered other forms of violence.

"To me, it's ridiculous to hold another Olympics when such terrible things are
going on," he said by telephone yesterday. "But if the people in Sarajevo can be
made to feel they have not been forgotten by the world, then maybe there is a
reason for the Olympics, as a way to focus on the situation."

The aid group is also lending a hand in other war-torn areas -- Guatemala,
Beirut, Afghanistan and Eritrea. Tornas plans for its torch to be handed to the
Atlanta Olympic committee. For the next two weeks, there will be aid group
collection boxes along Storgaten, the town's main street, and at most of the
sports venues.

Meanwhile, from the top of the mountain, Tornas had looked at the lovely
Lillehammer scene. "In 10 years' time, who knows what could happen," he said.
"Of course, people say it can't happen here. But it happened in Bosnia, in
Beirut, in Northern Ireland. It can happen anywhere."

In about 48 hours, the Games would begin.

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Showing support for the people of Sarajevo. (Barton Silverman)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Populist Challenge in California Race

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 981 words

DATELINE: SACRAMENTO, Calif., Feb. 10


Picking up where Ross Perot and Edmund G. Brown Jr. left off in the 1992
Presidential campaign, Tom Hayden is running for governor of California on what
he calls a crusade against the influence of special interests in politics.

Mr. Hayden, whose political career started in the protests against the Vietnam
War in the 1960's, said he was not in the race to win. But his announcement on
Wednesday stunned politicians in this state capital and could significantly
shift the dynamics of what is shaping up to be a hard-fought race in a big
state.

Republicans here said Mr. Hayden's decision would help the Republican incumbent,
Gov. Pete Wilson, by fragmenting Democratic voters in the primary on June 7, in
which Mr. Hayden is taking on Kathleen Brown, the state Treasurer, and John
Garamendi, the state insurance commissioner.

Mr. Hayden, a 54-year-old state senator from Santa Monica, said in an interview
today that he was running because of a "tacit silence among Republicans and
Democrats about campaign reform and lobbying reform." Mr. Hayden, wealthy since
he won a large divorce settlement after splitting with the actress Jane Fonda in
1989, would not need to raise much money for a statewide campaign.

$94 Gift Limits

Like Mr. Brown, a former governor of California and Ms. Brown's brother, Mr.
Hayden said he would not run 30-second television commercials and would accept
only small contributions -- no more than $94 a person ("94 for Reform" is his
slogan).

Mr. Hayden has long challenged the establishment; before he married Ms. Fonda,
he was a defendant in the Chicago Seven case arising from his protests at the
Democratic convention in 1968.

In concentrating on political reform, Mr. Hayden already has plenty of
ammunition: Ms. Brown, who announced her candidacy this week, has so far raised
far more than $5 million; Mr. Garamendi has more than $1 million. The nominee of
each party is expected to raise as much as $25 million.

"It's the ideal situation for Wilson," the House Speaker, Willie L. Brown, a
Democrat, said today. He said Ms. Brown, as the front runner in the polls at
this early stage, would be hurt because she would be forced to be more specific
about her positions during the primary. "Whether it's a crime issue or a race
issue," the Speaker said, "she's got to say it now." But others assert that Ms.
Brown could benefit because the entry of the liberal Mr. Hayden in the race will
make her appear more moderate.

Mr. Brown said in an interview that he was pleased to see Mr. Hayden in the
race. "I'm glad he's putting the issue of political reform front and center."
Mr. Brown declined to compare his Presidential quest to that of Mr. Hayden,
saying he is curious about whether Mr. Hayden will tap his own money.

Noncommittal Brother

Asked whether he would endorse his sister in the primary, Mr. Brown replied:
"I'm staying out of the campaign. I'm certainly urging my sister to get out
front on political reform."

Mr. Hayden in an interview on the Senate floor rejected any comparison to Mr.
Perot or Mr. Brown. "I would ask voters to judge me on the merits and not let
immediate stereotypes characterize me," he said. "I don't want to make
comparisons. You may. My point is that I think that there's a message of reform
that needs to be voiced, and the alternative is the suffocation of silence. If I
can be a magnet that redirects debate to reform, my mission is satisfied."

Asked about how much money he planned to spend on a campaign or whether any of
it would come from his personal fortune, Mr. Hayden said, "That's unknown."

He said he would rely on a grass-roots organization and a belief that "the free
press still can reach as many people as television commercials." And he insisted
that he did not see himself as a spoiler, saying, "I'm not trying to defeat them
but to unleash a debate and a movement to which they respond."

In a speech on Wednesday, Mr. Hayden, who was elected to the State Assembly in
1982, said he decided to run on the night before the filing deadline on
Wednesday because "the earthquake of Jan. 17 jolted me into a greater urgency."

Republican Questions

Some Republicans questioned whether Mr. Hayden was a legitimate populist voice
against big money in politics given his own fortune.

"It borders on hypocrisy -- running on taking no more than 94 bucks is all right
if you've got plenty of your own money," said Kenneth L. Maddy, the state Senate
Republican leader. "You can be holier than thou all you want. It's one thing to
limit how much you receive, but the issue is how much you spend." But Mr. Maddy
conceded that his colleague across the aisle would be "forcing the issue in a
way that no one likes, even Wilson."

In his 1992 campaign for the State Senate, Mr. Hayden spent an estimated
$750,000 in a three-way primary, a large amount for such a race.

Mr. Hayden said he would withdraw from the race if the other candidates speak
out on his agenda, which includes public financing of campaigns and outlawing
political action committees. But thus far, that is not happening. The Brown
campaign issued a statement saying that Ms. Brown would continue to emphasize
creating jobs, eliminating violence and reforming schools, "no matter who else
joins the race." Mr. Garamendi was not much more forthcoming, saying, "I welcome
a discussion of the issues raised by Tom Hayden."

Given voters' worries about the economy, the fallout from the earthquake and
other matters, Herbert E. Alexander, a political science professor at the
University of Southern California, questioned whether Mr. Hayden would succeed
in making campaign reform an important issue. "He's trying to force this as an
issue," Mr. Alexander said. "But I don't know that Brown or Garamendi will adopt
it in a way that will make it a prime issue that would satisfy Hayden or his
supporters."


NAME: Tom Hayden

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 17, 1994, Thursday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article last Friday about the entry of Tom
Hayden into the race for California governor misattributed a quotation about
Kathleen Brown, who is also a Democratic candidate. It was Ms. Brown's brother,
former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. -- not Willie Brown, the state House Speaker --
who said of Mr. Hayden, "I'm glad he's putting the issue of political reform
front and center." Former Governor Brown, who ran for the Democratic nomination
for President in 1992, also said: "I'm staying out of the campaign. I'm
certainly urging my sister to get out front on political reform."


GRAPHIC: Photo: Tom Hayden in Los Angeles on Wednesday as he announced his
candidacy for the Democratic nomination for Governor of California. (Associated
Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 12, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 848 words



International   -5

JAPAN TRADE TALKS FAIL
President Clinton met with the Prime Minister of Japan and then declared the
trade talks a failure. Administration officials threatened aggressive steps to
break down barriers to American goods.  1
NEXT STEPS ON JAPAN
News Analysis: after eight months of unsuccessful negotiations with Japan, the
question is whether President Clinton has any options left to push Tokyo to open
its markets.  4
JAPAN PLEADS ITS CASE
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa of Japan spoke to an audience at Georgetown
University, discussing his frustrations with his country's economy and declaring
that Japan would never have nuclear arms.  4
U.S. MAKES BOSNIA STANCE CLEAR
News analysis: the United States is making it clear that its agreement to play a
bigger role in Bosnia was for the purpose of bringing about a negotiated
settlement.  5
FRANCE PRESSES BOSNIA FOR PACT
The Foreign Minister of France, taking advantage of a new agreement with the
United States, pressed the Bosnian Government for an approach to peace
negotiations that might lead to a settlement. 5
The Bosnia countdown began, with planes moving into position. 5
President Clinton and Russia's leader talked, easing Bosnia tension. 5
SOUTH KOREA SEEKING CAUTION
The Foreign Minister of South Korea said it is unlikely that North Korea will
accept full nuclear inspections any time soon, but he also expressed caution on
sanctions.  3
ISRAEL COOL ON SETTLERS
Israel reaffirmed that it would not abandon its settlements, but said that they
have been stumbling blocks to its Palestinian talks and singled out one for
criticism. 3

Robben Island Journal: South Africa's campus for change.  4

National   6-9

A SCANDAL CONCLUDED
The Navy moved to close the books on the Tailhook sexual harassment scandal,
deciding not to appeal the dismissal of the last three cases stemming from the
incident.  1
A SENATOR ACQUITTED
After prosecutors unexpectedly refused to present their case, Senator Kay Bailey
Hutchison was acquitted of charges that she misused her office while she was
State Treasurer of Texas.  1
A CONGRESSMAN PAYS
Moving to defuse accusations that he misused Congessional privileges,
Representative Dan Rostenkowski has reimbursed the Government $82,000 for office
supplies purchased by his office at public expense.  6
WIRETAP SOFTWARE SOUGHT
The White House is pressing for legislation to force telephone and cable
television companies to install software that enables law enforcement agencies
to eavesdrop on phone calls and computer transmissions.  1
IMMIGRATION TREND REVERSES
As the last refugees from the Vietnam War continue to arrive in Westminster,
Calif., their successful countrymen are heading back with dollars in their
pockets to visit relatives or open businesses.  6
A GIRL'S LIFE DEBATED
A Florida hospital that has been caring for a brain-dead teen-ager is seeking
permission from the courts to disconnect her life support system, despite the
parents' opposition.  6
DRUG ISSUE ADDRESSED
News Analysis: As crime and violence have risen to prominence on the roster of
national concerns, now rivaling the economy, President Clinton is addressing
their companion, the drug issue.  7

Religion Notes: Worshiping in the fast lane.  9

Metro Digest   21

BESEIGED BY SNOW
The harshest storm of a relentless winter attacked the New York region yesterday
with a foot or more of new snow that deepened the sense of siege for millions.
1
LIVING WITH ICE
Because of the snow, so much snow, the miracle of birth had to unfold on a couch
in Teaneck, N.J. In Manhattan, a delivery man had ice in his eyebrows and terror
in his eyes.  1
Obituaries 9-10
Dr. Fritz John, mathematician.  9
Saul Weprin, Speaker of the New York State Assembly.  10
William Conrad, actor.  10
Neil Bonnett, race driver.  10
Sports 28-34
Baseball: Owners change commissioner's powers.  29
Basketball: Knicks' fight tougher than expected.  33
Columns: Rhoden on Chris Webber.  29
Football: CBS strikes deal with Southeastern Conference.  32
Golf: Couples holding steady.  34
Hockey: Devils hitting stride.  34
Olympics: Sides in Harding case meet in court.  29
Games set to begin.  29
Samaranch concerned over Georgia flag.  31
U.S. team may be last of its kind.  30
Tennis: Navratilova bows out.  32
Business Digest 37
Arts/Entertainment 11-17
A soprano's sudden elevation.  11
Theater: "A Body of Water." 13
Music: A Schnittke premiere.  11
Andrei Gavrilov's pianism.  16
Dance: City Ballet premiere.  11
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19
Editorials
Dodging a trade battle.
Ms. Reno and the jail glut.
He stands tall in Willimantic.
Mr. Weprin's contribution.
Letters
Anna Quindlen: Diagnosis -- undue influence.
Edmund Leites: Who's an American? Ask Lincoln.
Joan Braunagel McShane: Paper profits.
Kathy Magee: Yes, I can.
Mike Jones: Critical thinkers.
Vicki Matthews-Burwell: Drinking it all in.
Bridge 17
Chronicle 20
Crossword 17

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 12, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

To Vietnamese in America, the Homeland Beckons

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 6;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1265 words

DATELINE: WESTMINSTER, Calif., Feb. 10


As the last groups of bewildered refugees from the Vietnam War arrive here with
their identity tags and bundles of belongings, plane loads of their successful
countrymen are heading back with dollars in their pockets to visit relatives or
open businesses.

Nineteen years after the fall of Saigon, with the Vietnamese population in the
United States approaching one million, the flood of refugees is drawing to a
close.

The flow is, in a way, reversing itself: more Vietnamese are now returning from
the United States for visits than are arriving here as refugees or immigrants.

This shift took on momentum last week when President Clinton lifted the
two-decade-old American trade embargo against a former enemy. The Little Saigon
enclave of 80,000 Vietnamese in this town 40 miles south of downtown Los Angeles
is suddenly busy with plans and projects -- not all of them realistic -- for
their return to the homeland as wealthy heroes.

In High Gear

"A lot of Vietnamese-Americans have been going to Vietnam like crazy when they
heard the rumor that the sanctions may be lifted," said Co Pham, president of
the local Vietnamese Chamber of Commerce. A medical doctor, he himself has plans
to open a hospital in Vietnam.

Vuong Tran, who owns a travel agency and works as a consultant for American
companies seeking to do business in Vietnam, said: "This is the day we have been
waiting for. We spent a lot of money doing research for this day." Mr. Tran, who
has frequently visited his homeland over the years to lay the groundwork for new
enterprises, is in high gear now, determined to be one of the first to profit.

T. T. Nhu, a columnist for the San Jose Mercury News, said her uncle, who owned
a bank in Vietnam and, as a refugee, earned a doctorate at Cornell University,
may return to reopen his bank. "It's like living and dying and going to heaven
again," she said.

Surprising some Vietnamese here, the mood even seems to have affected the
younger generation here with American educations and only dim childhood memories
of Vietnam.

Big Plans, Tough Reality

"Many young professionals have declared to their parents over the last few days
that they will return to Vietnam in the next month or two," said Yen Do, editor
of Nguoi Viet Daily News here, the largest Vietnamese-language newspaper in the
United States. "They said it solemnly and officially within the family. They
didn't ask the parents, 'Should I go back?' They just said it: 'I will go.' "

He said the talk is of enterprises like banks and small import-export companies
and of using American skills in construction, education, real estate and medical
care. "Everything seems possible now," he said.

But Mr. Tran warned that in reality many things were still not possible in
Vietnam, with its primitive and slow-moving centrally controlled economy.  "The
end of the embargo will benefit first the giant companies including rich oil
companies, banks, construction, communications, law firms," he said.  "Small and
medium businesses, and this includes the Vietnamese-Americans, will have more
difficulty. This is still a socialist country and doing business there is very
complicated. It will take a couple of more years."

Nevertheless, Mr. Tran said his travel business had boomed in recent years as
visits to Vietnam became more common and less politically risky within the
emigre community, which has been polarized over whether to have dealings with a
Communist Vietnam.

One of his plans involves building a retirement community for elderly returnees
in their native country. He said he had circulated a questionnaire here and
found that about half the 2,000 respondents said they would be interested in
buying a home in Vietnam.

When Hanoi first opened the door for returnees in the mid-1980's, Mr. Tran said,
he escorted groups of 5 or 10 people on visits to their homeland and his
business so angered militant Vietnamese anti-Communists here that his office was
firebombed.

Now, the Vietnamese mission to the United Nations estimates that nearly 100,000
Vietnamese return to visit every year. By some estimates, as many as 20,000
people have returned for the lunar new year of Tet this month. At the moment,
only a few Vietnamese return home to stay.

Dwindling Arrivals

At the same time, Vietnamese refugee arrivals in the United States, which
reached a peak of about 150,000 a year in the early 1980's, have dwindled to
fewer than 60,000 in the fiscal year 1993, down from 82,000 in 1992.

And these arrivals will all but end within the next year or two, said Pamela
Lewis, a spokeswoman for the Bureau of Refugee Programs in the State Department,
as a pool of Vietnamese deemed to be political refugees under an immigration
program dries up.

Almost all the refugees arriving in the United States now leave Vietnam not by
boat but by airplane in the Orderly Departure Program, which was begun in the
1980's.

Most of them now belong to two specific groups: the Amerasian offspring of
Americans in Vietnam, along with their family members, and former South
Vietnamese officers and Government officials who have been held as political
prisoners.

The last 3,500 people in the Amerasian program are expected to arrive in the
United States by summer, Ms. Lewis said, bringing the total to nearly 80,000. As
many as 100,000 former political prisoners and family members will have entered
the country when that program ends some time within the next two years.

The exodus of boat people has all but ended; fewer than 100 people were recorded
last year. Their numbers are dwarfed by the 58,000 who have returned to Vietnam
from refugee camps since late 1989. Those returnees were denied asylum by third
countries, as most of the new boat people will be, because they were judged to
be fleeing for economic rather than political reasons.

Once the pool of Amerasians and political prisoners is exhausted, in one more
sign of normalization, virtually all Vietnamese arrivals in the United States
will come not as refugees but as immigrants. Their entry would be based on the
same criteria and follow the same procedures as people from the Philippines or
Ireland or Argentina or France.

And yet, in the face of this turning tide of history, it remains politically
difficult here in Little Saigon to support the end of the embargo and to do
business openly with the Communist Government in Hanoi.

The lifting of the embargo was greeted with angry demonstrations and threats
against advocates of normalization. Local political leaders chose their words
carefully so as not to offend former Vietnamese military men and political
prisoners who are still fighting the long-ago war in their hearts.

'They Lost Their Country'

"These are the hard-core types that we call the San Jose paratroopers," said
Douglas Pike, who heads the Vietnam Archive at the University of California at
Berkeley. "They lost their country and they are bitter about it, and I guess I'd
be even more bitter about it."

So the celebration one recent evening was quiet at the Vien Dong restaurant,
where a Vietnamese-American banker, a construction contractor, a doctor, a
restaurateur, an import-export executive and a half-dozen others gathered on the
eve of Tet to mark the lifting of the embargo.

It was as if they shared a guilty secret in the aftermath of a war that had
seemed to bring only tragedy.  They were going to go home, and they were going
to make money.

"Happy New Year," they said, as they lifted water glasses of California
champagne, and they took pictures of one other smiling.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: With the end of the trade embargo on Vietnam, the flow of
Vietnamese returning from the United States for visits to their homeland is
becoming a flood. Vuong Tran, who owns a travel agency in Westminster, Calif.,
near Los Angeles, said, "This is the day we have been waiting for." (Marissa
Roth for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: February 13, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1460 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   4   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A
                computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss
                and is accused by her of sexual harassment.

 2      2  79   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 3      3  15   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 4      4   3   FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of
                mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a
                sylvan Vermont town.

 5      6  44   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 6      5   4   BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent
                deaths.

 7      7   3   HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B. Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) Three
                American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German activities
                in Buenos Aires in 1942.

 8          1   FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) A
                widow's affection for the close friend of her son, killed in an
                accident, creates familial tension.

 9     10   8   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &
                Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates
                a child's mysterious death.

 10     9  48   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 11     8  25   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 12    12   2   VOYAGER, by Diana Gabaldon. (Delacorte, $21.95.) A woman finds
                love while commuting between 18th- and 20th-century Scotland.

 13         2   GRAND PASSION, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $22.) A romantic
                encounter between a small-inn keeper and the man behind a large
                hotel chain.

 14    13   9   THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A
                collection of stories about American men and the strains of
                contemporary life.

 15*   15  14   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery
                writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined
                to kill him and take his place.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  40   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2      2   8   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 3      3   5   SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A
                psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.

 4      5  25   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 5      7  19   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 6      8  11   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                100, reflect on their lives.

 7      6  23   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 8      4  13   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More
                comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 9     11  19   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 10     9  17   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 11    10  79   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 12    12  28   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 13    13   4   FLY FISHING THROUGH THE MIDLIFE CRISIS, by Howell Raines.
                (Morrow, $22.) A journalist looks at middle age through the
                prism of his favorite sport.

 14*   14   5   A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Knopf, $27.50.) The
                development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years in Judaism,
                Christianity and Islam.

 15        23   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A
                psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their
                effects on a person's self.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      3   4   MAGIC EYE, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when
                scrutinized at length.

 2      2  38   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 3      1  16   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.

 4      4  29   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 29, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind
(Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interest)

BEYOND DESPAIR: Three Lectures and a Conversation With Philip Roth, by Aharon
Appelfeld. (Fromm, $17.50.) The Israeli novelist argues that literature can and
must deal with the Holocaust or give up its pretensions to be a vehicle of
spiritual apprehension.

THE BINGO PALACE, by Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $23.) Three decent people
look for love on a windblown prairie in this novel whose daily life is enriched
by supernatural events and the presence of Indian spirits.

BITTER WINDS: A Memoir of My Years in China's Gulag, by Harry Wu and Carolyn
Wakeman. (Robert L. Bernstein/Wiley, $22.95.) Mr. Wu's memoir of 19 years in
labor camps is grimly familiar as to abuse and deprivation but grotesque and
surreal in its account of acting out each new political rectification campaign
right in the heart of the prison system.

BRAZIL, by John Updike. (Knopf, $23.) In the vast, trackless wilds of a Brazil
the author freely admits making up out of whole cloth, a tragicomic
knight-errant and his dolly, madly in love, break all the rules of class and
race.

THE CAVEMAN'S VALENTINE, by George Dawes Green. (Warner, $19.95.) Romulus
Ledbetter, Mr. Green's protagonist, is a homeless, black, paranoid private eye
who can be roused to propriety only by a case as interesting as the one Mr.
Green has dreamed up for his first novel.

CROSSING THE RIVER, by Caryl Phillips. (Knopf, $22.) A novel, covering two and a
half centuries, that presents a brilliantly coherent mythified vision of the
irreversible African diaspora.

GOING NATIVE, by Stephen Wright. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) A road novel
that explodes the conventions of the genre as a weird, dangerous shape-shifting
protagonist remakes his identity on the way to California.

HOW WE DIE: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf,
$24.) The author, a physician, surgeon and teacher for 35 years, offers a wise,
humane and cultivated examination of what happens to people when they die,
omitting none of the clinical detail.

IMAGES: My Life in Film, by Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $27.95.) At 75, the great
Swedish film maker confronts and reveals himself as artist and man in this
evocation of his career, based on a fresh viewing of all his movies.

JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES. Volume 2: The Economist as Saviour 1920-1937, by Robert
Skidelsky. (Allen Lane/Penguin, $37.50.) How Keynes reshaped the world's
economy, made a lot of money and married a ballerina, by an economics professor
whose mastery of many subjects seems to match Keynes's own.

JOSEPHINE: The Hungry Heart, by Jean-Claude Baker and Chris Chase. (Random
House, $27.50.) Prodigious research and outstanding narrative fluency mark this
biography of Josephine Baker (1906-75), the irresistible American institution of
French revues, cabaret and film.

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 13, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 864 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     6   SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied
           Poland.

 2     1   NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.)
           In Victorian-era Minnesota, a servant hopes to win an
           heiress's heart by helping her family win a yacht race.

 3     4   WINTER MOON, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The
           policeman Jack McGarvey on the trail of a serial killer in
           Los Angeles.

 4     3   RUBY, by V.C. Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) A young woman seeks
           to discover the dreadful secrets of her family's past in
           New Orleans.

 5     7   DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine,
           $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent
           novelist.

 6    52   THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A
           law student investigates the murder of two Supreme Court
           Justices.

 7     3   PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of
           murders in a small California town vexes a temporary
           district attorney.

 8     2   TERMINAL, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $5.99.) A medical
           researcher's pursuit of a treatment for cancer and a
           nurse's pursuit of him.

 9    96   A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.)
           Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged
           with murder.

 10    2   SEDUCED, by Virginia Henley. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) To
           safeguard property she has inherited, a British noblewoman
           masquerades as a male.

 11    3   DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) An
           ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a
           series of mysterious deaths.

 12   12   ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Warner, $5.99.)
           Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a serial killer in
           Washington.

 13    3   THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.)
           A "Star Wars" novel.

 14    2   SUDDENLY, by Barbara Delinsky. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.)
           A pediatrician finds romance after the death of her dear
           friend.

 15   22   INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine,
           $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1     5   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.

 2    536  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 3    52   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

 4    22   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket,
           $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show
           host.

 5    122  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France.

 6     5   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 7     9   OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the
           television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.

 8*   136  YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine,
           $10.) The different languages men and women speak.

 9*   15   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as
           seen through the A.A. Milne character.

 10*  11   EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A
           woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of
           murders.

 11*  11   THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects
           of Taoist philosophy, as seen in the actions of an A.A.
           Milne character.

 12   37   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           psychological and social significance of menopause for
           today's women.

 13*  11   GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the
           physicist Richard Feynman.

 14*   2   WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ... AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and
           Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A three-day
           battle in Vietnam in 1965.

 15*  42   TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The
           charms of rustic France.

 16*  28   EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's,
           $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire
           veterinarian.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    152  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles to practice in the
           pursuit of success.

 2     9   BOTTOMS UP! by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.99.) Exercises
           for women to achieve good health and fitness.

 3     7   THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1994. (World
           Almanac/Funk & Wagnalls, $8.95.) The latest edition of the
           reference work.

 4     3   A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (Harper
           Perennial, $12.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with
           feelings of love in daily life.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 29, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SUNDAY VIEW;
Riding a Merry-Go-Round of Pathos and Camp

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1765 words


IT'S NOT FOR NOTHING THAT Michael John LaChiusa describes his ambitious new
musical, "Hello Again," now at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, as having been
"suggested" by the Arthur Schnitzler classic, "La Ronde" (titled "Reigen" in
German). The young American composer, lyricist and librettist has effectively
deconstructed the melancholy and skeptical Viennese sex comedy without putting
it back together. The new work is not an adaptation of the Schnitzler play, but
it is an impertinent, sometimes haunting, often jokey commentary on it.

"Hello Again," directed and choreographed by Graciela Daniele, is still about
the daisy chain of sexual encounters that begins when a whore has al fresco sex
with a soldier, who then makes love to a young woman, who moves on to a
different young man, until, at last, the ninth and final partner returns to the
whore. The Schnitzler play, which is about romantic dreams repeatedly dashed, is
contained within the small, hermetically sealed world of turn-of-the-century
Vienna. Mr. LaChiusa liberates the Schnitzler characters but at a certain cost
to coherence. They now move freely back and forth in time, through the first
nine explosive decades of the 20th century.

They misbehave and delude themselves mostly in and around an ever-changing New
York and, in one sequence, aboard the Titanic. They aren't caught by time, place
and sociopolitical circumstance as much as they are by Mr. LaChiusa's conceit,
which could be called fate. Society and politics no longer enter into it.

The Soldier in the first scene of "Hello Again" could be a veteran of the
Spanish-American War. It's the turn of the century. He shows up a few minutes
later waiting shipment overseas to fight in World War II. The 1960's sequence is
about the Nurse, who has a taste for bondage, as she seduces the College Boy,
who behaves with the naivete of a fraternity brother in a 1930's Harold Lloyd
comedy. The boy turns up in the following sequence, set in the 1930's, having
sex with the Young Wife, who's both rich and unhappy, in a movie theater. Her
desperate refrain, even as she's taking her pleasure of the boy: "I'm morally
bankrupt," which gets a laugh, as it's supposed to, but has little connection
with the character who appears in the following segment.

Mr. LaChiusa bends time out of shape and nearly all recognition. The period in
which a sequence is set frequently has little to do with anything that happens
within it. He ignores the Vietnam War entirely. There are references to Woody,
Mia, Chuck, Di and Barbara Walters in the 1980's segment, but they're like set
decoration. His scale of values is unpredictable. Pure camp often takes
precedence.

With that understood, there's also something nuttily adventurous about Mr. La
Chiusa's casual treatment of chronological time and his melange of Brechtian
cabaret turns, burlesques sketches (the Nurse who ties up the College Boy comes
straight out of a Bobby Clark routine) and romantic interludes of unexpected
pathos. Among the latter: an astonishingly beautiful, bittersweet sequence about
the Young Wife, who earlier was seen with the College Boy. Even as the Husband
is making dutiful love to her, she slips out from under him to confront her
mirror image in a fantasy about the great love she has never had.

It's a lovely theatrical moment but isolated, existing on a dramatic level that
Mr. LaChiusa achieves at only one other time: the show's opening sequence,
scored to the haunting title song, when the Whore picks up the Soldier, talks
him into some free sex and then winds up his victim. As sung and danced by Donna
Murphy and David A. White, the interlude promises more riches than "Hello Again"
can deliver with any consistency. Though this version of "La Ronde" eventually
closes the sexual circle, there seems to be no particular point to it beyond Mr.
LaChiusa's rather chilly and unsurprising acknowledgment that promiscuity is not
especially fulfilling. You might imagine that, though "Hello Again" ends in the
1980's when the AIDS plague was being officially acknowledged for the first
time, the awareness of AIDS would somehow be pertinent to this variation on
Schnitzler. It isn't.

Schnitzler (1862-1931) was a doctor whose specialty was laryngology, with
particular interest in symptoms of syphilis in the throat. "La Ronde," which was
privately printed in 1900 but not publicly performed until 1912, has sometimes
been seen as a cautionary tale about the spread of a disease that wasn't curable
until years later.

Yet Schnitzler specialists find no evidence that "La Ronde" was about syphilis.
Rather, they say, an awareness of the consequences of syphilis, commonplace at
the time, would have heightened the sense of the sad futility that is the common
lot of Schnitzler's characters. In "Hello Again," any such awareness of AIDS is
not simply ignored but conspicuously missing. The result: there's no real center
to Mr. LaChiusa's circle.

It's difficult to realize today how inflammatory "La Ronde" once was. A 1923
staging at the Belasco Theater in New York came under fire from the Society for
the Suppression of Vice. The result? The play got a reading instead. Max
Ophuls's elegant and witty 1950 French film adaptation was denied an exhibition
license by New York State until the United States Supreme Court cleared it for
showing in 1954.

"Hello Again" is nothing if not explicit and up-to-date. There are no discreet
time lapses. The lights do not go down when sex is being had. Two of the show's
funnier, nastier scenes feature a male hustler called the Young Thing. He first
catches the eye of the Husband of the Young Wife in the sequence set aboard the
Titanic. Later, in the 1970's, he is befriended by the Writer, an impossibly
self-centered fellow who picks him up in a disco, takes him home and insists on
providing the Young Thing with made-to-order romantic dialogue.

Mr. LaChiusa's music and lyrics are not yet in a league with Stephen Sondheim's;
he's still searching for a style of his own. But he shares the Sondheim fondness
for experimentation. If he doesn't yet have experience and technical
proficiency, those can come with work and with the kind of fine collaborative
assistance he receives in this Lincoln Center Theater production, part of its
Festival of New American Plays.

As was apparent in the recent Joseph Papp Public Theater production of his
"First Lady Suite," Mr. LaChiusa appears to have a lot of wildly bizarre ideas
that are not always developed. He goes for the jokes. Seen briefly but to comic
effect in the 1940's segment of "Hello Again" is a group of harmonizing big-band
singers who sound very much like Glenn Miller's tirelessly grinning Modernaires.

Ms. Daniele seems to have served Mr. LaChiusa well as both director and
choreographer. So, too, have the members of the cast, especially Ms. Murphy, Mr.
White, Carolee Carmello (as the Young Wife), John Cameron Mitchell (as the Young
Thing), Malcolm Gets (as the Writer) and Michele Pawk (as the Actress). Derek
McLane, who designed the imaginative sets for "First Lady Suite," performs the
same job for "Hello Again," though it must have been far more difficult at the
Newhouse. It can't be easy designing for a small theater where the seats are on
such a steep rake. Most patrons see more of the stage floorboards than they do
of any sets, but it's still a handsome show.

'Pounding Nails in the Floor With My Forehead'

Eric Bogosian is back on the street. Well, not exactly on the street. It just
seems that any guy who pushes possibly lethal paranoia with such ferocious
energy should be under cover, in a doorway or on a dark corner, some place where
controlled substances are usually found. In fact, he's at the Minetta Lane
Theater with his accomplished and funny new one-man show, "Pounding Nails in the
Floor With My Forehead." That's about as good a title as any for the kind of
rage in which he deals.

As directed by Jo Bonney on the Minetta Lane's bare stage, which has been
carefully arranged by the set designer John Arnone to simulate a bare stage with
style, Mr. Bogosian is again telling stories, sometimes as himself, sometimes as
characters who divide up into two principal types. Type One is the put-upon,
guilt- ridden, half-liberated white American middle-class male. Type Two is
everyone who preys upon Type One: subway panhandlers who coerce with evil odors;
cheerfully menacing drug pushers; smiling, soft-spoken doctors for whom no side
effect is too ghastly to endure for a couple of days or a year or two;
therapists who are ready to sell you books and videos on how to liberate the
child within, and, Mr. Bogosian's chef d'oeuvre, which closes the show, a
dangerous loon who's one step ahead of murder or permanent commitment as a ward
of the state.

They are an alternately hilarious and scary crew, blood brothers to all the
characters Mr. Bogosian introduced in his earlier one-man shows, most recently,
"Sex, Drugs, Rock-and-Roll." "Pounding Nails" is a lark, performed with uncanny
skill for the members of a middle-class audience of all ages, people who know
exactly where Mr. Bogosian is coming from. Or, as Mr. Bogosian's drug pusher has
a habit of saying as he can't stop talking, "Make a long story short."

'Ricky Jay And His 52 Assistants'

One of the oddest and richest one-man shows in town at the moment must be "Ricky
Jay and His 52 Assistants," written and performed by Ricky Jay and directed by
David Mamet. It's at the Second Stage Theater. Who is Ricky Jay? He's so "in"
that by tomorrow you'll want to bite off your tongue before admitting your
ignorance before strangers.

Ricky Jay is a master of illusions, most of which have to do with his
manipulation of his 52 assistants, which are playing cards, and with his ability
to enchant his audience with wonderful, often bizarre stories about magic,
magicians, cardsharps, freaks, sorcerers and the history of magic. He has
provided technical advice to movie makers, including Mr. Mamet, and acted in
Mamet films including "House of Games," "Things Change" and "Homicide."

He's a master's master, a celebrity's celebrity, and does tricks at the Second
Stage Theater that boggle minds. Not all of them have to do with illusion. Among
other things, he can toss a playing card with such merciless speed at 15 or 20
feet that it will pierce the hide of a watermelon bought in midwinter. Not only
that, he'll toss a second card that goes into the same slot.

Is this theater? You bet it is. You aren't asked to suspend disbelief -- you
have no choice.

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Carolee Carmello, left, and Donna Murphy in Michael John
LaChiusa's musical "Hello Again" at Lincoln Center -- An impertinent commentary
on "La Ronde" by an author still searching for a style of his own. (Joan
Marcus/Marc Bryan-Brown/"Hello Again")(pg. 5); The master illusionist in "Ricky
Jay and His 52 Assistants," directed by David Mamet. (Brigitte Lacombe/"Ricky
Jay and His 52 Assistants"); Eric Bogosian in his latest solo, "Pounding Nails
in the Floor With My Forehead." (Paula Court/"Pounding Nails in the Floor")(pg.
18)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'HEAVEN AND EARTH';
Beyond 'A War And a Syndrome'

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4; Column 6; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 145 words


To the Editor:

In reading Lan Cao's essay "The Details Are Vietnamese, the Vision, Guilty
American" [Jan. 23], I was surprised that the sole example she cited for her
grievances about the depiction of her homeland in Hollywood films, most recently
Oliver Stone's "Heaven and Earth," is "The Scent of Green Papaya." I have seen
this film and was distressed that the director, Tran Anh Hung, who is
French-Vietnamese, perpetuates the long-held stereotype of Asian women as
submissive servants.

Ms. Cao seems to have overlooked Thi Thanh Nga's widely praised "From Hollywood
to Hanoi," a very personal film describing a Vietnamese-American woman's
struggle to harmonize her two cultures. After watching this film, I felt I had
finally seen Vietnam and its citizens as a country and a people, instead of "a
war and a syndrome."

DOLLY WILLIAMS
New York

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Change is In the Air in Cuba, but the Paint is Still Peeling

BYLINE: By HOWARD W. FRENCH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 428 words

DATELINE: HAVANA


THE air of expectation is still heavy wherever one goes in Cuba these days, but
it no longer seems to be for the quick, catastrophic fall of the Government
following the Soviet Union's collapse.

Rather, one senses a pungent mixture of depression and hope that attends a more
gradual passage. As the photos on this page suggest, one world is withering in
Cuba. Another of still uncertain shape is being born. The process continues even
as the United States, for domestic political reasons, continues to shy from a
relaxation of the decades-old trade embargo on Cuba, though it recently lifted
the one on Vietnam.

The old Cuba still remains everywhere on display, barely creaking by -- in
tattered, majestic Havana, in the high-rises without working elevators, in the
ration lines snaking around whole city blocks. But more and more, the new Cuba
is revealing itself as citizens pursue a quest for betterment made possible by
American dollars, whose possession was legalized last year. This is the Cuba of
tourist development, of sleek-suited Cuban and foreign businessmen who huddle in
well-appointed hotels, and of city skies crowded by satellite dishes. The
free-market stirrings coincide with a religious resurgence ushered in by
Government liberalizations.

The old and new collide regularly. In the neighborhoods of central Havana, a
mother showing her sparsely furnished walk-up is asked why her stove burners
were left running with no food cooking. She explains with a smirk: "There's
never any gas when I need it. I may as well burn it off when they turn it on."
In the same streets on another day, a stranger is greeted by calls of
"McDonald's, McDonald's" in a Cuban accent -- a hawker selling hamburgers to all
comers with dollars.

If the Government has not yet admitted that the country is heading toward some
form of capitalism, the people seem little inclined to await an announcement.
State jobs that pay in non-convertible pesos are going unfilled as thousands
flock to the informal activities that enable them to earn dollars. Suddenly,
because of their access to foreign exchange, hotel waiters and taxi drivers earn
more than bureaucrats. Others left to fend for themselves find that they can't,
and go wanting.

With Cubans' rush to fit into an expanding private economy, there has come a new
candor. "They still say 'Socialism or death' in all their speeches," a
sugar-mill worker said of the Communist Party's cadres. "I suppose someone will
always have to work for the Government, but if I can help it, it won't be my
children."

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Workers of the World Reflect -- Two sugar-refinery workers take
a cigar break. Many Cubans are forsaking peso-paying Government jobs like theirs
to earn dollars in the newly liberalized economy. Still Exercising Socialism --
A group of elderly women limber up in central Havana before medical checkups.
Later, they serve food at a nearby hospital -- a reflection of the Government's
longstanding exhortation for all to contribute to the common social good. Field
of Dreams -- A youth catches a baseball in the ruins of a lot recently cleared
to make way for a new tourist complex -- hotels, restaurants, etc. -- that is
planned for the center of Havana. In the Shadows -- A homeless man sleeps on the
steps of a Havana bank in the early-morning hours. With more Cubans fending for
themselves and the social safety net fraying, some go without. Heading for the
Light -- Worshipers in Rincon observe the Festival of St. Lazarus. As the
Government has become more tolerant in recent years, religious worship has
enjoyed a resurgence. (Photographs by ANGEL FRANCO The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: PARK SLOPE;
PROFILE: AT THE HELM

SECTION: Section 13; Page 10; Column 5; The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 368 words



NAME -- Captain Richard J. Rosa

AGE -- 46



JOB TITLE -- As of Jan. 10, commanding officer of the 78th Precinct, which
covers Park Slope, Gowanus and Prospect Park.

DEPARTMENT SIZE -- 233 workers, including uniform and civilian workers

STATUS -- Married with children

CURRENT HOME -- Bergen Beach

YEARS ON POLICE FORCE -- 24

IMMEDIATE GOALS -- Clean the narcotics trade off Fifth Avenue between Flatbush
Avenue and 15th Street and continue added patrols at Prospect Park.

PREVIOUS ASSIGNMENT -- Providing police protection in Prospect Park after a
drama teacher was fatally shot by youths who stole his bike there. He ordered
police officers in helicopters, patrol cars and on scooters, horses and
bicycles.

COMMONLY HEARD COMPLAINT -- The New York City Police Department transferred
jurisdiction of Prospect Park from the 70th Precinct in East Flatbush to Park
Slope last month. "People were clamoring at my door asking me if I was going to
continue giving police protection to Prospect Park," Captain Rosa said. "They
were relieved to find out that I was one of the people who had been working on
it since June. Prospect Park is one of the few places in Brooklyn where people
can go to relax and it should be preserved."

CHILDHOOD HOME -- Bedford-Stuyvesant, Canarsie

ON PARK SLOPE -- "It's one of the jewels of Brooklyn."

ON BECOMING A POLICEMAN -- "I didn't grow up always wanting to be a police
officer. I just came home one day and told my family that I had signed up. They
weren't upset or anything because at that time they were more afraid of Vietnam
than the Police Department."

PAST JOBS -- Executive Officer of the 70th Precinct in East Flatbush; Executive
Officer for Community Policing at the 72 Precinct in Sunset Park, the model
precinct for community policing; Commanding Officer of Brooklyn South
Operations, where he directed officers to set up borders for parades and
demonstrations; Lieutenant in charge of setting up borders for parades citywide;
Integrity Control Lieutenant at the 77th Precinct in Bedford-Stuyvesant; desk
officer in the 62 Precinct in Bensonhurst and law instructor at the Police
Academy

NAME: Richard J. Rosa

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Efforts to Stem Violence in the Workplace

BYLINE: By KATE STONE LOMBARDI

SECTION: Section 13WC; Page 1; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1510 words


A Disgruntled employee at a Westchester-based manufacturing company began
warning his supervisor that he would come to work one day with his semiautomatic
weapon and go on a shooting spree. The man, who appeared increasingly unkempt
and whose behavior had become progressively more threatening, assured his
co-workers that his aim was good because he had served in the Vietnam War.

A manager at a different corporation in the county was being stalked by one of
her employees. The harassment began with a call to the manager's home, but the
campaign soon escalated. The employee became more menacing -- showing up at the
manager's house, following her around town and tracking her down on vacation.

HB>Incident in Mount Vernon

Both of these incidents were defused by corporate employee-assistance programs
before they could explode into violence. The two companies involved would
discuss the cases only on condition of anonymity. Several weeks ago in Mount
Vernon, however, a workplace dispute ended in tragedy.

William Santiago, 22, of Yonkers, was dismissed in late January from his job at
Steve's Market, a grocery chain with stores in Yonkers and Mount Vernon. Two
days later, he attempted to kill his former boss by spraying him with gasoline
and setting him on fire. Landers Chambers, 51, owner of the market, was severely
burned but survived the attack. Mr. Santiago, the former employee, was fatally
burned in the incident. Police said it was unclear whether his death was
accidental or a suicide.

All three incidents illustrate what is increasingly recognized as a serious
cause for concern -- violence in the workplace. Last year, a study called "Fear
and Violence in the Workplace," conducted by the Northwestern National Life
Insurance Company of Minneapolis, reported that from July 1992 to July 1993,
more than 2 million Americans were victims of physical attack on the job. An
additional 6 million workers were threatened and 16 million were harassed, the
report said.

"Violence is spilling into the workplace," said Peggy Lawless, research project
director for Northwestern. "It is pervasive. Our figures showed that chances are
one in four that a worker may be attacked, threatened or harassed on the job
next year."

The National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, based in Cincinnati,
released a study calling workplace homicide a "serious public health problem."
During the 1980's, the institute documented 7,603 homicides in American
workplaces. The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that in 1992, there were
138 murders in the workplace in the New York City area.

Figures Are Misleading

Those figures do not distinguish between murders committed in the course of
other criminal activities, like robberies and rapes of employees, and outbreaks
of violence that occur between co-workers on the job. In other words, they
include the taxi driver who is robbed and murdered on the job as well as the
laid-off employee who exacts revenge on his supervisor. Experts say that the
vast majority of violence on the job is still related to crime from the outside,
particularly robbery. But they warn that employee-to-employee violence is on the
rise.

At a recent symposium on workplace violence sponsored by the United States
Postal Service in Washington, Dr. Dennis L. Johnson, president of a management
consulting firm in Stuart, Fla., who is considered an expert on the subject,
said that violence within the workplace -- in which an attacker has a known
relationship with co-workers, supervisors or customers -- was one of the
fastest-growing crimes in the country.

While employers in Westchester have long examined ways to keep workers safe on
the job by reducing crime from the outside -- by hiring security guards, using
employee identification cards, installing closed-circuit television, maintaining
well-lighted parking lots, and the like -- they are now being forced to pay
closer attention to the type of violence that may be induced in the workplace
itself.

"We are getting called into more and more in-house situations where there is the
potential for a violent outcome," said Lise Mayers, who is based in Purchase as
area manager for Personal Performance Consultants, an employee-assistance
company that provides counseling services for more than a dozen corporate
clients. It was Personal Performance that was called in to handle the situations
involving the employee making threats to co-workers and the employee stalking
his manager.

A More Violent Society

The county government is also starting to look at the problem.

"Obviously people are concerned about the trends in violence at work and
recognizing that this is something you have to be aware of and knowledgeable
about -- even if it hasn't happened to you directly," said Pat Doyle, director
of alcohol and drug abuse services for the County Department of Community Mental
Heath. "You look at it from the preventive perspective as well as if it happens,
what is your protocol about it?"

Violence at work is pervasive enough that trade journals for employee-assistance
professionals run articles like "When Employees Make Good on Bad Intentions" and
"After the Incident . . . Intervention," with tips on treating post-traumatic
stress disorders. One advertisement offered employers a three-hour videotape on
workplace violence, which covered "traits in the violent offender, assessment
procedures, hostage considerations" and other subjects.

Experts who study workplace violence attribute its increasing prevalence to a
number of factors. First, they say it is a reflection of a more violent society,
particularly the availability of guns. According to Niosh, 75 percent of
workplace homicides are committed with firearms.

Second, the pervasiveness of drugs and alcohol contribute to the instability of
the work force. In some instances, domestic violence migrates into the office.
An abusive husband, for example, can track down his wife at work.. But most
recently, it is the stress and potential violence triggered by the wave of
corporate layoffs that has become the focus of employers.

"With downsizing throughout corporate America, there is this overwhelming sense
of insecurity and fear," said Dr. Estherann Grayzel, corporate medical director
for Nynex, which has corporate offices in Manhattan and White Plains. "When
someone feels out of control, that he no longer controls his destiny -- and
there's no support system in place -- there is the potential for trouble. It's
the loners who are most likely to explode."

Layoffs a Major Contributor

Ms. Lawless, who conducted the study for Northwestern, said that her research
revealed that layoffs were a "major contributor" to violence in the workplace.
In Westchester, as elsewhere, an entire corporate culture has developed over
making layoffs as least traumatic as possible. One caveat is never to dismiss
anyone on a Friday because they will then be alone over the weekend while trying
to absorb the blow. ("Frequently, it's not at the point when someone is fired
that you have the outburst -- it has to percolate a little," Ms. Mayers said.
"Someone is apt to explode a few days later.")

Dr. Grayzel said Nynex makes every effort to be sensitive to employees during
terminations with in-house discussion groups to teach skills for coping and
preparing for change. At International Business Machines, with corporate
headquarters in Armonk, every manager receives training on how to handle layoffs
as well as how to handle an employee who is having professional or personal
difficulties. Both I.B.M. and Nynex make extensive use of their
employee-assistance programs, which can counsel employees on how to handle
stress, drug- and alcohol-abuse problems and other mental health issues.
Termination benefits often include extended access to those services.

So ingrained are layoffs in the corporate culture now that counseling is offered
at both companies to "survivors," those who have avoided the most recent wave of
cutbacks. Scott Brooks, manager of human resources issues at I.B.M., said that
such employees often experience "survivor's guilt" because they still have a job
and former co-workers do not and that they also suffer from anxiety over being
the next to go.

Threat-Assessment Teams

Of course, the vast majority of people who are laid off do not respond with
threats or violence. But when such a situation arises, it is taken seriously.
I.B.M., which declined to identify any specific incidents, acknowledged that it
has developed threat-assessment teams to cope with potential violence.

If a threat is made, staff members from the human resources, security, medical
and legal departments convene to evaluate the problem and make a judgment on how
to intervene appropriately and when to call in law enforcement agencies.

"Instead of playing ostrich, companies have to deal with this," Ms. Mayers of
Personal Performance Consultants said. "In Westchester, especially with the
economy, we haven't seen all the fallout yet."

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Something Is Wrong With This Life

BYLINE: By Jane Smiley;  Jane Smiley is the author of seven works of fiction.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1573 words



THEY WHISPER
By Robert Olen Butler.
333 pp. New York:
Henry Holt & Company. $22.50.

I WONDER how many women of my generation vividly recall the very day in 1970
when Kate Millett's "Sexual Politics" liberated them from ever again having to
fake an interest in Henry Miller. I certainly do. Suddenly it was permitted not
to receive those dog-eared copies of sexual confessions by Miller, Norman Mailer
and that anonymous Victorian your boyfriend found so universally profound, not
to read them with nodding compliance, alienation and puzzlement, not to read
them at all.

As an adult, I've found neither the time nor the inclination to sample the genre
of male sexual adventures that Robert Olen Butler's new novel, "They Whisper,"
falls into. For me, then, the revelation is how complex and intriguing such a
novel can be and also how the very genre has changed since Kate Millett. "They
Whisper" is a shape-shifting narrative that lingers in the reader's moral
consciousness and memory.

Mr. Butler's premise is simple. The year is 1980, and the narrator, Ira
Holloway, sets out to tell the story of his marriage to Fiona Price. Both
characters are about 35 years old, and they have one son, John, aged 8. Ira
tells his story as a series of sexual memories, beginning with the first real
sense of intimacy that he ever felt with a female: "My uncle's was the last shoe
store in Wabash, Illinois, to put in an X-ray machine to check the fit, and as
soon as it was ready, I went to Karen and brought her to the shop. . . . My
heart was beating furiously as I stepped up beside her, for there were two view
ports and together we looked at the bones in her feet."

Ira focuses so relentlessly on his sexual desires that the reader is tempted to
think that he has no other life, but he makes a persuasive case that this focus
is a narrative choice, made partly because he is most deeply moved by his
relationships with women, but also because it offers him the greatest
possibility of revealing what has gone wrong in his life.

How much has gone wrong only gradually becomes clear. For many years and many
pages, Ira's faith in the ultimate innocence of his erection is unwavering. He
remembers not only every woman he has ever slept with, but also most of the
women he has ever contemplated for more than a few seconds in what he considers
to be loving detail. It is not surprising that the first thing that goes wrong
between him and Fiona is her jealousy and her insistence that he focus all of
his desires on her. He begins lying to her almost immediately.

Surely the rhetoric of sexual confession is one of the trickier literary
challenges. In the first place, who is the audience? Before Kate Millett, men
were the assumed audience and women who peeped were thought to deserve what they
got -- which was a bracing and difficult knowledge of "real manhood." Now,
though, since men and women are on a more nearly equal footing in both public
and private life, it is tempting to believe that sexual confessions can be
addressed to a more general audience. The flaw in this belief is betrayed in
Ira's continuous, almost frenzied assertion of the innocence, love and
irresistible need that drive his sexual obsession. Ira reminds me of other men
I've known whose persuasions were flattering, but whose aims were nevertheless
self-aggrandizing.

Ira rarely loses a chance to cast himself as a guiltless party. As a G.I. in the
Vietnam War, he tells us, he is required to put his skills as a translator at
the service of Army superiors who wish to exact information from a woman
suspected of belonging to the Vietcong. Ira falls in love with her, and she
seems to fall in love with him. She begins to confess, as a way to getting close
to him, but he stops her. Afterward, he realizes that his superiors have got
exactly what they want -- he has thus betrayed her, possibly unto death. But he
knows his intentions were good, and besides, his desires were irresistible.

Ira's supposed guiltlessness is magnified a hundredfold by his marriage to
Fiona. While she is pregnant, he realizes that her jealousy is actually a
symptom of more deep-seated insecurities. Once she has the child, she answers
her own need for a renewal of innocence by returning to her Roman Catholic
faith, which she insists Ira and their son, John, share with her. At the
earliest possible opportunity, Ira makes a secret pact with his son that they
will humor Fiona but reserve their deepest feelings for each other.

As Fiona grows more absolutist and desperate in her beliefs, the father and son
retreat more and more into dutiful hypocrisy, until at last Ira realizes that
the 5-year-old seems hardly to love his mother at all: "He was looking at me
over her shoulder and his face was still, unmoved now by his bad dream but
unmoved by his mother's love as well. . . . I motioned for him to put his arms
around her and he nodded a little bit and he did this." Ira is "flushed now with
regret," but the family romance grows no less brutal, only more so.

As Ira's marriage implodes, it's pretty clear to the reader that Ira's faith in
the powers of sex as a way of getting acquainted and a way of "knowing" women is
considerably misplaced. But it's not clear to Ira. As an alternative to Fiona,
he falls in love with Rebecca, a woman of greater mental stability, whom even
John seems to prefer. Ira woos Rebecca by renouncing sex with her and explaining
to her that he owes John 10 or 12 years with Fiona, during which he intends to
protect the boy from his mother's extreme religious feelings, particularly from
her belief that the only way for the boy to avoid burning in hell is to enter
the priesthood. Rebecca's response is to save herself gladly for Ira.

It isn't hard to be seduced by Ira's voice, which is also Mr. Butler's voice.
The focus on Ira's sexual history gives the author, who won the 1993 Pulitzer
Prize in fiction for his collection of short stories "A Good Scent From a
Strange Mountain," the occasion for precisely and lyrically rendering many vivid
moments, and for successfully weaving these moments into a broad and evocative
tale. He achieves something that only the best novels do -- he focuses the
reader's attention to every single detail so well that he can rely on the reader
to remember all the early details that the later details depend on. The novel
thus has a strong cumulative effect, whether or not the reader remains a
believer in Ira's version of the story.

ALL the same, "They Whisper" fully partakes of the ambiguous nature of sexual
politics in our time. I found myself horrified at Ira's fantasy of a stranger he
sees sleeping on the commuter train: "I want very much to slip inside her
without her waking, to slip inside and meet her for the first time in her
dream." (Of course, he also fantasizes that she wants this as much as he does.)
But only four pages later, Ira voices an apprehension that every thinking parent
can identify with: "I feared that all the things that would happen between the
three of us in the years ahead . . . would seem to my son to be the way love
is."

The nature of Mr. Butler's rhetorical task makes me back off from judging
whether "They Whisper" is a great book, or even a good one, but it is a
many-faceted and fascinating one. And it taught me that it has been the fate of
many men of the Vietnam generation to live the realities of imperialism, both
abroad and in the home, without conviction, but with seething self-doubt and
longing. For that reason and for that reason alone, "They Whisper" is a fully
realized and important expression of our era, one that deserves a wide, if
unavoidably ambivalent, audience.



SEARCHING FOR THE COSMIC

Robert Olen Butler believes that what critics think about his new novel, "They
Whisper," says as much about them as about the book itself.

"If the reviewer is not at least open to the kind of regard for women's bodies
that Ira has," said Mr. Butler of his main character, "he'd have to find the
book excessive or over-the-top or repetitive in ways that it is not. This is one
reason why sex is so difficult to write about."

Mr. Butler, interviewed by telephone from a Long Island stop on his book tour,
said that he discovered the voices for "They Whisper" while writing from women's
perspectives in his collection of short stories, "A Good Scent From a Strange
Mountain," which won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction last year. "It was those
women's voices that I was able to comfortably make part of me that allowed me to
really understand and write about the essence of male heterosexuality."

When the novel was done, Mr. Butler realized he had more to say on the subject;
he plans to write his next two novels about sexuality as well. "The impulse of
men to love women, to love many women, has been trivialized and politicized and
scorned for ages," he said. "The fact is, for many men that impulse is deeply
serious. It is a search for the inner mysteries of a unique personality -- and
beyond that, a search for the cosmic."

Mr. Butler, who is 49, said he writes books to figure out how he sees the world.
And he follows the advice that he gives to his creative writing students at
McNeese State University in Lake Charles, La., where he lives with his wife,
Maureen. "It's pretty simple: you write from your deepest artistic unconscious,
your deepest self, the place you dream from."
   JON ELSEN

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Lucius Clay Jr. Is Dead at 74; Led Air Defense

BYLINE: By CHARISSE JONES

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 532 words


Gen. Lucius D. Clay Jr., a four-star Air Force general who directed Air Force
combat operations in Vietnam and later headed the North American Air Defense
Command, died last Monday at Alexandria Hospital in Virginia. He was 74 and
lived in Fort Belvoir, Va.

The cause was cardiac arrest and emphysema, his family said.

In 1973, General Clay was named commander in chief of the North American Air
Defense Command and the United States Air Force Aerospace Defense Command,
making him responsible for the air defense of the North American continent. He
retired two years later, ending a 37-year career that featured some of the
highest positions and honors afforded by the military.

Lucius DuBignon Clay Jr. was born July 6, 1919, in Alexandria, Va. His
grandfather was Senator Alexander Stephens Clay of Georgia, and his father was
Gen. Lucius D. Clay Sr. After World War II, the senior General Clay, who died in
1978, commanded American forces in Europe, served as the military governor of
the American sector of occupied Germany and was a force behind the 1948-49
Berlin airlift and the rebuilding of West Germany.

West Point Graduate

Like his father, the younger General Clay attended the United States Military
Academy at West Point, graduating in 1942. He took flight training and earned
his pilot's wings that year.

In England, the young officer commanded a bomber squadron and flew combat
missions against Germany. After the war, he became the deputy commander and
deputy for base services with the European Air Depot.

He returned to the United States in February 1947, having by then risen to the
rank of lieutenant colonel, and he transferred to the Air Force, which had
recently become a separate branch of the military. He served in several
positions at the Pentagon, attended the Air War College and Air University, and
held posts that included chief of the Plans Division for the Strategic Air
Command and commander of the 12th Air Force, Tactical Air Command, in Waco, Tex.

In 1966 he was promoted to major general and in 1969 became deputy chief of
staff for Plans and Operations.

Air Strikes in Vietnam

In February 1970, he was named vice-commander in chief of the Pacific Air
Forces, assuming the command of the Seventh Air Force, which was based in South
Vietnam, and overseeing air strikes throughout mainland Southeast Asia. In
September 1970, he became a four-star general, and in August 1971, was named
commander in chief of the Pacific Air Forces.

During his career, he received more than 20 decorations and service awards,
including the Distinguished Flying Cross, the French Croix de Guerre and the
Purple Heart. He was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal five times and had
two Joint Service Commendations.

At the end of his life, General Clay lived at a military retirement community in
Fort Belvoir. His wife, Betty Rose Commander Clay, died in 1992.

He is survived by four children: Dr. Lucius D. 3d of Princeton, N.J., State
Senator Charles C. of Marietta, Ga., Carla Berry of New Rochelle, and Dr. Colin
McK. of Fort Collins, Colo.; his brother, Maj. Gen. Frank B. Clay, retired, of
Chevy Chase, Md., and six grandchildren.

NAME: Lucius D. Clay Jr.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Demeaning Travel Ban to Cuba

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 450 words


It is hard to deny the value of a free trade in ideas and information across
international frontiers. Yet for five years, successive Administrations have
resisted lifting restrictions on travel by writers and artists during trade
embargoes against countries like North Korea, Vietnam and Cuba.

Now the Clinton Administration appears to be playing the same game. It promised
to review existing bans in order to fend off a liberalizing amendment put
forward by Representative Howard Berman, a California Democrat who is chairman
of the subcommittee on international operations. But after the review, Cuba was
still excluded from any relaxation of travel bans.

This year both House and Senate have adopted amendments by Mr. Berman and
Senator John Kerry urging the President not to restrict travel whose purpose is
informational, educational, religious or humanitarian. Yet these exhortations
may not be enough to overcome Cuban-American hard-liners, who lavish campaign
contributions on key lawmakers and who oppose any relaxation on travel bans to
Cuba.

Under existing embargo laws, Americans, with few exceptions, need prior official
permission to travel to Cuba. The exceptions are U.S. officials, journalists,
U.S. citizens with close relatives in Cuba, professional researchers and
expenses-paid guests of the Castro regime.

Though Fidel Castro's near-bankrupt island has ceased to be a security threat,
this demeaning cold war restriction persists. And Secretary of State Warren
Christopher, in seeking to deflect any legislation, faces both ways
simultaneously.

The Secretary has assured Mr. Berman that "dissemination of information and
ideas is a significant element in the promotion of democracy" and a "central
tenet of our foreign policy." But he nevertheless insists the Administration
needs the authority to control information flow, lest it be used as a "pretext
for evasion of the larger financial purposes of economic embargoes." It would be
hard to improve on the elastic nullity of those phrases.

The other day, the Administration completed its review of travel bans and
decided that some liberalization was in order -- but not for Cuba. This
frustrated hopes for an executive order that would extend the list of those who
need no advance permits for Cuba. Such an order would have left in place the ban
on U.S. tourism, as mandated by Congress, but would have lowered the barrier to
teachers, writers, artists, physicians, human rights advocates and church
leaders.

The time seems overdue for this small step to freer travel. If the Clinton
Administration cannot effect this modest change by executive order, then why not
make the Berman amendment binding?

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 15, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Forgive Vietnam?

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 141 words



To the Editor:

The headline "Forget Vietnam? No. Forgive? Perhaps" (news article, Feb. 2)
represents an extreme expression of the arrogance of power.

The wealthiest, most technologically advanced, most powerful country on earth
sent hundreds of thousands of soldiers halfway around the world to impose its
will on a small, impoverished country, killing some two million men, women and
children, crippling and blinding countless more with fiendish new
"antipersonnel" weapons like napalm, and deliberately ruining immense areas of
this agricultural country's farmland by the environmental terrorism known as
"deforestation." And now the perpetrator of this holocaust has the nerve to
propose that it may "forgive" its victim?

CLIFFORD D. CONNER
Adjunct Asst. Professor of History
Lehman College
Bronx, N.Y., Feb. 4, 1994

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vermont Garrison, 78, Fighter Pilot in 3 Wars

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 191 words


Col. Vermont Garrison, an ace fighter pilot who flew missions in World War II,
the Korean War and the Vietnam War, died on Monday at his home in Mountain Home,
Idaho. He was 78.

The cause was a heart attack, said his daughter Jayne.

Colonel Garrison became a double jet ace in the Air Force in 1953, when he was
the commander of the 335th Fighter Squadron. He flew an F-86 and shot down 10
MIG-15's over North Korea.

A native of Mount Victory, Ky., he joined the Royal Air Force in World War II,
became a fighter pilot and then transferred to the United States Army Air Forces
in 1943. (The Air Force did not become a separate military branch until after
the war.) Flying P-47's and P-51's, he shot down seven German planes before
being downed by ground fire and spending a year as a prisoner of war.

Colonel Garrison also flew F-4 fighters during the Vietnam War, thus serving
combat tours in three wars. He retired in 1973.

He is survived by his wife, Maria; three daughters, Jayne Garrison of San
Francisco, Shelta Reese of New Braunfels, Tex., and Jonna Robison of Colorado
Springs, and a son, David, of Buckden, England.


LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

In 'Catch-22' Sequel, Heller Brings Back Yossarian, Milo, et al.

BYLINE: By SARAH LYALL

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 895 words


Thirty-three years after publishing "Catch-22," the novel whose title became an
enduring part of the lexicon and whose bitter satire helped change America's
view of war, Joseph Heller has written a sequel that promises to reveal what has
become of characters like Yossarian and Milo Minderbinder.

Last week, Mr. Heller delivered the completed manuscript of the book, "Closing
Time," to his publisher, Simon & Schuster; it should be on sale in the fall. The
new novel is more a follow-up to "Catch-22" than it is a conventional sequel,
Mr. Heller said in an interview. It doesn't pick up directly where "Catch-22"
left off, somewhere in the Mediterranean in the last months of World War II, but
instead is set in New York in the present.

Milo Minderbinder, the calculating mess officer and black-market manipulator,
has metamorphosed into a defense contractor and mega-mogul who has a building
named after his company at Rockefeller Center. Yossarian, the cynical bombardier
who spent World War II trying to get out of flying any more missions, has
married twice, worked as a teacher, an advertising executive and a failed
screenwriter, and finally become a business and public relations consultant.

"The book and its title come directly from my stage in my career and my stage in
life," said Mr. Heller, speaking by telephone from his house in East Hampton,
L.I. "It occurred to me that it might be a good idea to write about some of the
characters of 'Catch-22,' blend them in with a number of new characters and
infuse it with my new experiences since World War II."

Not the Usual Way

It is highly unusual for an author, after so many years, to write a sequel to a
novel that has become an undisputed classic. In the last several years, a number
of authors have attempted sequels to the works of others long dead, classics
like "Gone With the Wind," "Rebecca" and "Pride and Prejudice," often drawing
critical derision along with substantial sales.

Mr. Heller's editor, Michael Korda, said this one was another matter. "I'm
against exploitational sequels where you say, 'Let's hire somebody to write a
book saying what happens to Natasha after 'War and Peace,' " said Mr. Korda.
"But this is obviously different. And it's an autobiographical continuation.
Just the way that Yossarian was recognizably Joe Heller in 'Catch-22,' Yossarian
is recognizably Joe Heller today."

Of course, as much as Mr. Heller might deny it, the success of "Catch-22" puts
an extraordinary burden on this new book. For one thing, readers might have
their own ideas about the characters' future, or they might prefer them the way
they were before, frozen in time and place.

"There's a vast group of people of all ages for whom 'Catch-22' is one of the
most significant books of their lives, and they're going to be very interested
in how Joe has dealt with his characters," said Robert Gottlieb, the former
editor in chief of Alfred A. Knopf, who as a young editor at Simon & Schuster in
1961 edited "Catch-22."

'Catch-18' Plus 4

To Mr. Gottlieb and Mr. Korda, the book represented a generational changing of
the guard. Originally called "Catch-18," (the name was almost arbitrarily
changed, Mr. Gottlieb said, because Leon Uris was publishing a book called "Mila
18" that year and the publishers didn't want any confusion), the book separated
the older editors from the younger ones at the publisher, and, to some extent,
the older readers from the younger readers. "It put down the conventional view
of war," Mr. Korda said. "It represented for critics and reviewers and the
public a passage to a much more radical view of the Second World War, and in a
sense that presaged people's opinions about Vietnam."

Although "Catch-22" never made it onto the New York Times best-seller list, it
has sold more than 10 million copies in paperback and hard cover since it was
published, Simon & Schuster said.

The book's title also became synonymous with Mobius-strip government regulation,
bureaucracy so convoluted as to be self-contradictory. The "Catch-22" in the
book refers to the Air Corps policy of exempting combat pilots from work on
medical grounds. Pilots could be exempted if they pleaded insanity, but anyone
who wanted to avoid combat duty must have been sane: ergo, Yossarian had to keep
flying.

The End of a Generation

Mr. Heller said that "Closing Time" referred to the passing of an era, the dying
off of a whole generation of World War II veterans, as well as the end of a
century and of a millennium.

"It's a very apt title for me and for the characters in the book," said Mr.
Heller, who will be 71 in May. He said he had been in fine health since
recovering several years ago from Guillain-Barre syndrome, a neurological
disorder. (He chronicled his struggles with the illness in "No Laughing Matter,"
which he wrote with his friend Speed Vogel.) "The pressure on this novel was to
write one that would undoubtedly relate to 'Catch-22' without being a copy of
it," he said.

Mr. Korda, who has helped Mr. Heller slash and trim an 1,100-page manuscript to
a more manageable one of 600-plus pages, said that the new novel came at a
crucial point in Mr. Heller's career. "It's a book that he's been waiting to
write for many years," he said. "It's clearly a book that he couldn't have
written until he reached a certain age."


LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Joseph Heller. (Camera Press, 1985)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
SINGER TO MAKE SEWING MACHINES IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: Bloomberg Business News

SECTION: Section D; Page 3; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 108 words


The Singer Company said yesterday that it would open as many as 100 stores in
Vietnam in the next three to four years and manufacture sewing machines through
a joint venture in Ho Chi Minh City. Singer said a new plant in Ho Chi Minh City
would be capable of making 250,000 sewing machines a year when fully operational
in early 1995. Durable goods ranging from televisions to refrigerators will also
be assembled at the plant. Singer, based in Hong Kong, said it would make credit
available to Vietnamese consumers, something it has done with great success in
China. Singer shares rose 75 cents, to $35.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Commitment Goes Back to Truman

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 247 words


To the Editor:

I was startled to read in "A Passion Spent, Finally," your Feb. 4 front-page
news analysis on the end of the United States trade embargo of Vietnam, that
while the Vietnam War was Lyndon B. Johnson's war, the commitments were made in
John F. Kennedy's Administration.

Any proper description of the war's roots must reflect even deeper origins than
that.

The Truman Administration, in the light of its global containment doctrine and
following the "fall" of China in 1949 and the North Korean invasion of South
Korea in 1950, sent millions of dollars in aid to the colonialist French to
defeat Ho Chi Minh's forces in Vietnam.

The Eisenhower Administration, though declining to go to war in 1954 to save the
French in Indochina, proceeded to give massive financial and military aid to the
new Government of South Vietnam, sent military personnel to train and advise the
military of that country and created the Southeast Asia Collective Defense
Treaty (SEATO). President Eisenhower also enunciated the "domino theory," which
suggested that countries near and far would be threatened by the fall of South
Vietnam.

It was in light of and consistent with those commitments that the deeper Vietnam
commitments and policies of Kennedy and Johnson followed.

DAVID M. BARRETT
Villanova, Pa., Feb. 9, 1994
The writer, assistant professor of political science at Villanova U., is author
of "Uncertain Warriors: Lyndon Johnson and His Vietnam Advisers."

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1118 words



International A3-16

SAUDI ARABIA TO BUYU.S. PLANES
After an intense lobbying effort by President Clinton and his top economic and
foreign policy advisers, Saudi Arabia told the United States that it had decided
to replace its fleet of commercial aircraft with American planes that will cost
$6 billion and provide jobs for tens of thousands of American workers.  A1



PERILS KEEP ARAFAT STRUGGLING
Plagued by enemies, a financial crisis so severe he can no longer pay salaries
and difficulties in his talks with Israel, Yasir Arafat says he is struggling to
keep the P.L.O. from disintegrating even before it takes control of the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.  A3

Protests grow over Israelis who provide military training abroad.  A13

NEW SERBIAN CAMPAIGN IN BOSNIA
A new Serbian campaign of violence and intimidation is uprooting Muslims and
Croats in western Bosnia, according to U.N. officials and refugees who have fled
recently.  A1

DEADLINE FOR SERBS
United Nations commanders told Serbian generals they must withdraw heavy weapons
within 12.4 miles of Sarajevo or place them in five compounds guarded by United
Nations monitors by the end of the weekend or face NATO air strikes.  A8

Experts can't determine who fired a shell that killed 68 in Sarajevo.  A8

CHANNEL TUNNEL OPENING
Barring death by meteors or the outbreak of war between England and France, the
ceremony that will change Europe is set for May 6. The Channel Tunnel, proudly
billed as the first land link between Britain and the Continent since the Ice
Age, will be officially opened.  A1

POLICE AGENCY FOR EUROPE
Will criminals or travelers be the most happy in a Europe without frontiers? An
answer may come from the region's new police agency, Europol, opening for
business in the Hague and where the staff will reach 300 in two years.  A11

CONCESSIONS IN SOUTH AFRICA
In a last-ditch bid to head off defiance of South Africa's first free elections,
the African National Congress agreed to constitutional concessions aimed at
appeasing Zulu and Afrikaner nationalists.  A9

VIETNAM EXODUS CALLED OVER
The 19-year exodus of Vietnamese "boat people," most of whom were granted asylum
in the West, has now been declared over.  A7

RUSSIA ALLOWS U.S. DRUG SALES
Washington said Russia agreed to allow the sale of virtually all drugs made in
the United States and approved by the Food and Drug Administration.  A16

The Japanese are riveted by corruption trials.  A15

An earthquake in Indonesia kills 134 and injures 550.  A6

Taranto Journal: Steel mill is a symbol of southern Italy's crisis.  A4

National A18-20, D22

PLAN FOR THE HOMELESS
A draft of the Administration's plan to end homelessness says the problem is
"far larger than commonly thought" and calls for spending large, unspecified
sums on housing and tax-credit programs.  A1

CHARGING FOR POLITICAL ASYLUM
The immigration service will begin charging people seeking political asylum a
$130 fee and will delay issuing them work permits in an effort to deter new
applicants.  A1

A CASE STUDY IN TERM LIMITS
Rather than encouraging an orderly shift in the power structure, term limits in
California have set off a scramble among Assembly members to win other offices.
A18

DELAY IN ABORTION CONTROL LAW
Amid confusion about just how the law should operate, a state judge in
Harrisburg delayed the enforcement of Pennsylvania's five-year-old abortion
control law, which took effect this week.  A18

PITCH FOR HEALTH CARE PLAN
The President and Hillary Rodham Clinton began aggressive pitching their
health-care plan to older Americans, whose backing has proven more tepid than
expected.  A20

INSURANCE FIRMS INCONSISTENT
Insurance companies acted in an "arbitrary and capricious" way in deciding
whether to pay for treatment of breast cancer patients in a study of an
experimental therapy, researchers say.  A20

CLINTON'S UNHEARD MESSAGE
For two weeks, the President has taken to the road to press the themes of his
State of the Union address. But his message has been largely drowned out by
tensions in Bosnia and a trade war with Japan.  A20

GRAND JURY IN CLINTON INQUIRY
The independent counsel investigating the real estate investments of the
Clintons obtained a court order to convene a grand jury devoted solely to that
case.  D22

COMPOSITE PHOTO DRAWS FIRE
New York Newsday's composite photo of Tonya Harding and Nancy Kerrigan skating
together is drawing criticism as an example of news organizations' increasing
willingness to depart from the facts.  D22

Metro Digest B1

CUOMO DEAL ON MEDICAID
Governor Cuomo renewed his push for a complex plan to ease the large and growing
Medicaid costs for New York City and county governments. He offered to sweeten
the deal with more money from the state sooner.  A1

BOMBING PLOT IS ADMITTED
Closing arguments for the defense began in the World Trade Center bombing case
yesterday, with the lawyer for one of the four men on trial directly admitting
for the first time that there was a terror bombing plot.  A1

Business Digest D1

Home Section C1-14

High-tech safety.  C1

Perils of a nice Jewish girl.  C1

At work with Dr. Lori Cupp: Navajo, surgeon, pioneer.  C1

Goo is in the oven, Barbie is in the gym.  C2

House Proud C4

Parent & Child C12

Arts/Entertainment C17-24

Broadway pays big dividends, a study finds.  C17

Theater: "Unfinished Stories." C17

Music: A bel canto epiphany.  C17

Richard Thompson songs.  C18

Brentano String Quartet.  C20

Black Sabbath at Roseland.  C21

Dance: Feld Ballets/NY in "Doo Dah Day." C17

Books: "Scavenger Reef." C22

Television: Critic's Notebook C22

Diane Sawyer's new deal with ABC.  C22

Sports B11-19

Baseball: Wickman still in search of role.  B11

Olympics: Harding, Kerrigan meet briefly.  B11

Koss donates winnings to charity.  B11

Russians romp in hockey.  B14

Obituaries D23

Francois Cardinal Marty, former Archbishop of Paris.

Sidney Wise, college teacher who created Capitol Hill network.

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

The Tailhook fiasco.

Back from the brink again.

Help the horses.

Letters

William Safire: True indy counsel on the way.

Frank Rich: The radio funnies.

Andrew Zimbalist: Give Castro a carrot.

William Ratliff and Roger Fontaine: Conservatives, lead on Cuba.

Bridge C20

Chronicle B4

Crossword C22

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Refugees Lose Special Status

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 64 words


The era of "boat people" from Vietnam has been declared over. Those fleeing
Vietnam were once assumed to be political refugees and were generally given at
least temporary asylum automatically.

But now, with changes in the government and economy of Vietnam, United Nations
refugee officials have ruled that Vietnamese should get no special treatment.

 Article, page A7.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

White House Memo;
Events Are Outflanking the President

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 20;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 872 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 16


Last week he visited a jail. On Tuesday he traveled to a police academy in Ohio.
Today it was a jaunt to a community college in New Jersey. President Clinton has
been a busy man on the domestic front. But on the national stage, his message
has been largely drowned out.

For the past two weeks, Mr. Clinton has tried to press the themes he articulated
in his State of the Union Message last month by hitting the road. But he has
been caught at nearly every turn by the travails of a Presidency that is trying
to cope with possible military action in Bosnia and a trade war in Japan at the
same time that it is under fire from a former Justice Department official over
the crime bill, sparring with Congress over the cost of health care and trying
to clean up the last bit of mess from the Tailhook scandal.

For anyone who has watched Bill Clinton for any amount of time, the image that
emerges, a juggler trying to keep every ball in the air, should come as no
surprise. That is what Mr. Clinton did on the campaign trail in 1992, relying
heavily on his seemingly limitless energy and his ability to connect with
audiences on the road.

But for a President, the truly difficult problems simply do not fade away with
each day's news cycle. Mr. Clinton and his advisers have come to realize that
even when they juggle as fast as they can, they cannot always control the balls.


Opponents Making Hay

Those opposing Mr. Clinton in the political battles are not having the same
difficulty. As Congress prepares to take up Mr. Clinton's ambitious health care
plan, for example, critics who initially shied from its complexity have turned
up the volume of their opposition and are winning plenty of attention.

Mr. Clinton's advisers contend they are still making progress, and they say
internal polling figures show that most Americans trust the Administration to
tackle crime and improve the health care system. But even in the scientific and
mathematical world of opinion research, the Clinton White House is still relying
on its instincts to develop a public relations strategy.

By their own description, Clinton aides say their lobbying strategy includes
both insider stroking and outsider appeals. Today, for example, the audience for
his health care pitch was a group of the elderly in New Jersey. In Washington on
Thursday, the audience for the same pitch will also be the elderly, but the
setting will be a White House luncheon for the leaders of interest groups for
the elderly.

This approach satisfies warring needs within the White House. Mr. Clinton is
happier on the road, where he is treated like the celebrity he is and runs fewer
risks of being bogged down with endless meetings and nattering from members of
Congress.

But it is also supposed to allow the President to address a broader audience and
spend the time catering to the Washington insiders and the interest groups that
need his attention, as occurred when he recently joined his wife, Hillary, in
wooing -- unsuccessfully as it turned out -- members of the Business Roundtable.

Many modern Presidents have found it comforting to head out of town when things
were going badly in Washington or the pressures of the capital became too great.
Lyndon B. Johnson did it to try to escape from the nightmare of Vietnam. Richard
M. Nixon was in Michigan, campaigning for a Congressional candidate, just before
he was forced from office in the Watergate scandal.

Ronald Reagan's aides discovered the value of the network news and became
masters at programming their boss for nightly coverage. The networks caught on
during the 1988 campaign when George Bush tried to duplicate the strategy,
however, and by 1992 Mr. Bush and others had developed an alternate strategy
using local television, satellite hookups and cable.

It was on that stage that Mr. Clinton played today.

"There is a fascinating disconnect between public opinion and Washington
opinion," said Mandy Grunwald, a Clinton adviser who devised media strategy
during the campaign and is now working for the White House health care plan.

Taking Washington Along

"Is it better to spend your time talking directly to Washington or going to the
American people and making that case to resonate back in Washington?" Ms.
Grunwald asked. "I think you have to do both. But if you only debate this in
Washington, you're missing something."

It is not clear whether this approach will work with health care, which must
survive several more months of high-decibel debate before any bill that the
Administration can claim will even emerge for Congressional tests.

But Mr. Clinton's aides say they are convinced that taking the White House on
the road is the best way to solve the problem they face. Mr. Clinton derives his
strength from getting outside the White House and visiting places where he is
convinced he is talking to people who care about his message.

If it works, Mr. Clinton reaches two audiences at once: the insiders at work on
Capitol Hill and the voters beyond Washington.

"Members of Congress are looking for the things that make people in town
meetings start nodding their heads, too," said Paul Begala, a Clinton adviser.
"Nobody does that better than Bill Clinton."

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM'S EXODUS IS DECLARED OVER

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 894 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Feb. 16


The era of "boat people" from Vietnam has been declared over, and Vietnamese
fleeing their country will no longer be entitled to at least temporary asylum as
political refugees.

"A chapter is coming to an end in Indochina and Southeast Asia," Sadako Ogata,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, said earlier in the week at the
conclusion of a special meeting at the United Nations refugee organization's
Geneva headquarters.

Less than two weeks since the United States lifted its trade embargo on Vietnam,
the refugee group's steering committee ruled that from now on, Vietnamese who
flee would no longer be automatically entitled to consideration for a grant of
asylum as political refugees but would be treated as asylum-seekers from any
other nation. This means that if the country where the migrants land rules that
they are not refugees from persecution they can be sent home immediately.

"The conference stated that the international community will not and cannot pay
indefinitely to provide free food, free housing and free medical care for these
people," the High Commissioner's office announced.

Special Status for 'Boat People'

Until now, "boat people" were generally given special treatment, with a right to
at least temporary asylum until their cases could be studied.

"The Vietnamese cannot be treated any differently from other groups of
asylum-seekers," Mrs. Ogata said. She cited "generally positive trends" of
development in Vietnam.

Since 1986, when aid from the Soviet Union began dwindling, Hanoi has encouraged
the establishment of a market economy and opened its doors to participation by
foreign investors and businessmen. The lifting of the American economic embargo
on Feb. 4 is expected to bring a more rapid rise in living standards in a
country where the average citizen earns little more than $200 a year.

Only about 60,000 "boat people" remain in camps in Asia, and most of them have
been determined to be economic migrants rather than refugees. They will be
returned to Vietnam, even against their will. The High Commissioner's office
reported that last month, 2,844 Vietnamese were voluntarily repatriated. Since
the refugees are given no alternative, the use of the word "voluntary" has been
a subject of protest by humanitarian organizations.

Only 55 persons fled by small boats in 1992. The number rose to 777 last year.
They fled mainly to Japan, prompted by rumors here that Tokyo would either allow
them to work there or return them with large cash payments. Most of the refugees
of the last decade have been North Vietnamese, with no connection to the former
South Vietnamese Government or its American backers, and have had relatively
safe passages from the region of the port city of Haiphong along the Chinese
coast to Hong Kong.

Mass Exodus in 1970's

At its height, from the fall of South Vietnam in 1975 to the early 1980's, the
stream of "boat people" was a dramatic flight of hundreds of thousands of South
Vietnamese ready to throw their lives and that of their children on the mercy of
the South China Sea, mainly in fishing boats not built to withstand such rigors.
How many of them perished cannot be known.

After China invaded northern Vietnam in 1979, the Vietnamese authorities singled
out the ethnic Chinese minority for particular pressure to emigrate. They loaded
ancient freighters with thousands of ethnic Chinese, who had to pay in gold for
their forced flight, and sent them onto the sea. The arrival of such ships led
to extended disputes between Western and Southeast Asian countries before the
passengers were granted temporary asylum, usually in Malaysia.

Nearly 800,000 refugees from Vietnam reached safety, mainly in Malaysia,
Thailand and Hong Kong. Many did so after watching fellow refugees die from
hunger, thirst or exposure. Many others were killed, raped, robbed, brutally
beaten and subjected to indignities by fishermen, mainly Thai, who found preying
on refugees more rewarding than their normal occupation. Others lost their lives
when hostile security forces drove them from their shores or towed them back
onto the open sea.

Most Came to U.S.

The great majority of the "boat people" found refuge in the United States. After
flying out 135,000 Vietnamese in the final days of the Saigon Government, the
United States accepted almost no further refugees from its former allies in
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos, until press reports of their plight in 1977 caused
the Administration of President Jimmy Carter to open immigration quotas for
them. At the peak of admission to the United States, 168,000 refugees a year
entered.

Under international pressure, Vietnam agreed in 1979 to the "Orderly Departure
Program," which made possible legal emigration, usually to reunite divided
families. Nearly 500,000 Vietnamese have emigrated under the program since 1980,
more than 350,000 of them to the United States.

The American total includes two groups admitted to the United States under
agreements between the two countries. They are people who say they are the
offspring of Americans who served in South Vietnam before 1975 and Vietnamese
women, and their relatives, and former officers and officials of the Saigon
Government who were confined in rugged and isolated areas termed "re-education
camps," as well as their families.


LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Liberate Cuba. Liberate Us. Lift the Embargo, Now.;
Give Castro A Carrot

BYLINE: By Andrew Zimbalist;  Andrew Zimbalist is professor of economics at
Smith College.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 23;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 715 words

DATELINE: NORTHAMPTON, Mass.


As the Clinton Administration lifts the trade embargo against Vietnam and
considers easing travel restrictions to Cuba, Libya, Iran and Iraq, its economic
embargo against Cuba is being increasingly criticized. Yesterday, the United
Nations released a report concluding that far from encouraging political or
economic reform, the embargo is doing the opposite.

Indeed, it is widely recognized that the policy not only flagrantly violates
international law, which proscribes trade sanctions based on political ideology,
but also is counterproductive. Two months ago in Mexico, Vice President Al Gore
defended the North American Free Trade Agreement by arguing that more open trade
would promote the development of democratic institutions in Mexico. The same
argument applied in the former Soviet bloc, China and Vietnam, and would apply,
if given a chance, in Cuba.

President Clinton isn't fooling anyone when he says that the reason for Cuba's
market-oriented reforms in recent years is economic pressure from the U.S.
embargo. Cuba has been opening its economy gradually since 1989 because it has
no choice.

As a small island country with limited natural resources, it must trade to
survive, and to trade it must adapt to the rules of the world marketplace. Cuban
reforms like encouraging foreign investment and allowing small private
enterprise are gaining momentum and will continue to do so with or without the
embargo. Ending the embargo, however, would accelerate Cuba's economic
transition, as it would encourage openness and improve the chance for peaceful
change.

The alternative will either be prolonged agony for ordinary Cubans or a
political explosion accompanied by instability and potentially a large-scale
immigration problem for Florida.

It is no accident that recent reports from the Inter-American Dialogue, the Rand
Corporation, the 20th Century Fund, the Army War College and the Center for
International Policy, among others, all advocate the dismantling of the embargo.
Each report endorses a step-by-step loosening of the embargo in return for
piecemeal concessions by President Castro, leading to the grand finale, a
Nicaraguan-style presidential election.

There are many reasons why this quid pro quo gradualism is ill-conceived, but
two stand out. Once the U.S. takes its first significant step -- lifting travel
restrictions or allowing trade or investment in medical products -- Mr. Clinton
will have burned his bridges with the ultra-conservative Cuban American National
Foundation. Virtually the only reason that the embargo is still in place is the
political clout of this well-financed organization. Once Mr. Clinton alienated
it, the political constraint on a rational policy toward Cuba would disappear.

More importantly, as the Administration made its first clear move toward
normalization, foreign capital from Europe, Canada, Latin America and Asia would
pour into Cuba, as investors moved to exploit opportunities that would come with
the prospective opening of the U.S. market.

Over the last three years, Cuba has received $500 million in foreign capital
through 112 joint ventures in tourism, mining, agriculture, and manufacturing.

Yet the present value of U.S. properties nationalized from 1959 to 1961 in Cuba,
when far fewer opportunities for profitable investment existed, is more than $5
billion. With 11 million people, a disciplined and well-trained labor force and
proximity to the U.S.  market, Cuba offers additional billions of dollars in
prospective investments. A gradual lifting of the embargo would preserve the
existing advantage of overseas companies and give them a jump-start on
exploiting these new opportunities while U.S. capital continued to have its
hands tied.

It makes political and economic sense simply to lift the embargo all at once.
The U.S. can retain leverage through carrots instead of sticks: setting a higher
sugar import quota, offering economic aid or most-favored-nation trade status,
negotiating frozen Cuban assets or waiving compensation for nationalized
properties.

How can President Clinton call for democracy in Cuba when his own policy is
determined by a handful of reactionary exiles? This is Mr. Clinton's chance to
manifest clarity and courage in his foreign policy.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1008 words



International A3-11

BOSNIAN SERBS PULL BACK
The United Nations said Serbian convoys carrying heavy weapons began pulling
back from positions ringing Sarajevo after the leader of the Bosnian Serbs
promised Russia it would pull all such weapons back.  A1

A TRIUMPH FOR YELTSIN
In winning a pledge from the Bosnian Serbs to withdraw their heavy artillery,
Boris N. Yeltsin scored a badly needed diplomatic triumph, one that is likely to
work for him in Russia as well as abroad.  A10


U.S. SURPRISED BY RUSSIAN MOVE
Washington was caught by surprise by a Russian announcement that it would send
troops to Sarajevo to help the Bosnian Serbs withdraw or surrender control of
their heavy weapons, senior U.S. officials said.  A10

CROATIA APPEARS TO IGNORE U.N.
Croatia appears to have made little effort to withdraw its regular troops from
Bosnia, U.N. officials said, despite a sharp warning two weeks ago to start
pulling them out or risk economic sanctions.  A10

RUSSIA REPORTS P.O.W. PRESSURE
Moscow complained in November that State Department officials were discouraging
them from releasing documents about prisoners of war in Vietnam, according to a
classified cable made available by Administration officials angry over President
Clinton's decision to lift the Vietnam trade embargo.  A5

GREECE SQUEEZES MACEDONIA
Greece forged ahead in its fight with Macedonia, closing the former Yugoslav
republic's main trade route and drawing protests from other members of the
European Union.  A11

INDIA'S UNCERTAIN FUTURE
More than 70 percent of India's people continue to live in poverty, even as
economic and political forces change around them, mostly benefiting the middle
class. The tensions of caste, religion, corruption, and secessionism help to
keep India well behind many Asian neighbors.  A8

SEOUL RECONSIDERS MISSILES
South Korea's Foreign Minister, Han Sung Joo, said his country was reconsidering
whether it still wanted U.S. Patriot missiles now that tensions with North Korea
have abated over nuclear inspections.  A3

MEXICAN PEACE TALKS SET
The Mexican Government's peace negotiator said that talks to formally end the
Indian uprising in the state of Chiapas would begin on Monday in a city that he
did not identify.  A6

A delegation of Christians says it was detained in China.  A3

Berlin Journal: Gardens encroach on a city's prime real estate.  A4

National A12-20

LIMITED ACCESS TO RU-486
American women will be able to get the French abortion pill, RU-486, but only if
they are willing to travel to England and pay $500 to terminate their pregnancy.
A1

ABANDONING THE CITY OF ANGELS
After last month's earthquake, some Los Angeles residents are leaving to find
things that have eluded them -- an affordable house, security, the easy life.
A1

HERE COMES ANOTHER BROTHER
To the dismay of White House officials, Hugh Rodham, the First Lady's brother,
is trying to win the Democratic nomination in Florida's Senate race.  A12

SPARKS OVER CITRUS SPOKESMAN
Advocacy groups are fuming about the conservative talk show host Rush Limbaugh
being paid $1 million to hawk Florida orange juice on his radio program.  A12

RACE-BASED SCHOLARSHIPS
The Clinton Administration said college scholarships could be awarded on the
basis of race to help "remedy past discrimination" and promote diversity on
campuses.  A13

CLINTON TOUGHENS HEALTH PITCH
Toughening his appeal to older Americans, the President said critics of his
health care plan and supporters of a balanced-budget amendment were trying to
rob Medicare to pay for their goals.  A14

HEALTH ALLIANCES IN TROUBLE
The structure at the heart of the Clinton health plan, the regional
insurance-purchasing pool known as a health alliance, is in trouble.  A14

NEW AIR NAVIGATION SYSTEM
The F.A.A. is allowing commercial airlines to use a satellite navigation system
for landings in bad weather at more than 1,000 small American airports.  A16

BUSH OFFICIAL PLEADS GUILTY
The Treasurer in the Bush Administration pleaded guilty to conspiracy to make
false statements about her finances and to obstruction of a Federal grand jury.
A17

ROSE LAW FIRM IS CLEARED
Federal bank regulators cleared Hillary Rodham Clinton's former firm of any
conflict of interest in its work involving a failed Arkansas savings and loan.
A17

Law Page B9

For some who once sang rock, now there's just the blues.

At the Bar: A real-life episode of "Regarding Henry."

Metro Digest B1

$450 MILLION FRAUD CASE
Steven Hoffenberg, the Manhattan bill collector whose financial empire collapsed
a year ago, was charged with securities fraud and obstruction of justice. The
Federal complaint said he defrauded thousands of investors of $450 million.  A1

ECONOMY'S CHANGING SHAPE
New York's regional economy was once the most diverse in the United States. Now
the region is becoming something new under the sun. The manufacturing that
remains is heavily devoted to the local market, while services like finance,
law, communications, popular culture and medicine are increasingly in demand
throughout the global economy.  A1

BANK'S $15 MILLION MISTAKE
In one of the biggest computer errors in banking history, Chemical Bank
mistakenly deducted about $15 million from more than 100,000 customers' accounts
on Tuesday night, causing panic and consternation among its customers around the
New York area.  A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-28, D18

Sports B10-18

Obituaries D17

Randy Shilts, writer.
J. Vernon Luck Sr., surgeon.

Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27

Editorials

Mr. Cuomo's Medicaid cure.
Truth in crime packaging.
Incentives can work for Iraq, too.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Clinton and drugs.
Anthony Lewis: Political crime.
Misha Glenny: Bosnian quicksand.
Jimmy Carter: Bring back the wise men.

Chronicle B8

Crossword C27

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEW DOUBTS CAST ON P.O.W. EFFORT

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 879 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 17


Russian officials reportedly complained last November that State Department
officials were discouraging them from releasing documents about prisoners of war
in Vietnam. The report came in a classified cable made available today by
Administration officials angry over President Clinton's decision to lift the
trade embargo against Vietnam.

According to the cable, the Russians said they were receiving a mixed message
from Washington: while many American officials were pressing them to turn over
as many documents as possible about the missing, others were saying that
releasing such documents would hurt relations.

Senior State Department officials vigorously denied today that Moscow had been
told not to disclose documents and said they had repeatedly pressed the Russians
to produce whatever documents they had.

Clinton's Policy

President Clinton said last year that he wanted the fullest possible accounting
of the fate of more than 2,200 Americans missing in Indochina.

The officials who provided the classified cable expressed concern that it
indicated that some State Department officials were flouting the President's
policy in order to avoid disclosures from Soviet archives that could have
delayed the lifting of the embargo.

The Administration's movement toward lifting the embargo stalled last spring
with the discovery of a 1972 document, reportedly from Soviet archives, that
suggested that Vietnam had held more prisoners than it had admitted.

President Clinton lifted the trade embargo on Feb. 3, saying that Hanoi had
cooperated in providing a full accounting of the missing Americans.

Discrepancy in Numbers

The cable supplied today, which was dated Nov. 12, quoted a Russian official as
saying that Foreign Ministry officials had been told by unnamed State Department
officials that they "were not pleased with" the release of the 1972 document,
which was said to be a translation of a Vietnamese document stating that Hanoi
held 1,205 American prisoners of war.

The figure of 1,205 P.O.W.'s in that document, which was released in April, was
far greater than the 591 prisoners that Vietnam released in 1973. The document
included many factual inconsistencies, and the Pentagon concluded last month
that it exaggerated the number of P.O.W.'s.

The Nov. 12 cable quoted the Russian official, Lieut. Col. Sergei N. Osipov, a
liaison with American M.I.A. investigators in Moscow, as saying that the
ministry had heard that State Department officials "were discouraging further
releases of such documents."

The cable was sent by the American head of the Moscow office of an official
Russian-American group that was seeking information about Americans missing from
the Vietnam and Korean wars. The cable was sent under the name of Thomas R.
Pickering, the United States Ambassador.

Mr. Pickering said today that he could not understand how the Russians had
gotten a mixed message, because Washington had repeatedly asked for all relevant
information.

Accusation of Collusion

Several Americans who used to work with the M.I.A. investigators in Moscow said
the cable showed that some State Department officials were so eager to have the
embargo lifted that they urged Moscow not to release documents that put Vietnam
in a bad light.

Col. William LeGro, a retired former special assistant to the director of the
investigation, said: "Some officials were trying to convince the President that
the Vietnamese had cooperated 100 percent in resolving the M.I.A. issue and that
the embargo should be lifted. Therefore they said, 'We don't want any more of
this incriminating evidence to become public.' "

But the cable also suggested that some Russian officials "were confusing stated
policy with the reaction by individual officials to the untimely and inopportune
release of documents and information to the press."

And Winston Lord, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia, angrily denied
today that any State Department officials discouraged Moscow from releasing
documents.

'Contrary to U.S. Policy'

"No one in the State Department would say, 'We don't want documents,' " said Mr.
Lord. "The reported position by the Russians of what some State Deparment people
said is directly contrary to official United States policy. Anyone who would
have said that would be fired."

A person who attended a meeting in Moscow in October between Mr. Lord and Deputy
Foreign Minister Georgi F. Kunadze said verbatim notes showed that Mr. Lord had
urged the Russians to cooperate further.

State Department officials said a cable was sent to Moscow on Nov. 13
emphasizing that Washington wanted all relevant documents and protesting reports
that Russia had agreed not to release files without consulting Hanoi.

One American official familiar with the contents of the cable said Colonel
Osipov had been reluctant to release Vietnam-related documents and may have
concocted the story that State Department officials had urged Moscow not to do
so. Under this interpretation, Colonel Osipov was trying to ward off pressure to
release documents that could embarrass Moscow. Some American intelligence
officials say Colonel Osipov is a former K.G.B. agent.

Colonel Osipov did not return two calls to his office in Moscow.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Randy Shilts, Author, Dies at 42; One of First to Write About AIDS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GRIMES

SECTION: Section D; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 751 words


Randy Shilts, the author of best-selling books on AIDS and gay issues and a
newspaper reporter for The San Francisco Chronicle, died yesterday at his home
in Guerneville, Calif. He was 42 and also had a home in San Francisco.

The cause was AIDS, said Linda Alband, his assistant.

Mr. Shilts was one of the first journalists to recognize AIDS as an important
national issue. In the early 1980's he persuaded The Chronicle to let him report
on AIDS full time. His work resulted in the widely acclaimed 1987 book "And the
Band Played On: Politics, People and the AIDS Epidemic." The book, a history of
the first five years of the epidemic, charged the Reagan Administration, the
medical establishment and even some gay organizations with indifference to the
disease.

"Any good reporter could have done this story," Mr. Shilts said in a newspaper
interview at the time, "but I think the reason I did it, and no one else did, is
because I am gay. It was happening to people I cared about and loved."

Mr. Shilts was born in Davenport, Iowa, and grew up in Aurora, Ill., near
Chicago, in a politically conservative and religious household. As a teen-ager,
he founded a local chapter of the Young Americans for Freedom.

His Coming Out

While attending the University of Oregon in Eugene, where he studied journalism
and was managing editor of the student newspaper, he openly declared his
homosexuality. He became head of the Eugene Gay People's Alliance.

After receiving his bachelor's degree in 1975, he worked briefly as the
Northwest correspondent for The Advocate, a gay publication, before moving to
San Francisco, where for the next three years he was a Advocate staff writer.

In 1977, while still working for The Advocate, he began a three-year stint
reporting for television station KQED in San Francisco. From 1979 to 1980 he
also reported on city politics and gay issues for KTVU television in Oakland.

In 1982 he was hired as a reporter for The Chronicle, which made him a national
correspondent in 1988.

In 1982, Mr. Shilts published "The Mayor of Castro Street: The Life and Times of
Harvey Milk." The book chronicled the life and career of Milk, a member of the
San Francisco Board of Supervisors and a champion of gay rights. He was
assassinated in 1978, along with the city's mayor, George Moscone, by a former
supervisor opposed to a pending rights bill for homosexuals.

Mr. Shilts did not always please all homosexuals with his reporting. While on
the AIDS beat in the early 80's, he discussed the dangers of San Francisco's
bathhouses and anonymous sex in the spread of AIDS. And he later attacked the
practice of outing, or revealing the homosexuality of public figures, unless the
targets promoted anti-gay policies. Both positions were opposed by some
homosexuals.

'An AIDS Celebrity'

Although Mr. Shilts said that he did not expect "And the Band Played On," which
was published by St. Martin's Press, to be a commercial success, the book took
off, remaining five weeks on the New York Times best-seller list, and turned him
into what he called "an AIDS celebrity." The book was nominated for a National
Book Award and was made into an HBO movie in 1993 that attracted the
participation of stars like Richard Gere, Matthew Modine and Anjelica Huston.

Mr. Shilts followed up with "Conduct Unbecoming: Lesbians and Gays in the U.S.
Military, Vietnam to the Persian Gulf" (1993, St. Martin's Press), which he said
he intended to be "my definitive book on homophobia." Based on interviews with
military personnel and Government records obtained through the Freedom of
Information Act, the book traced the history of persecution of homosexuals in
the military. It was on the best-seller list six weeks.

In 1987, on the day he turned in the manuscript for "And the Band Played On,"
Mr. Shilts found out that he had tested positive for HIV, the virus that causes
AIDS. In August 1992, he developed full-blown AIDS. Later that year his left
lung collapsed. He completed the final pages of "Conduct Unbecoming" in a
hospital bed.

For fear of letting his personal situation influence his reporting, he kept his
illness secret until February 1993. In a magazine interview, he said, "Every gay
writer who tests positive ends up being an AIDS activist. I wanted to keep on
being a reporter."

He is survived by his companion, Barry Barbieri, and four brothers: Gary, of
Aurora, Ill; Reed, of Billerica, Mass.; David, of Michigan, and Dennis, who
teaches in Poland.

NAME: Randy Shilts

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Randy Shilts at his home in San Francisco with his dog, Dashiel.
(Terrence McCarthy, 1993)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Stewart's Wife Dies

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 17; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 79 words

DATELINE: BEVERLY HILLS, Calif., Feb. 17


Gloria Hatrick Stewart, the actor Jimmy Stewart's wife of 45 years, died on
Wednesday at her home. She was 75.

The cause was cancer, said her son Michael McLean.

The Stewarts were married in 1949. Mrs. Stewart had another son from a previous
marriage, Lieut. Ronald W. McLean, who was killed at the age 24 of in the
Vietnam War.

In addition to her son Michael, she is survived by her husband and the couple's
twin daughters, Judy Merrill and Kelly Harcourt.


LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Art;
Joint Show: May Stevens and Rudolf Baranik

BYLINE: By HOLLAND COTTER

SECTION: Section C; Page 27; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 998 words


May Stevens and Rudolf Baranik have been married for more than 40 years. During
that time each has produced a significant body of paintings and has been
involved in political activism. Ms. Stevens, who is also a poet, was a founder
of the influential feminist journal Heresies. Mr. Baranik is known for his
theoretical writing and for work he produced in response to the Vietnam War.

Their joint show at Exit Art, titled "Existential-Political," has more than mere
anecdotal logic, though. Seen together, their paintings ask -- and answer with
only partial success -- some of the famously tough-nut questions about political
art itself. Do strong convictions necessarily make strong art? Can politics and
painterly abstraction coexist?

Ms. Stevens's work is a kind of emblematic narrative painting on a large scale
in a brushy expressionist style. Among its recurrent themes is the life of the
Marxist revolutionary and pacifist Rosa Luxemburg, who was slain by the German
military in 1919. In one of several images that Ms. Stevens adapted from
archival photographs, Luxemburg stands at the center of a group portrait taken
at the Second International Congress for World Socialism in 1904. The only
woman, she radiates a nimbuslike white glow.

Luxemburg's face in this painting is almost featureless, as if it had been left
unfinished, and her presence elsewhere is even less concrete. She is present
only by implication, for example, in "The Murderers," a depiction of her
assassins, and in "The Canal," a depiction of the gray water into which her body
was thrown. And in a view of her funeral cortege, she appears in the form of her
own messianic-sounding words, handwritten in German over and over again on the
painting's dark sky: "I was, I am, I will be."

It is a stirring story. Luxemburg was an exceptional person: fiery, gentle,
reckless, brave. But little of her spirit comes across in Ms. Stevens's
paintings. With their drab palette and indifferently executed images, they look
self-consciously workaday, as if any other approach would compromise their
ideologic seriousnesses. (The use of gold ink to write feminist texts in "Sea of
Words," from 1991, is the only concession to formal verve.) And in restating the
bare bones of a familiar hagiography, they offer less a visual experience than a
literary one. One respects Ms. Stevens's admiration of Luxemburg, but wishes she
had done more to bring her to life.

Mr. Baranik's work also elicits admiration and reservations, but for different
reasons. If Ms. Stevens's painting is too stinting and didactic, Mr. Baranik's
is the opposite. Like the Abstract Expressionists whom he admires, he believes
that art should address themes of mortality and loss -- realities that are
universal and therefore implicitly political -- but should do so obliquely,
through abstraction rather than overt polemic. His self-description as a
"formalist socialist" best describes the slippery terrain he has staked out for
himself.

His 11 paintings in the show offer insights into how he has traversed it. The
two earliest pieces are from a series done in the early 70's titled "Napalm
Elegies." They are based on a single horrific image: a news photograph of a
Vietnamese child whose features had been all but melted away by the corrosive
wartime chemical. In one painting the face is discernible; in another it is
softly mottled like the face of the moon seen through a telescope. In both
images, the real-life reference is unmistakable, and the question of whether the
work is in the strictest sense abstract remains unresolved.

In paintings from the 80's, topical images drop away in favor of a more personal
content, and formal elements -- variations in surface texture, carefully
calibrated tonal gradations of white and black -- assume a greater role. The
recurrent image is a horizontal grayish wall-like band of what looks like piled
skulls, vertebrae or stones set against a black-to-charcoal ground. Mr.
Baranick's love of the moody, work-intensive painting of artists like Edvard
Munch and Albert Pinkham Ryder is evident, especially in the turbulently
brushed, romantic figure of a huge horse in "Sleep Well" (1986).

This image was inspired by photographs taken by the Baraniks' son, Steven, who
died in 1981, and several other of Mr. Baranik's recent works are dedicated to
his memory. One, titled "These Are the Pearls That Were His Eyes" (1985), looks
like an underwater landscape of smoothly modeled rocks and coral, with strings
of white and bottle-green lights shining out from the darkness. It is a mournful
image and the most beautiful painting in the show. Even if one is unaware of its
memorial context, its sense of tenderness and mystery come through.

The psychological warmth that makes this work stand out is missing elsewhere.
Other paintings from the 80's, while imposing, tend to look expressive without
feeling especially personal, and are formally complex almost to a fault. Their
wealth of painterly inflection slows down the rate at which one takes them in --
this is a good thing -- but it also sets up a distracting play of virtuosic
moves that undermines the monumental gravity Mr. Baranik seems to be after. The
results end up looking generic rather than universal, modernist business as
usual.

If Ms. Stevens's paintings are too specifically political, Mr. Baranik's
"existential" approach is often not specific enough. One has only to look at the
work of another couple long engaged in political art, Leon Golub and Nancy
Spero, to see how some really daring solutions can be drawn from this rich but
contested category. At the same time, as this show indicates, Mr. Baranik and
Ms. Stevens have done much to push the debate along. One can ask more of an
artist, but that's already a worthy accomplishment.

"Existential-Political: The Paintings of Rudolf Baranick and May Stevens"
remains at Exit Art/The First World, 548 Broadway (near Spring Street), in SoHo
through Feb. 26.


LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A detail of "Sleep Well," an oil painting by Rudolf Baranik that
is part of "Existential-Political," a joint exhibition at Exit Art in SoHo.
(Exit Art)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 845 words



International   2-5

SERB COOPERATION REPORTED
United Nations officials said that the Bosnia Serbs had agreed to withdraw their
heavy arms from the area around Sarajevo by Saturday night and to allow
peacekeeping patrols access to check their compliance.  1

A TRIUMPH FOR RUSSIA
After getting a promise from the Bosnia Serbs to withdraw from the Sarajevo
area, the Russians were suggesting that it was Washington's turn -- to persuade
the Muslims to reach a negotiated peace.  4

NEW ROLES IN BOSNIA
News analysis: Even if NATO does not bomb the Serbs, the allies have a new level
of involvement in Bosnian and the question is whether they will remain involved
long enough to bring the war to an end.  4

In Belgrade, cheers for Russia's intervention in Bosnia.  4

A NEW LOOK AT UNESCO
The State Department has recommended that the United States rejoin the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which was abandoned
10 years ago by the Reagan Administration.  5

HOLDING ON TO JERUSALEM
The Israeli Government wants to build up a Jewish presence around Jerusalem to
strengthen its hold on the city even as they negotiate about self-rule
elsewhere.  3

A step toward freedom for the Burmese dissident leader.  5

Vietnam will discuss human rights with the United States.  5

Moscow Journal: Parliament's fight for a home.  2

National   6-9

I.R.S. LANDS ON FREE PARKING
The Internal Revenue Service has figured out how its top officials can each
avoid paying hundreds of dollars in extra taxes this year to cover the value of
parking free in the agency's garage.  1

U.S. MEDIATES GAY HARASSMENT
Citing a threat of violence, Attorney General Janet Reno ordered Federal civil
rights meditators into their first case involving harassment based on sexual
orientation.  1

PHILADELPHIA VOTE OVERTURNED
Citing "a massive scheme" by a Democratic candidate to steal a Pennsylvania
State Senate election, a Federal judge invalidated the vote and ordered the seat
filled by the Republican opponent.  1

INTEREST RATES SURGE
Long-term interest rates shot sharply higher for the second day in a row,
putting the Federal Reserve in an uncomfortable position as the markets become
more nervous about the prospects for inflation.  1

THE BORDER'S SYMBOL OF FAILURE
A 14-mile stretch along the Mexican border near San Diego has become the symbol
of a losing battle against illegal immigration and the focus of new measures to
try to control it.  6

HEALTH PLAN UNDER SCRUTINY
As Oregon begins an ambitious universal health plan, serious questions are being
raised about the state's ability to pay for the new services and its political
will.  6

AT ODDS OVER BUDGET AMENDMENT
White House policymakers are at odds over whether the Administration is
undermining its deficit-cutting credentials by criticizing the balanced-budget
amendment.  7

CONSENSUS SOUGHT ON GRAZING
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt has been campaigning in the West for a plan
that would give ranchers and environmentalists more influence over grazing on
public land.  8

BRAIN-DEAD GIRL RELEASED
A 13-year-old Florida girl who doctors say is brain dead will be released into
the custody of her parents, hospital officials said.  9

A look at changes in the teachings of the Catholic Church.  9

Metro Digest   21

NEW LOOK AT HOSPITAL
The Giuliani administration and state officials say they plan a thorough
redesign of the reconstruction of Kings County Hospital Center to produce a
smaller institution.  1
Sports 27-34
JANSEN FINALLY WINS
In his last Olympic race, and after a six-year odyssey that included the death
of his sister and almost too many falls and slips to count, Dan Jansen of the
United States won a gold medal in the 1,000 meters.  1
Baseball: Perez searches for forkball.  27
Schourek doesn't expect handouts.  34
Basketball: Bulls a test for Knicks.  29
Nets beat Bullets.  29
Columns: Vecsey on Dan Jansen.  27
Rhoden on John Chaney.  27
On Baseball 34
Golf: Clements outdoes himself.  34
Hockey: Rangers stop Senators.  29
Olympics: A biathlon first for Canadian.  27
Soccer: U.S. ties Bolivia.  34
Sports People 28
Obituaries 26
Aleksandr B. Chakovsky; enforcer of Soviet line on writers.
Alonzo (Jake) Gaither, football coach at Florida A & M.
Business Digest 37
Arts/Entertainment 11-15
Fate plays trick on Ricky Jay.  11
Leonard Slatkin to leave St. Louis Symphony.  12
Film: "On Deadly Ground." 11
Music: Gergiyev's Mussorgsky.  11
Jessye Norman and Boston.  12
Blind Melon.  12
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19
Editorials
Russia's Sarajevo gambit.
Toll booths for the persecuted.
Federal election omission.
Born female -- and fettered.
Letters
Anna Quindlen: Dance of death.
Michael Shapiro: North Korea's master hand.
David Gurevich: The mob -- today's K.G.B.
Josiah Bunting 3d: Code of dishonor.
Bridge 15
Chronicle 20
Crossword 13

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS;
War and Endurance

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 904 words

DATELINE: BONN, Feb. 18


Even if NATO does not drop a single bomb around Sarajevo next week, diplomats
say the allies, especially the United States, have now become militarily
involved in the Bosnian conflict in a way they have never been before.

The question is whether they are prepared to stick it out long enough to devise
a strategy that will end not just the shelling of Sarajevo but the war itself.

If the Bosnian Serbs withdraw their tanks, artillery pieces, mortars and rocket
launchers by Sunday night, as they promised Russian intermediaries they would in
the face of NATO's demand that they comply or face bombing Monday morning, the
allies can claim success.

Could War Have Been Avoided?

But if that happens, NATO's critics will argue that the alliance could have
prevented the siege, and the entire war, in the first place if it had only acted
earlier.

Though NATO is prepared to bomb any heavy weapons not put under United Nations
control within a radius of 12.4 miles of the center of Sarajevo after the
deadline expires at 1 A.M. local time Monday, the United Nations authorities in
Zagreb said today that they expected the Serbs to comply by Saturday night.

A senior NATO diplomat said bombs could start falling even if only a few Serbian
weapons were not withdrawn by Sunday night. "The blood lust is up in Washington"
he said.

The NATO diplomat also cautioned that "even if the guns are taken out of the
zone, it is only a tactical withdrawal that in no way changes the Serbs'
strategic goal of a united Serbia."

'What Do We Do Next?'

"We can't allow the guns to come back in," this diplomat said, "but what do we
do next? The fundamental problem is still the lack of a clearly defined
strategic goal."

In this view, even if Sarajevo never again suffers the kind of devastating
attack that killed 68 people in its main marketplace on Feb. 5 and finally
spurred the allies into making a firm threat, the war will go on in Bihac, in
Tuzla and elsewhere in Bosnia and Herzegovina unless the allies finally come up
with a strategy to end it.

To many people in Europe, it has been clear ever since the failure two summers
ago of the first European Community efforts to negotiate a cease-fire that no
political or diplomatic strategy to end the war could succeed without the full
participation of the United States.

The European allies would like to see Americans more heavily involved in the
United Nations peacekeeping force in Bosnia as part of a combined political and
diplomatic strategy to bring pressure on the Serbs, the Croats and the Muslims
there to stop the fighting.

The British View

Defense Secretary Malcolm Rifkind of Britain, defending a British decision to
send only 60 extra peacekeeping troops to Bosnia in answer to a request from the
United Nations for an additional 3,000 to police the withdrawal of heavy
weapons, said pointedly today: "Britain at the moment has in Bosnia over 2,500
men. Russia is to have 400. The United States has 15."

France, he could have added, has more than 6,000.

Washington has sent a representative, Charles Redman, to play an active role in
the peace talks to convince the warring parties that they have more to gain from
a negotiated settlement than from continuing to fight.

Negotiations to end a war do not take place in a vacuum. To produce a
settlement, negotiations have to reflect realities on the battlefield, and
NATO's willingness to bomb has become one of those factors.

"What we have is a progressive stepping up to the mark by NATO," one allied
diplomat in Brussels said, "and this is going to have a salutary impact on the
negotiations. I think this demonstrates that NATO is in a position to play a
constructive role in the resolution of the conflict."

'Duration Is the Key'

But that will be true only as long as NATO remains willing to be directly
engaged. A short-term tactical success achieved with Russia's help in Sarajevo
could become an obstacle to long-term strategic success, by encouraging the
illusion that allied engagement need not last very long or cost much.

As one allied official with memories of French and American involvement in
Vietnam put it, "Duration is the key to this situation."

Sarajevo could be only the beginning, not the end of NATO involvement in the war
in the Balkans, depending on the answers to many questions:

If the Serbs withdraw their weapons and use them elsewhere, is NATO going to
threaten to bomb them there? If the Serbs bring back the weapons and fire at
Sarajevo again, is NATO going to stop them? If the Bosnian Muslims try to use
the withdrawal to seize back captured territory around Sarajevo, will the United
Nations or NATO stop them? If NATO is willing to use air power to bring about a
cease-fire in Sarajevo, why not anywhere else?

And if the Serbs do not withdraw, the bombs start falling and the Serbs
retaliate against the United Nations peacekeeping forces on the ground, how long
is NATO willing to keep flying to protect them?

NATO's credible but limited threat to use force for the first time in its
45-year history, combined with the constructive assistance of the Russians, may
have deterred further atrocities in Sarajevo.

But they continue elsewhere in Bosnia, and they may not stop until the alliance
develops a long-term military strategy to back diplomatic efforts to end this
war and deter others in the ethnic caldrons of Eastern Europe.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi to Discuss Expanding Relations With U.S.

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 806 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Feb. 18


Vietnam says it will open discussions this month with the United States on human
rights and other issues with the goal of broadening their relationship. But an
official warned that Hanoi will not accept interference in its internal affairs.

Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai, the chief architect of Vietnam's campaign for
full diplomatic relations with Washington, said in an interview on Wednesday
that an American negotiating team was expected in Hanoi by the end of the month
to begin what he called "technical" discussions on issues like the status of
official property seized by each country at the time of the Communist victory in
1975. Among those assets are the former United States Embassy in Saigon, now
called Ho Chi Minh City, and South Vietnamese bank accounts in the United
States.

The talks will also focus on the establishment of official liaison offices here
and in Washington. In lifting the American trade embargo against Vietnam on Feb.
3, President Clinton said he had decided to open a liaison office in Hanoi "to
provide services for Americans there and help us to pursue a human rights
dialogue with the Vietnamese Government."

An Embassy in All But Name

The Deputy Foreign Minister, whose name is often mentioned as a possible first
Ambassador to Washington, made clear that Vietnam did not share that narrow
concept of the liaison office.

Mr. Mai made clear that Vietnam wants the liaison offices to be embassies in all
but name. "The liaison office is an American idea," he said. "We think it would
be better if we could go faster. But if the United States wants to go step by
step, we have to accept that.

"Full diplomatic relations would be better," he said. "There is no obstacle on
the Vietnamese side. The problem is with United States domestic politics. We
hope it will take a shorter time than the lifting of the embargo."

"When talking of human rights, Vietnam and other developing countries feel the
United States considers itself as a model for the world, imposing its way of
living and thinking on other nations," Mr. Mai said, speaking in English. "They
are always reminding the Vietnamese people they are dealing with a superior
power. Sometimes we feel the United States doesn't treat us on an equal
footing."

No Political Conditions

At a briefing on Thursday, the Foreign Ministry's spokeswoman, Ho The Lan,
emphasized that "equality, mutual respect and noninterference in internal
affairs" must govern the human rights discussions. She said both countries had
agreed that neither side should set political conditions for normalization.

Mrs. Lan repeated concerns expressed by Mr. Mai at a news conference after the
lifting of the American trade embargo that the human rights issue might hinder
progress. Mrs. Lan added: "Vietnam and the United States understand that on the
road to normalization there may or may not be obstacles. It depends on the good
will of both sides."

Though Washington acknowledges that repression has eased since aid from Moscow
was cut off three years ago by the former Soviet Union, the United States still
criticizes Vietnam's adherence to a one-party Communist system, its jailing of
political opponents and its restrictions on activities of Buddhist and Roman
Catholic clerics and on press freedom. Officials here say that they consider
such criticism interference in their country's domestic affairs.

Mr. Mai said that Le Bang, Vietnam's representative at the United Nations, would
also meet in New York late this month with State Department officials to pave
the way for a future "dialogue" on human rights requested by the United States.

Missing Still an Issue

In lifting the embargo against Vietnam, Mr. Clinton emphasized Hanoi's
cooperation with efforts to account for Americans who are missing from the
Vietnam War, a sensitive issue that is also likely to complicate steps toward
normalizing relations.

Mr. Mai said Vietnam was pleased that the United States Treasury Department had
raised Vietnam to a category of nations with which Americans can conduct any
financial transactions short of military sales. "But I think that's enough for
us," he said.

But the Deputy Foreign Minister said he regretted that the United States had not
granted Vietnam most-favored-nation trading status, the most beneficial category
of tariffs. He said high tariffs would make Vietnamese goods less competitive in
the American market.

He expressed optimism nonetheless about business opportunities and, above all,
tourism. In one or two years, Americans are likely to replace the French as the
most frequent travelers to Vietnam, he predicted, reasoning that thousands of
Americans who served in the war would like to visit.

As a result, Mr. Mai said, "More Americans will see that Vietnam is a country, a
people, not only a war."

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 20, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 859 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     1   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just
           before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret
           to an 11-year-old boy.

 2     2   NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A
           servant hopes to win an heiress's heart in Victorian-era
           Minnesota.

 3     4   RUBY, by V.C. Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) A young woman seeks
           to discover the dreadful secrets of her family's past in
           New Orleans.

 4     5   WINTER MOON, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The
           policeman Jack McGarvey on the trail of a serial killer in
           Los Angeles.

 5     7   SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied
           Poland.

 6     4   PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of
           murders in a small California town vexes a temporary
           district attorney.

 7     8   DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine,
           $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent
           novelist.

 8    53   THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A
           law student investigates the murder of two Supreme Court
           Justices.

 9     1   JEDI SEARCH, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.)
           The first volume of "The Jedi Academy Trilogy," a "Star
           Wars" saga.

 10    3   TERMINAL, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $5.99.) A medical
           researcher's pursuit of a treatment for cancer and a
           nurse's pursuit of him.

 11    4   DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) An
           ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a
           series of mysterious deaths.

 12    3   SUDDENLY, by Barbara Delinsky. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.)
           A pediatrician finds romance after the death of her dear
           friend.

 13    4   THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.)
           The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.

 14   97   A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.)
           Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged
           with murder.

 15    2   THE CHILDREN OF MEN, by P.D. James. (Warner, $6.50.) In
           2021, when Britain is a police state, the human race
           approaches its end.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction


 1     6   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           Everyday spirituality.

 2    537  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 3    53   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) A memoir.

 4     6   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 5    23   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket,
           $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.

 6    123  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France.

 7*    3   WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ... AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and
           Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Vietnam.

 8*   38   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.)
           Menopause and today's women.

 9*   16   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a
           la A.A. Milne.

 10   137  YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Communicating.

 11*  12   EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.)
           Southern murders.

 12*  10   OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the
           television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.

 13*  12   THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects
           of Taoist philosophy.

 14*  12   GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the
           physicist Richard Feynman.

 15   15   RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photos (by
           Walter Iooss Jr.) and observations.

 16*  43   TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The
           charms of rustic France.

 17*   1   BITTER BLOOD, by Jerry Bledsoe. (Onyx, $5.99.) The grisly
           murders of members of two wealthy Kentucky and North
           Carolina families.

 18*  26   UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on
           life's commonplaces.

 19*  15   YOUNG MEN & FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of
           Chicago, $10.95.) A forest fire.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    153  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles to practice in the
           pursuit of success.

 2    160  THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and
           Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's
           diet.

 3    10   BOTTOMS UP! by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.99.) Exercises
           for women to achieve good health and fitness.

 4     4   A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (Harper
           Perennial, $12.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with
           feelings of love in daily life.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 5, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: February 20, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1454 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction


 1      1   5   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A
                computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss
                and is accused by her of sexual harassment.

 2          1   ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car
                collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives
                of five families.

 3      2  80   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 4      3  16   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 5      4   4   FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of
                mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a
                sylvan Vermont town.

 6      8   2   FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) A
                widow's affection for the close friend of her son, killed in an
                accident, creates familial tension.

 7      5  45   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 8      6   5   BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent
                deaths.

 9      7   4   HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B. Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) Three
                American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German activities
                in Buenos Aires in 1942.

 10    11  26   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 11     9   9   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &
                Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates
                a child's mysterious death.

 12         1   MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $22.95.) Archy
                McNally's search for the thief of a family's heirlooms uncovers
                a string of surprises.

 13    12   3   VOYAGER, by Diana Gabaldon. (Delacorte, $21.95.) A woman finds
                love while commuting between 18th- and 20th-century Scotland.

 14    13   3   GRAND PASSION, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $22.) A romantic
                encounter between a small-inn keeper and the man behind a large
                hotel chain.

 15         1   PADDY CLARKE HA HA HA, by Roddy Doyle. (Viking, $20.95.) The
                travails of a boy growing up in 1960's Dublin.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  41   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2      2   9   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 3      3   6   SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A
                psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.

 4      4  26   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 5      5  20   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 6      6  12   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                100, reflect on their lives.

 7      7  24   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 8      8  14   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More
                comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 9          1   A DRINKING LIFE, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) The
                memoirs of a New York born-and-bred Irish-American journalist.

 10    12  29   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 11     9  20   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 12    11  80   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 13    10  18   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 14        10   LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The
                country singer's memoirs, with an account of her relations with
                daughters Wynonna and Ashley.

 15    14   6   A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Knopf, $27.50.) The
                development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years in Judaism,
                Christianity and Islam.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   5   MAGIC EYE, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when
                scrutinized at length.

 2      2  39   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 3      3  17   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.

 4      4  30   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 5, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear In Mind
(Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interest)

BEYOND DESPAIR: Three Lectures and a Conversation With Philip Roth, by Aharon
Appelfeld. (Fromm, $17.50.) The Israeli novelist argues that literature can and
must deal with the Holocaust or give up its pretensions to be a vehicle of
spiritual apprehension.

THE BINGO PALACE, by Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $23.) Three decent people
look for love on a windblown prairie in this novel whose daily life is enriched
by supernatural events and the presence of Indian spirits.

BRAZIL, by John Updike. (Knopf, $23.) In the vast, trackless wilds of a Brazil
the author freely admits making up out of whole cloth, a tragicomic
knight-errant and his dolly, madly in love, break all the rules of class and
race.

THE CAVEMAN'S VALENTINE, by George Dawes Green. (Warner, $19.95.) Romulus
Ledbetter, Mr. Green's protagonist, is a homeless, black, paranoid private eye
who can be roused to propriety only by a case as interesting as the one Mr.
Green has dreamed up for his first novel.

EXCURSIONS IN THE REAL WORLD: Memoirs, by William Trevor. (Knopf, $23.) Not an
autobiography but a series of sketches from the life of the marvelous Irish
short-story writer; well mannered, persuasive, showing exceptional powers both
of re-creation and forgiveness.

GOING NATIVE, by Stephen Wright. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) A road novel
that explodes the conventions of the genre as a weird, dangerous shape-shifting
protagonist remakes his identity on the way to California.

HARRIET BEECHER STOWE: A Life, by Joan D. Hedrick. (Oxford University, $35.) A
substantive, scrupulously researched life of the author of "Uncle Tom's Cabin,"
with cogent analyses of the book and the moral universe that gave rise to it and
to other controversial works by Stowe.

HOW WE DIE: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf,
$24.) The author, a physician, surgeon and teacher for 35 years, offers a wise,
humane and cultivated examination of what happens to people when they die,
omitting none of the clinical detail.

IMAGES: My Life in Film, by Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $27.95.) At 75, the great
Swedish film maker confronts and reveals himself as artist and man in this
evocation of his career, based on a fresh viewing of all his movies.

JOSEPHINE: The Hungry Heart, by Jean-Claude Baker and Chris Chase. (Random
House, $27.50.) Prodigious research and outstanding narrative fluency mark this
biography of Josephine Baker (1906-75), the irresistible American institution of
French revues, cabaret and film.

QUICKSAND, by Junichiro Tanizaki. (Knopf, $22.) A novel about a woman who casts
such a spell on her lesbian lover and the lover's husband that they long to die
for her, by a writer whose constant themes were self-destructive sexuality and
the double image of woman as goddess and demon; first published in Japan in
1928-30.

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEW CALLS TO LIFT EMBARGO ON CUBA

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 734 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 19


Now that the United States trade embargo on Vietnam has been lifted, a growing
number of Cuban-Americans and members of Congress are pushing President Clinton
to ease the embargo on Cuba. But because of domestic political pressures, the
Administration seems unwilling to budge.

Though still a minority among Cuban-Americans and on Capitol Hill, these voices
are telling the Administration that the best way to undermine Fidel Castro is to
increase Western involvement in Cuba. In their view, that means easing or ending
the embargo.

Supporters of such a move, like the Miami-based Cuban Committee for Democracy
and Representative Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of Manhattan, assert that the
32-year-old embargo has failed to achieve its goal of forcing out Mr. Castro or
getting him to embrace democracy. Worse, they say, the embargo has hurt the
well-being of average Cubans and given Mr. Castro a convenient explanation for
why Cuba's economy is in such a sorry state.

Representative Rangel, whose bill to end the embargo has 25 co-sponsors, said:
"I have talked with Cuban business people and they tell me, 'The embargo is
helping Castro.' They say, 'The Cuban people believe it's the embargo, not
Castro, that's causing all their pain.' "

Cuba Is Different

Administration officials say that while the recent small and tentative economic
reforms in Cuba offer some glimmers of hope, they have no intention of easing
the embargo because they are convinced that Mr. Castro has no plans to hold free
elections or improve human rights.

"Vietnam is at least doing something on economic reform, but Cuba isn't really
doing anything on economic or political reform," one official said. "Our feeling
is the embargo has an impact. Lifting it would produce a short-term inflow of
capital that would enable Castro to retard reform."

Administration officials acknowledge that domestic politics comes into play.
They see little political gain in softening their policy toward Cuba, when the
main Cuban-American group, the Cuban American National Foundation, remains
vehemently anti-Castro.

"This Adminstration doesn't want to be seen as soft on Castro," said Jorge
Dominguez, a Cuban-American professor of political science at Harvard. "You hear
talk from various parts of government that they're concerned about elections in
Florida, and not just in 1996."

Administration officials say they have learned that even if they want to reach
out toward Mr. Castro, they can end up getting burned. One official noted that
shortly after the 1992 election, President Clinton's emerging foreign policy
team was reassessing Cuba policy when they heard that several prominent Cuban
human rights workers were beaten up on International Human Rights Day.

No Easing on Travel

Showing the Administration's continuing determination to isolate Cuba, the State
Department has recommended against easing travel restrictions to Cuba.
Representative Howard L. Berman, Democrat of California, who asserts that
liberalizing travel is vital for disseminating pro-democracy ideas, has
suggested he would push a bill to ease travel restrictions to Cuba and other
embargoed countries if the Administration did not do so on its own.

To woo the Cuban-American vote in the 1992 Presidential elections, Mr. Clinton
moved faster than former President George Bush to endorse a tough bill on Cuba
that tightened the embargo by prohibiting the overseas subsidiaries of American
companies from trading with Cuba.

Administration officials say that law, the Cuban Democracy Act, ties their hands
on Cuba policy. But many experts on Latin America say the act leaves the
Administration plenty of latitude to tinker with Cuba policy.

The act's sponsor, Representative Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey,
takes a hard line, saying, "the question of American foreign policy toward Cuba
is largely settled."

In the view of some foreign policy experts, the Administration is so attentive
to domestic political concerns that it finds itself trapped with a policy that
is counterproductive.

"It's a remnant of the cold war," said Peter Hakim, president of Inter-American
Dialogue, a Washington research group. "Many senior officials say in private
it's an absurd policy. It's not achieving its goals. And it's more likely than
not to help create a violent situation in Cuba that will produce large flows of
refugees."


LOAD-DATE: February 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Journal;
The Girl Next Door

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 724 words


Now that the Tailhook scandal has been swept under the Navy's rug -- 140
marauding Navy and Marine pilots, 83 assaulted women, 0 courts-martial --
connoisseurs of poolside sex can turn to happier pursuits. The day after the
Clinton Administration cut off further inquiries into Tailhook, Sports
Illustrated officially kicked off its publicity push for its annual swimsuit
issue.

Tailhook came to its unsavory end with the resignation of Adm. Frank B. Kelso
2d, the officer who saw no evil as men wearing "Women Are Property" T-shirts
went on their rampage close by. While the Navy's own judge concluded that the
admiral was a liar who manipulated the investigation, Mr. Clinton's new
Secretary of Defense exonerated him as a man of the "highest integrity and
honor," then let him slip into early retirement.

Hardly had this sorry escapade faded from the evening news than ABC offered
comic relief in the form of "Sports Illustrated Swimsuit '94: The 30th
Anniversary," an hourlong plug masquerading as a documentary about the history
of a lubricious American publishing institution.

A hybrid of very soft porn, talking (and preening) Sports Illustrated heads and
historical film clips (of Richard Nixon, bizarrely, as well as of Cheryl Tiegs),
the hour was a hoot. Yet it did make a provocative historical point.

As the perky narrator, Christie Brinkley, and her newsreels made clear, much has
happened in the 30 years since the swimsuit annuals "were born into a
complicated time." Not only have there been several incarnations of Mr. Nixon
(all fully clad) but there has been a civil rights movement, the Vietnam War and
a sexual revolution. Betty Friedan's "The Feminine Mystique" was published the
year before Sports Illustrated invented what Ms. Brinkley called "something to
heat up readers during the long winter months." The rest is feminist history.

But, incredibly, the swimsuit issue has hardly changed in three decades of
sociopolitical tumult. This year there is one black model and a smattering of
Calvin Kleinesque beefcake. Otherwise the magazine is still pushing what Ms.
Brinkley repeatedly described as the "natural beauty" of "what readers long for
-- the girl next door."

Who is the girl next door? Her fake name keeps changing but she is still the
same empty-headed, smiling, air-brushed mannequin who appeared in Playboy in the
1950's and early 60's, when pubescents like myself had to make do with
clandestine copies of Hugh Hefner's centerfolds before the advent of the more
respectable pin-ups from Henry Luce. The interviews with this year's Sports
Illustrated "supermodels" on the ABC special presented girls next door as
smiling consorts who live only to be commanded by photographers, editors and
anyone else who will pick up their tab.

Given the far wider range of explicit pornography that's available in 1994 than
in the swimsuit issue's earlier history, you might expect the old-fashioned
bikini shots to be obsolete.But except for 13-year-olds -- including my son, who
asked for the issue when I finished with it -- the real appeal of the swimsuit
issue to men is not pornographic.

Indeed, the pictures are not even sexy. Their true allure derives from their
implicit celebration of the old order in which men call the shots and women
submit without protest. Much as we want to believe that this hierarchy has been
discredited -- and despite all the laws written to dismantle it -- old habits
die hard.

And not just at Sports Illustrated, not just in the Navy. In the literary erotic
novel of the moment, "The Fermata," by Nicholson Baker, the hero has the power
to freeze women in time and have his way with them. The newest developments in
CD-ROM technology include interactive videos in which men can order models to do
as they're told by pressing computer buttons.

I'm going to give my 13-year-old my copy of the swimsuit issue; he'll have more
fun with it than I did. But when corporate America has so much at stake in an
adolescent view of women as pliant servants, that view will not soon die out
among men for whom time is always frozen at age 13. Sports Illustrated is
guaranteeing advertisers that the swimsuit issue will bring in five million
readers, at $4.95 a copy. Time Warner has too much invested in the message
"Women Are Property" to give it up without a fight.

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

This Is the Army, Mr. Ting

BYLINE: By Kathleen Norris; Kathleen Norris is the author of "Dakota: A
Spiritual Geography."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 880 words



HONOR & DUTY
By Gus Lee.
425 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.

FANS of Gus Lee's first novel, "China Boy," will welcome his continuation of the
story of Kai Ting, the first American-born child of aristocratic but
impoverished Chinese parents who settled in San Francisco's mostly black
Panhandle after World War II. While the strength of "Honor & Duty" may be its
portrayal of a sadly divided immigrant family, most of the novel takes place at
West Point, where Kai's father, a former officer in the Nationalist Chinese
Army, had long dreamed of sending him, as "escape from diaspora and attainment
of America itself."

Mr. Lee, who himself attended West Point, makes clear in this obviously
autobiographical novel how that tradition-bound military school could appeal to
a Chinese youth. At his first briefing, Kai reflects on lessons to be learned
there, from Confucius and from a great Chinese military hero: "Here was where
Kung Fu-tzu and Guan Yu came together. Be honorable. Do your duty. Be correct.
Have courage. Do not be selfish. Subdue the self." Even the rigors of hazing
draw from Kai a truly Chinese response; he hopes to "survive the truly awful
lack of ho, harmony, in this place."

As in "China Boy," Mr. Lee reflects a fine comic sensibility. Kai and his squad
leader are shouting in proper military fashion: " 'WHY'D Y'ALL DECIDE TA BE A
CHI-NESE?' he roared. 'NO EXCUSE, SIR,' I cried. . . . 'NEXT TIME, Y'ALL CHOOSE
TA BE FRUM MISSISSIPPI, YOU HEAR ME?' 'YES, SIR!' I screamed, with total
sincerity." But Mr. Lee does not shy away from depicting the pain of being a
Chinese-American at West Point while the United States was at war with Asians.
At the funeral of a beloved instructor killed in Vietnam, Kai is steered away
from the parents, his "Asian face . . . unwelcome at this moment."

Kai Ting's life is haunted by failure and the mean streets of his childhood. He
blames himself for not acting to prevent the death of a neighbor, 14-year-old
Lucky Washington, at the hand of his father, a notorious bully. Kai knew a fight
was brewing and never told his own father ("Chinese fathers were out of reach,"
he says) or the one policeman he knew, a boxing coach at the Y.M.C.A. When a
cheating scandal erupts at West Point, it is the honor code that offers Kai a
way to act, reminding him of the words of his traditionalist uncle Shim:
"Hausheng, Able Student, it is duty. Do not worry about feelings. Think of your
obligations."

Contrasting views of the scandal are exemplified by the bitter, incurably
bigoted Colonel Smits, with "all the bad habits that young men admire," whose
weekly Poker Society games have spawned the cheating, and the cultured Maj. H.
Norman Schwarzhedd (evidently based on General Schwarzkopf, whom Mr. Lee thanks
in a list of acknowledgments), who lives quietly, reads widely and preaches duty
to one's troops as an officer's highest objective. Smits says scornfully, "When
you hit the real world, there ain't no honor code to help." Schwarzhedd reminds
Kai, when many of his classmates are forced to leave: "Consider the alternative.
A cheating culture. . . . Intolerable."

"Honor & Duty" is a big book, and at times Mr. Lee seems too bent on getting it
all in. While each element works well enough, the novel can be unwieldy. But
this story of the formation of a young man, as he struggles to honor his Chinese
inheritance in an American context, is an important one. I was raised in
Honolulu, where most of my schoolmates were Asian-American. Writers like Mr.
Lee, Maxine Hong Kingston and Amy Tan have revealed to me how little I knew of
my friends and their families: the complexities of the cultural, political and
religious ambiguities that marked their lives as Asian-Americans.

Maybe all families seek to hide precisely those things that writers must
embrace. Gus Lee embraces even the most painful circumstances in a spirit of
forgiveness. When Kai's American stepmother is dying, she who "had been the
living, sleeping, hounding terror of my life," he stays by her deathbed, unable
to mourn, but listening to her last words: " 'Open,' she said faintly. 'Rest.' "
And she hands him an envelope containing his only photograph of his dead mother,
a treasure that the stepmother took from him many years before.

"Honor & Duty" reminds me of "The Color Purple" in the way that family
revelations come slowly, subtly, often in fragments that Kai Ting must piece
together in order to understand his past. A reconciliation with his father is
particularly moving. Honest in their account of the mean spirit that corrupts
much human behavior, both of Mr. Lee's novels also reflect gratitude for the
saving help that often comes from unlikely sources, as in this exchange between
Major Schwarzhedd and Kai:

" 'Someone must've helped you. . . . Boys don't end up at West Point under
independent steam.'

" 'My mother -- my stepmother -- gave me English. My father gave me West Point
as the objective. My boxing coach . . . gave me his time and his skills.' I
sighed. 'For 10 years.' I realized that it was enough, that I had gotten more
than most kids."

Then he adds, recalling a streetwise but compassionate boy who befriended him in
the tough Panhandle neighborhood, "Sir, my first friend gave me hope."

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 21, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Next After Vietnam, Let's Lift Cuba Embargo

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 287 words



To the Editor:

In your Playa Giron Journal (news article, Feb. 11) residents of the Bay of Pigs
scratch their heads and wonder why the United States continues to blockade Cuba.
Since the Clinton Administration lifted the embargo against Vietnam, many United
States citizens ask the same question.

The trend of the 1990's has been toward greater openness and dialogue with
former enemies. In the case of China, our policy has been one of "intensive
engagement." In the case of Vietnam, we have now chosen for engagement as well.
With Cuba, we've been taking the opposite tack. Not only have we continued the
34-year-old economic ban, but we actually tightened it in 1992 by stopping
United States subsidiaries abroad from trading with Cuba.

In recent Congressional hearings, Assistant Secretary of State Alexander Watson
proudly reported that trade with Cuba by United States foreign subsidiaries had
plunged from $718 million in 1991 to $1.6 million in 1993. What an
accomplishment! With the United States economy in the doldrums, our Government
managed to lose us more than $700 million worth of business. And because we are
the only country in the world that prohibits trade with Cuba, when United States
companies are forced to pull out, European, Japanese and Latin companies rush
in.

It's time for United States policy to free itself from the stranglehold of a
small sector of the Cuban-American community that still lives in the past. We in
the Association for Free Trade Against Cuba, formed by the business community
days after the Vietnam embargo's end, hope to move President Clinton to lift
this counterproductive ban.

MEDEA BENJAMIN
Director, Global Exchange
San Francisco, Feb. 12, 1994

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 22, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

School Prayer Gaining Ground in South

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1112 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Feb. 21


In the latest example of a slow but unmistakable return of prayer to public
schools in the South, Georgia's Senate has passed legislation that would allow
"a moment of quiet reflection" by students.

When the measure was approved on Feb. 14 by a vote of 51 to 2, the dissenters
were two strongly conservative lawmakers who argued that the bill did not go far
enough -- that it should have flatly stated that the quiet moment was for
prayer. The legislation is expected to pass the Georgia House in the next few
weeks and be signed by Governor Zell Miller.

State Senator David Scott of Atlanta, who led the effort on the bill, said he
was motivated more by the chaos and violence in some schools than by concern for
students' souls. The moment of reflection is intended to let students "look
inward" and get "some things in order," he said.

Push From the Right

Senator Scott's motives notwithstanding, his legislation and similar measures
that nine other states have either enacted or are considering are the latest
push by religious conservatives to re-establish prayer in tax-supported schools.
These measures take advantage of court rulings in the last two years that the
religious right believes provide a loophole in the body of Federal law that
since a landmark 1962 Supreme Court ruling had unequivocally held that public
prayers in public schools are unconstitutional.

Late last year, groups like the Christian Coalition and Pat Robertson's American
Center for Law and Justice began urging students to initiate prayer at
graduation ceremonies. They argued that a 1992 ruling by the United States Court
of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, in New Orleans, made such prayer legal when it
was spontaneous, initiated and led by students, and was nonsectarian and did not
proselytize.

Judicial Trend

When the Supreme Court subsequently refused to review that ruling, groups like
Mr. Robertson's saw it as proof that they were reading the judicial trend
correctly.

Now they are urging state legislatures to enact legislation that will allow such
prayers, said Jay Sekulow, the director of Mr. Robertson's conservative legal
group. Yet Mr. Sekulow's group disavows ownership of the Georgia legislation,
arguing, as did the two dissenting Senators, that the bill should not have
omitted a specific mention of prayer. Mr. Sekulow says prayer in schools and at
school functions is now legal as long as it meets the standards set by the Fifth
Circuit.

Alabama and Tennessee have already adopted laws that rely on the premise that
school prayer is legal if it meets the Fifth Circuit standards.

The Tennessee measure was the first such proposal to pass a legislature, though
Gov. Ned McWherter allowed it to become law without signing it and a challenge
to it is moving through the Federal courts. Tennessee is in the Eighth Circuit
of the Court of Appeals, raising the possibility that that appellate court may
rule differently than the Fifth, whose rulings apply only in Mississippi,
Louisiana and Texas.

Outside the South, Oklahoma and Pennsylvania have similar measures pending in
their state legislatures, according to groups monitoring the issue.

Measures moving through the legislatures in Mississippi, Florida, Louisiana,
South Carolina and Virginia take the approach that the issue is one of students'
rights to free speech, rather than a question of religious rights.

Eliott M. Mincberg, the legal director of People for the American Way, which
opposes organized prayer in public schools, says the strategy inspired by the
Fifth Circuit's ruling is "quite a trend, and this whole issue has been quite an
organizing issue for the religious right."

"It is going various ways, with them trying to phrase it in nonthreatening ways
by calling it a moment of reflection or insisting that it be nonsectarian,
nonproselytizing and student-initiated," he said. "It's all a Trojan horse."

Under a 1971 ruling by the Supreme Court, moments of silence or periods of
meditation meet the Constitutional separation of church and state only if they
have a truly secular purpose and do not advance religion. In the three decades
since, the most that legislatures could do, in states where there was support
for school prayer, was urge Congress to initiate a Constitutional amendment
allowing prayer.

But now the Fifth Circuit, aided by the Supreme Court's refusal to review its
action, has apparently opened a loophole, said James Guth, a political science
professor at Furman University in Greenville, S.C., who has written extensively
about the religious right. The court's 1992 decision in Jones v. Clear Creek
Independent School District "has given impetus to these efforts in the state
legislatures," he said.

Added Momentum

In Mississippi, there is the added momentum of recent protests over the
dismissal of a principal in Jackson who routinely began the school day with
prayers read by students on the public-address system. The protests prompted the
principal's rehiring, and in the resulting atmosphere, State Senator Mike Gunn
of Jackson reintroduced the prayer bill that he had sponsored each session since
1988. This time it passed. "It was like putting high-grade jet fuel in our
tank," he said.

Mr. Mincberg of People for the American Way and John Peck, the Washington
lobbyist for the American Civil Liberties Union, say the issue should not be one
of who initiates the activity or whether it is called reflection or prayer.
Rather, they say, it should be a question of the public schools' effectively
promoting and endorsing religious observances.

Caught in the Middle

School officials are sometimes caught in the middle. Last spring, Wayne Oldham,
principal of the high school in Westmoreland, Tenn., received letters from the
A.C.L.U. and Mr. Robertson's American Center for Law and Justice, each hinting
that they would sue him depending on whether he permitted a student to initiate
a public prayer at graduation.

Mr. Oldham allowed the prayer and then hired a lawyer, Russell Heldman of
Nashville, to sue the A.C.L.U., accusing it of intimidation and asking the
Federal courts to rule on the constitutionality of the Tennessee law. Mr.
Heldman said prayer is "a student free-speech issue, just as the wearing of
black arm bands by students in school to protest the Vietnam war in the 60's was
a free-speech issue."

Senator Scott, the sponsor of the Georgia bill, which studiously avoids
mentioning prayer or religion, said: "The A.C.L.U. has an agenda and the
religious right has an agenda. But I'm not saying anything about prayer. I'm
just trying to give kids a way to focus and think and get through the day."

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 22, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Disney Drums Its Fingers as Virginia Debates the Worth of a Theme Park

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1214 words

DATELINE: HAYMARKET, Va., Feb. 20


The Walt Disney Company's plan to build a huge American history theme park next
to this northern Virginia village 35 miles west of Washington is suddenly taking
more political and economic twists and turns than a roller coaster ride.

The state's new Republican Governor, George F. Allen, is squabbling with the
Democrat-controlled Legislature over whether to try to entice Disney by
subsidizing some of the park's development costs, like highway construction and
staff training.

Mr. Allen has proposed a $142 million subsidy, which is $17 million more
generous than the legislators have so far been willing to offer. But given the
potential economic impact of the $650 million park, which by some estimates
could eventually rival the Disney parks in Florida and California, the debate is
far from over.

Disney says it remains optimistic that a compromise will be found. But it has
warned that its plans will collapse if they are delayed.

The company wants to open its fifth theme park in 1998 on 3,000 acres, which it
has options to buy, just outside this town of 500 people. According to Disney
calculations, the park should attract six million visitors a year, many of them
tourists visiting Washington. State and private calculations indicate that
directly or indirectly, the park and its surrounding new hotels, shops and
houses could create 19,000 tourism jobs and a billion-dollar building boom.

Politics Comes Into Play

In a state hard hit in recent years by recession and military cutbacks after a
decade of above-average growth, some officials say new development is needed.
Disney and Governor Allen are betting that the need will ultimately bring around
balky legislators, as well as doubtful zoning officials and environmentalists.

Complicating the debate over how much inducement to give Disney is a host of
other issues, including the political byplay between a new Republican Governor
and a Democratic Legislature, state development policy, regional economic
jealousies, pollution concerns and fair distribution of park jobs for members of
minorities.

There is also debate over the American history attractions that Disney's
"imagineers" propose to mix in with Mickey Mouse, Goofy and the usual assortment
of Disney rides. The 100-acre park would be split into nine "playlands" with
themes that include slavery in America and the wrenching era of the Vietnam War.

The politically savvy Disney, whose lobbyists are aswarm at the Capitol in
Richmond, where they are referred to collectively as "the Mouse," says it must
have a development subsidy -- and soon. Disney says it must have help building
roads around the park, which by some estimates will cost more than $100 million,
and argues that delaying or denying the subsidy would threaten the economic
underpinning of the park and ruin its building schedule.

Last week, Disney officials said the company would not tolerate delay. Their
warning came after the state Senate and House approved bills with differing
subsidies, neither as generous as the Governor wants. Furthermore, the House
version carried numerous qualifiers.

Still, the Disney officials, in the spirit of Mickey, found a silver lining.

"We're optimistic," said Mary Anne Reynolds, a Disney spokeswoman, noting that
although the Legislature differed sharply with the Governor, it had at least
moved toward approval of a subsidy.

Seeking a Second Vote

In proposing a $142 million bond issue to help Disney, Governor Allen, the
state's first Republican chief executive in 12 years, asked that the money be
free of strings.

But when the state Senate voted on his request on Tuesday, the Democrats held
the subsidy to $125 million, with Disney to pick up half of the annual $12
million in debt service. The House approved only $82 million, adding that if
Disney would contribute another $44 million, the state would repay the company
over several years.

Then the House threw in the biggest roadblock Disney has yet to encounter in its
effort to create "Disney's America." The chamber attached a rider to its bill
that requires a second legislative look at the park proposal, along with a
second vote, just before the Legislature adjourns early this spring.

"This is hardly the way to welcome 19,000 jobs and a $650 million investment,"
the Governor said after the votes, accusing Democratic legislators of playing
"partisan games."

But the debate over a Disney subsidy goes well beyond money and how much of it
Democrats and Republicans can agree on. Also in dispute is whether Virginia
should break with its long habit of drawing new industry by simply promoting its
central location on the Atlantic Coast, low taxes, solid education system and
the absence of strong unions.

Many other states, especially those in the South, use development subsidies to
attract industry. But Virginia has mostly avoided this approach, arguing that
the state has plenty of cost-free incentives to offer and that, besides,
taxpayer money should not be risked on business ventures that could fail.

'Chilling' Mistake

That was precisely the position taken last week by the House majority leader, C.
Richard Cranwell.

"If we make a mistake on Disney," he warned, "it'll have a chilling effect on
our ability to do anything constructive in the future because it is such a
big-ticket item. I hope nobody thinks the message to Disney is, 'Don't come to
Virginia.' The message is, 'Virginia is a well-run state.' "

Though Disney has had great success with most of its theme parks, the success
has not been universal. Its Euro Disney park just outside Paris has lost
hundreds of millions of dollars.

Legislators are also squabbling over whether other regions of Virginia should be
given some kind of economic aid if a big subsidy goes to Disney to help it
settle in northern Virginia. In the southwest, many miners are out of work, and
on the Tidewater coast, many military installations are closing.

Nor do the twists in the Disney dispute end there.

Environmentalists say a huge Disney development would further degrade the
environment in the ever-growing Washington area. History buffs say that they
fear Disney will distort history and that the influx of visitors could harm
genuine historic areas like nearby Manassas Battlefield Park.

And civil rights advocates warn Disney that they will protest loudly if the
company does not hire as many members of minorities as they want.

Senator Henry L. Marsh 3d of Richmond, who is black, argued during last week's
debate that the legislature should require Disney to let black history experts
review the historical accuracy of the park's theme attractions.

"There's a possibility of abuse when you show slavery in an entertainment
fashion," he said. He was rebuffed.

In a few days, the conferees from the Virginia Senate and House will begin
efforts to reconcile the two subsidy bills passed last week. No one is
predicting just how much money will eventually be put out for Disney, but the
betting is that the legislators will be generous enough to bring its new
fantasyland to life.

"They're not going to be able to look their constituents in the eye and say, 'I
just blew it, just messed up 19,000 jobs in Virginia,' " the Governor
confidently predicted the other day.

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 22, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

From Ivan Klima, A Look at Prague Before and After

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1158 words

DATELINE: PRAGUE


For American readers of Eastern European literature, the arrival of a new novel
by the Czech dissident writer Ivan Klima is a noteworthy and anticipated event.
Mr. Klima's "Judge on Trial," a many-layered story of a Communist judge who
compromised his way through life, was hailed by Western critics last year as a
landmark work about the mentality of the apparatchiks who ran the Czech
dictatorship.

But the publication here of Mr. Klima's latest work, "Waiting for Dark, Waiting
for Light," has passed almost without notice. Reviews have been sparse, there
are no displays in Prague's bookstore windows and sales clerks respond with
blank stares when they are asked for a copy. Yet the novel, a look at
Czechoslovakia both before and after the end of Communist rule in 1989, is to be
published with considerable fanfare by Granta in England in August and several
American publishers are vying for it.

The apparent Czech indifference toward Mr. Klima's new work reflects what is
perceived here as a malaise gripping the intellectual life of Prague despite
new-found political freedoms. For many Czechs, this city's reputation abroad as
the new Paris of Eastern Europe seems ill-founded. Mr. Klima, a friendly
63-year-old, offered his own explanation in a recent interview.

Expectations Unfulfilled

"Our critics don't like people who are well known abroad," he said benignly. As
an example, he cited a review of "Waiting for Dark, Waiting for Light" in which
a Czech critic dismissed the novel as having been "written for export."

But there is something deeper in the current malaise than just the provincial
taste of critics. Mr. Klima and others in Prague's cultural milieu feel that
expectations for a burst of creativity when the Communist shackles came off were
probably too high.

The new Minister of Culture, Pavel Tigrid, who spent the Communist era in Paris
as an opposition journalist, put it this way in January at his first news
conference: "For Americans who never, fortunately, had to live in unfreedom, it
is difficult to imagine 40 years of a regime that was not only totalitarian but
vulgar and stupid. I don't think that in 40 years there was one single idea that
was original. People are tired. On the other hand, there are two or three
writers who are very promising, so give us a chance."

Mr. Klima, who is philosophical about the situation rather than disappointed,
said: "People in theater, for example, thought they would put on Ionesco and
have full theaters. They dreamed all their lives about putting Ionesco on stage
and now that they could, no one came."

In part, this is because many in the educated class who are interested in
20th-century European playwrights either cannot afford to pay the increased
price of theater tickets or have had to sacrifice leisure time to make ends
meet. "In this country, the intelligentsia are so underpaid they have no money
to buy tickets and they are too busy," Mr. Klima said. "When they finish their
official work, they have to earn more money. With the exception of lawyers, they
still earn one-quarter as much as those who work with their hands."

Trying to Keep Up With Change

Mr. Klima said it was difficult for a writer to capture the post-Communist mood
in a novel because things were changing so fast. Instead, he said, young
creative people seem to be concentrating on documentaries for television, some
of which reflect aspects of post-Communist life very well. "I saw a perfect
short movie on television three or four days ago on racism," he said. He was
referring to a common antipathy toward Vietnamese who came here on past exchange
programs from Communist Vietnam.

As he worked on his new novel, he said, he was fascinated by the question of
whether people who had been part of the old regime, even unhappily, would
survive in the new era.

The main character in "Waiting for Dark, Waiting for Light" is a cameraman for
state television whose job was to film the president installed by the Soviets
after the crackdown in 1968. In some ways the cameraman hates the regime, and in
order to express himself he privately writes film scripts. When the 1989
revolution comes, the cameraman is pivotal in insuring that the street protests
are actually shown on television. Thus, while still being part of the old
regime, he helps bring it down.

"These people who lived a schizophrenic life, could they enter a normal life
again?" Mr. Klima said. "That's the question I was trying to solve." He hints
that the answer seems to be no. "Readers have told me it is a very depressing
ending," he said with a smile.

Under the Gaze of Kafka

Mr. Klima starts his mornings at his desk, where he works on a laptop computer
and with a large four-volume edition of a Czech dictionary at hand. The study is
lined floor to ceiling with books, with wall space reserved for paintings by his
daughter, Hana Klimova Pavlatova, who has illustrated some editions of Mr.
Klima's works. There is also a large oil painting depicting the Czech writer
Franz Kafka working as a land surveyor. The image is especially meaningful to
Mr. Klima, who was banned from writing in 1970; one of the interim jobs he found
was as a surveyor.

The shelves brim with the many editions of Mr. Klima's works in foreign
languages as well as rare copies in the underground form called samizdat. His
"Judge on Trial" was first published in 1979 in German and in a samizdat edition
of small bound volumes printed on airmail paper. Mr. Klima rewrote "Judge on
Trial" in the 1980's, before the Czech and English editions were published.

Another valuable edition on his bookshelves is the sliver-thin paperback, now
yellowing with age, of his Kafkaesque play, "The Castle," about a system that
survives by murdering its people. The play's publication led to a ban on his
writing at home, but also brought him increased attention abroad.

Immediately after the fall of the Communist regime in 1989, Mr. Klima at last
had the satisfaction of seeing his novels appear in Czech and with large print
runs. "Love and Garbage," which dealt with survival under a dictatorship,
quickly sold out its first run of 100,000 copies.

But even with those early, impressive successes and Mr. Klima's growing
reputation at home and abroad, the Czech critics were not particularly friendly
to his work. "They are used to one-level literature," Mr. Klima said. "They were
educated in these old universities by Communist professors who taught them to
look for positive heroes and negative heroes. They're now looking for positive
heroes opposing the negative ones and they didn't find them in my books."

He is unruffled by the smaller print run -- only 15,000 copies -- of his new
book. But he was delighted the other day when he opened a letter from a reader
in the United States who had written to say that now, after reading "Judge on
Trial," she understood her Czech husband so much better.

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ivan Klima (Pavel Horejsi for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 22, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SCIENTIST AT WORK: J. Craig Venter;
A Bold Short Cut To Human Genes

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2070 words

DATELINE: GAITHERSBURG, Md.


IN a former ceramics factory on the outskirts of the nation's capital, Dr. J.
Craig Venter has created a biologist's dream: a high-technology laboratory
dedicated to the sequencing of DNA. Out of it is flowing a rich torrent of new
information, chemical sequences from many of the 75,000 or so genes that specify
a human.

"I don't see how this cannot revolutionize biology," Dr. Venter said. His
delight is in generating and analyzing the raw text in which the story of human
evolution is written. But this affable, soft-spoken man harbors a barely veiled
ambition to slay giants. He intends to execute a quick end run around the
Government's $3 billion Human Genome Project.

Washington's goal is to spell out each of the three billion chemical letters in
the human gene set. Dr. Venter is focusing on the tiny portion of DNA that
harbors the genes, while ignoring the vast stretches that have no known purpose.

Other biologists do not doubt that he can generate a lot of sequence data -- the
endless strings of A's, T's, G's and C's in which the genetic code is written --
but they are waiting to see what sense he can make of it. Dr. David Botstein, a
geneticist at the Stanford University Medical Center, sees little purpose in Dr.
Venter's approach of sequencing genes blindly without knowing their function.
"To say it is a substitute for the human genome project is overstated by a lot,"
he said.

Though academic geneticists have long been skeptical of Dr. Venter's approach in
varying degrees, his backers have invested $85 million in his Institute for
Genomic Research, and the pharmaceutical company SmithKline Beecham recently
paid $125 million for 10 percent of Human Genome Sciences Inc., the Rockville,
Md., company that has the right to commercialize the institute's findings. Dr.
Venter has no executive position in the company but owns shares whose current
market value is about $12 million.

The Government's plan is first to find chemical signposts along the vast length
of the human genome, a procedure known as mapping, and then to analyze the
sequence of the three billion chemical units between the signposts. This
gigantic task will take until the year 2005. But while the Government is still
largely in the mapping phase, Dr. Venter said he has already fished out most of
the genes.

His method is a short cut around a short cut. It focuses on just the 3 percent
or so of human DNA that is used to specify proteins, the working parts of living
cells. Even within this 3 percent, Dr. Venter analyzes the chemical sequence of
just short stretches of genes, each about 400 base units in length.

Guessing Genes' Roles

How can such tiny flecks of DNA give any idea of the mighty canvas from which
they have been scraped? By comparing them with the sequence of known genes from
other species, Dr. Venter said, he can guess the natural role of about a third
or more of the genes he samples. And his laboratory is churning out sequences so
fast that they are beginning to overlap, so that already in a few cases the full
structure of a gene can be inferred from its fragments.

In just over a year, his institute has analyzed 100,000 genetic fragments from
human DNA sequences amplified in clones. These include samples of at least half
of all human genes, Dr. Venter said, praising the young scientists and
technicians who tend the 30 gene-sequencing machines in the institute and the
attendant computers and clone-preparing robots.

"There is a tremendous esprit de corps here," he said. "People think they are
taking part in history."

Dr. Venter came to genome sequencing by a circuitous route. He nearly dropped
out of high school in San Francisco to devote his life to surfing. He became a
champion swimmer, then a Navy medical corpsman in Vietnam. That led him to
enroll as a premedical student at the University of California, San Diego, but
he was deflected from medicine into biochemical research.

"I've always let the results tell me where to go next," he says. "My favorite
hobby is sailing. I am always tacking."

Frustrated by Pace

At the National Institutes of Health, he spent 10 years isolating a protein that
serves as the heart muscle cells' sensor for responding to adrenalin. Frustrated
with this pace of discovery, he spent two more years sequencing long stretches
of DNA but turned up only eight new genes. It was time for a different tack.

Living cells have no trouble recognizing the genetic coding regions of DNA.
Transcripts of these regions, known as messenger RNA's, are prepared by the cell
and then direct the synthesis of the genes' protein products. Usually these
transcripts have a fleeting existence. But they can be captured and artificially
copied in the test tube into their DNA counterparts, known as complementary or
cDNA's. Unlike the messenger RNA's, the cDNA's are stable enough for their
chemical sequence to be analyzed. The set of cDNA's from liver cells, say,
represent all the genes the liver cells are expressing at the time.

When large-scale sequencing of DNA began to become technically possible, some
biologists asserted that it would be more efficient to sequence just the cDNA's,
but most, for the sake of knowledge, preferred to do the whole genome. Dr.
Venter joined the cDNA camp. His central idea was that genes could be found and
catalogued very quickly by sequencing small sample pieces of each cDNA, and that
this could be done on a large enough scale to study for the first time the
pattern of gene expression in different types of cells.

The task would be all the more efficient since a gene can be uniquely identified
by sequencing just a short region of its cDNA. Most biologists could not see the
point in identifying a gene before discovering its function. Many patent lawyers
thought otherwise.

Clash Over Budget

An immediate crisis was precipitated by Dr. Venter's double short cut. In 1991,
Dr. Bernadine Healy, then director of the National Institutes of Health, sought
to raise Dr. Venter's budget and apply for patents on the new genes he was fast
discovering lest Japanese and European companies do so first, reaping a windfall
of medical and commercial applications. This brought her formidable energies
into collision with another forceful scientist, Dr. James D. Watson, who was
head of the N.I.H.'s half of the Human Genome Project, which is shared with the
Department of Energy.

Like many other academic scientists, Dr. Watson thought wholescale patenting of
unknown genes was a poor idea because it would inhibit the exchange of research
information. And the Human Genome Project he headed twice turned down Dr.
Venter's request for funds.

"Watson turned against me," Dr. Venter said, adding that the geneticists who run
the project feared his short cut to the genes would make Congress wonder why it
was spending $3 billion to sequence the "junk" that remained. Dr. Watson said
Dr. Venter's grant applications were turned down by panels of experts "at a
level I couldn't reverse."

The clash of interests had unexpected outcomes. One was that in April 1992 Dr.
Watson resigned from the Human Genome Project, in part because of disagreement
with Dr. Healy over the patenting of DNA sequences. Another was that the dispute
attracted the interest of the business community. Dr. Venter began receiving
offers to leave the N.I.H. and form a company. He accepted one from Wallace
Steinberg of the Health Care Investment Corporation to form a nonprofit
institute, with a budget of $70 million (now up to $85 million) over 10 years.

Test Is Yet to Come

The conditions of this fairy-godmother deal allow him to pursue whatever
scientific goals he wishes, Dr. Venter said, and to publish all his DNA
sequences in scientific journals. The only restriction is that before
publication, he must let Human Genome Sciences, a company formed by Mr.
Steinberg, study the sequences for at least 6 months, and for 12 more months in
the case of genes it wishes to commercialize.

The test of Dr. Venter's approach is probably yet to come. Scientists usually
frown on blind gathering of data; the preferred method is to look for specific
facts that will confirm or refute an idea about how nature works. Some
geneticists refuse to be impressed by the sheer number of DNA sequences his
laboratory has analyzed.

"No one ever doubted he could get 100,000-sequence runs," Dr. Botstein said.
"But it doesn't mean any more now than when he first proposed it."

As for the general approach of sequencing cDNA rather than the whole genome, Dr.
Botstein said, "There are other ways of going at the cDNA but none that have the
same illusion of speed."

Other biologists said they believe his data will prove widely useful. "This is a
fine start," said Dr. Hamilton O. Smith of Johns Hopkins University, a Nobel
laureate who is a board member of Dr. Venter's institute. "It's getting a lot of
valuable information much earlier than anyone imagined we would get it."

The cDNA approach is strongly defended, not surprisingly, by William Haseltine,
chief executive of Human Genome Sciences. Academic critics "have a lot to
learn," he said. In two or three years, he added, "the great effort to discover
human genes will be over; the task then will be to redefine what a biologist
does."

He said, "A biologist will start with a gene itself and match it to a
phenomenon," instead of the other way around.

A Key Issue: Patents

The success of Human Genome Sciences may be affected by the still unresolved
issue of whether patents will be granted for large numbers of genes of mostly
unknown function. The company's strategy, however, is not to rely on this
protection but to develop full-length sequences for genes whose function has
been determined. These are more likely to prove patentable. The National
Institutes of Health decided recently not to pursue its patent application for
the gene fragments that Dr. Venter isolated while on its payroll.

With his machines analyzing 1,000 DNA sequences a day, and a Maspar
supercomputer to keep track of the streams of data, Dr. Venter seems to be
surfing on top of the scientist's world. He is developing computer programs to
infer what a gene does from its chemical sequence.

"All our intellectual effort is on the information side," he said. "The
sequencing is totally routine."

He has several ambitious goals. He said he has already achieved one, to find a
majority of the human genes, though since he has not yet published his 100,000
sequences, other scientists cannot yet assess his claim. Dr. Haseltine, for one,
said he believes the sequences represent less than half the full gene set. The
issue depends on how many duplications there are among Dr. Venter's sequences
and on how many genes there are in all, with estimates ranging between 50,000
and 100,000.

A second goal is to describe the anatomy of gene expression in human tissues.
The cells of the brain or liver or intestine presumably express different
subsets of genes to perform their special functions, and these subsets should be
revealed in the cDNA's analyzed from each organ.

Medical Help

The anatomy project will yield some important medical insights, Dr. Venter
hopes, like the retinue of abnormal genes that get switched on in various types
of cancer. The first appearance of these genes would serve as early detection
signals. One of his colleagues is exploring the changes in gene expression that
occur in aging.

But his "real goal," he said, is human evolution. "What we hope to do is to
follow evolution at the genome level," he said. "We will look for evolutionary
events that lead to the development of new genes." One example is the new genes
for brain structure that presumably emerged with the evolution of humans from
primates. That would be a leap beyond the present approach, which, because of
the cost of DNA sequencing, is mostly confined to studying how a single gene
varies from one organism to another.

"My motivation for leaving the Government was to go 10 times faster than I could
have done at N.I.H.," Dr. Venter says. "I didn't do this to become a
multimillionaire. I never negotiated for stock. I got it as a matter of course
because Steinberg's group offers leading scientists 10 percent of the companies
they form."

Dr. Venter's data on human genes may yet bring him fame, and in the pursuit he
has already found fortune.

NAME: J. Craig Venter

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. J. Craig Venter in his laboratory near Washington. (Marty
Katz for The New York Times)

Diagram: "Medical Uses of Gene Sequencing"

One goal of mapping human DNA is to find out which genes are switched on in
various kinds of cancer. The first appearance of these genes would help in early
detection of cancer. (Source: Institute for Genomic Research) (pg. C9)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 22, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The Boat People: A Chapter Closes

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 419 words


They first floated into the world's consciousness in 1977, fishing boats crammed
with desperate men, women and children fleeing the hardships and persecutions of
a newly united Communist Vietnam. They encountered pirate attacks at sea and
hostile receptions on nearby Asian shores. Still, nearly a million of these
"boat people" eventually set sail, most in the late 1970's and early 1980's.

That chapter of history has now been officially closed by the United Nations
High Commissioner on Refugees. The U.N.'s refugee arm declared last week that
fleeing Vietnamese would no longer be automatically eligible for consideration
as political refugees; they will be judged on an individual basis like other
applicants. Most of the 60,000 boat people remaining in Asian refugee camps can
now be legally sent back home.

That is unwelcome news to the affected Vietnamese. But sending them home is no
more cruel than leaving them to rot in refugee camps -- if they can be assured
of freedom from reprisals on their return. Asian countries, fearing unemployment
and ethnic conflict, will not admit them as residents. And Western countries
other than the United States have been almost equally unwelcoming.

Though the world likes to pretend otherwise, the treatment refugees receive
always has a lot to do with international politics and the current standing of
their homeland. The Vietnamese exodus of the late 1970's shocked a world that
had been lulled by Hanoi's rosy -- and false -- postwar picture of liberation,
peace and national recuperation. Vietnam is still a poor country and remains
arbitrary in its treatment of those suspected of political nonconformity. Yet it
offers more hopeful economic prospects and less systematic repression.

It is also being officially welcomed back into the community of nations that
isolated it during the long Indochina wars. Only this month, the U.S. finally
dropped its 19-year economic embargo. The Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, once virtually an anti-Vietnamese alliance, now weighs accepting Hanoi
as an associate member.

International law defines a refugee fairly strictly. Most people trying to
escape poverty and dictatorship do not qualify, only those who can demonstrate a
"well-founded fear of persecution." International agencies like the U.N. High
Commissioner on Refugees have a dual mandate: to protect legitimate refugees and
to organize their return home after it becomes safe to go back. For Vietnam,
that moment now seems to have arrived.

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Market Place;
Agent Orange ruling may affect product-liability lawsuits.

BYLINE: By Alison Leigh Cowan

SECTION: Section D;  Page 6;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 666 words


IT got only the briefest of mentions in yesterday's voluminous roundup of
announcements from the United States Supreme Court. But the court's decision not
to consider reopening the settlement over the Vietnam-era defoliant Agent Orange
could be big news financially for companies that face huge product-liability
lawsuits.

The biggest beneficiaries, lawyers and analysts predict, may well be the makers
of breast implants such as Dow Corning and Bristol-Myers Squibb. They are in the
midst of wrapping up negotiations on a proposed $4.75 billion settlement to
benefit women who say the devices have caused health problems.

"It could be helpful," Calvert D. Crary, a securities analyst specializing in
litigation at Auerbach, Pollak & Richardson in Stamford, Conn., said of the
Supreme Court decision. "It just adds a little more finality to the settlement."

The Supreme Court announcement confirmed what the stock market has suspected for
a long time: The High Court was not eager to reopen the Agent Orange litigation
that for the most part was settled 10 years ago.

In that historic 1984 case, Vietnam veterans who were injured by Agent Orange, a
chemical defoliant widely used to expose enemy positions, won $180 million --
less than $5,000 each -- from Monsanto, Dow Chemical and other manufacturers of
the chemical.

While the settlement was an unusual legal strategy at the time, it has since
been copied in both the breast implant and asbestos cases. For companies, such a
settlement can confine the liability and allow them to get on with business.
 But entering into costly settlements only gives companies peace of mind, the
logic says, if they know that decisions will not overturned later by plaintiffs
who say they were unaware of the need to get involved because they did not learn
of their injuries until much later. It was just such a lawsuit brought by the
widow of Capt. Don Ivy that the Supreme Court declined to hear on Friday,
leaving intact two lower court rulings that prevent these last-to-know victims
from suing.

For veterans, the frustration was palpable. "It's very disappointing," said
retired Adm. Elmo Zumwalt Jr., Chief of Naval Operations during part of the
Vietnam War. He said he thought Agent Orange cost his eldest son, Elmo 3d, his
life.

To others, however, the Supreme Court decision is a welcome signal that
companies can now count on these vexing cases to stay closed. "This whole case
is a very emotional one," said Scot Wheeler, a spokesman for Dow Chemical in
Midland, Mich. "But the causal relationships still have not been strongly
established."

Robert M. Hager, chief counsel for the Agent Orange plaintiffs who lost
yesterday, warned that more of the companies responsible for everything from
toxic waste to faulty breast implants would conclude that precedent was now on
their side.

"If amicus briefs from all 50 states and all the veterans groups could not
convince the Supreme Court to hear the case, when will they ever want to hear
this issue?" he said. "Companies will feel pretty comfortable they can just
bundle the rights of future claimants together into these cheap settlements."

He noted that even before yesterday's announcement, at least 21 makers of
asbestos were emboldened enough by the response of the lower courts to the Ivy
case to ask a Federal District Court judge in Philadelphia to approve another
class-action settlement that would cover people who were exposed to asbestos on
the job but were not yet aware of any injuries.

Jack B. Weinstein, the Federal District judge in Brooklyn and architect of the
Agent Orange settlement, said the issue of how to treat claimants who do not
even realize that they have been harmed is "a very difficult problem of modern
society," one that is far from resolved. "Although a number of plaintiffs and
defendants were watching the Ivy case very carefully," he said, "it has such
special circumstances, it's unlikely this has any implications in those other
cases."

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Facing Criticism, Clinton Will Name Envoys Soon

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 667 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 23


Facing criticism for being slow to name ambassadors to several major countries,
President Clinton will soon name envoys to India, Britain and Saudi Arabia,
Administration officials said today.

In an effort to break the logjam that has delayed numerous appointments, the
President plans to name Stephen J. Solarz, the former Representative from
Brooklyn, to be Ambassador to India, and William J. Crowe Jr., the retired
Admiral who was Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to be Ambassador to
Britain.

In addition, the President will appoint Ray Mabus, the former Governor of
Mississippi, to be Ambassador to Saudi Arabia, officials said.

Mr. Solarz's nomination has been delayed for more than four months because of an
F.B.I. investigation into his efforts to obtain a visa for a Hong Kong executive
with a criminal record. Last month, that investigation was ended with no charges
brought.

Mr. Solarz, a Democrat, lost a re-election bid in 1992 after the Congressional
district he had represented since 1975 was redrawn. Respected for his expertise
in foreign policy, Mr. Solarz was a member of the House Foreign Affairs
Committee and chairman of its subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs.

According to one Administration official, President Clinton has filed formal
papers with the State Department expressing his intention to nominate Mr.
Solarz. State Department officials said, however, that before the President
makes a formal nomination, India must first approve the name. This is widely
seen as a formality since Indian officials had told the Clinton Administration
that they wanted an ambassador who knew their country well.

Admiral Crowe, who was one of the most senior military figures to back Mr.
Clinton in the 1992 campaign, lent Mr. Clinton a much-needed military
endorsement when he was under fire for his efforts to avoid service during the
Vietnam War. Called on to help quell the uproar over Mr. Clinton's efforts to
stay out of the armed services, Admiral Crowe called many of the criticisms
"divisive and peripheral."

At a party that was held in Washington last weekend to mark Admiral Crowe's 40th
wedding anniversary, he invited his guests to visit him once he became
Ambassador to Britain, one of the most important and prestigious diplomatic
posts. Admiral Crowe was Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff from 1985 to
1989, serving under Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush.

Mr. Mabus was a vigorous supporter of Mr. Clinton in 1992 and, like the
President, was considered one of the new breed of young, mainstream Democratic
governors. He served as Governor of Mississippi from 1988 to 1992, losing a race
for re-election in November 1991 to Kirk Fordice.

Mr. Mabus will go to Saudi Arabia with little expertise about the Middle East.

Mr. Mabus was the Administration's second choice for the position. President
Clinton had first selected Edward W. Gnehm Jr., a career foreign service officer
who was Ambassador to Kuwait during the Persian Gulf war. But the Saudi
Government rejected him, in part because it did not consider him high-level
enough. Administration officials said the Saudis indicated they wanted an
ambassador who was a friend of the President's.

Nonetheless, Saudi Arabia has joined India in repeatedly criticizing President
Clinton for dragging his feet in appointing envoys, and several senators have
made the same criticism.

The most recent criticism came today from Senator Hank Brown, a Colorado
Republican, as Secretary of State Warren Christopher was testifying before the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Voicing sentiments often heard in New Delhi,
Mr. Brown asked whether the delay in naming an ambassador was in any way
intended to signal disapproval of India's Government.

"The Indians are very sensitive about this," Mr. Brown said, "They view the
absence of an ambassador as an insult."

Mr. Christopher said the delay provided "no scintilla of evidence to indicate
our disapproval of the Indian Government."


LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

A Frenchwoman Takes Hanoi by Helicopter

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 778 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Feb. 19


Anoa Dussol, a 37-year-old Frenchwoman of Vietnamese birth, has brought off a
peaceful helicopter assault on a country where the aircraft that she pilots were
for many years dreaded machines of war.

Last March, Ms. Dussol was in deep trouble with the Government for arriving on
an Air France flight in Ho Chi Minh City, where she was born when it was still
known as Saigon, with a fully operative but totally undocumented French
helicopter in the plane's cargo hold.

The security-conscious Vietnamese reacted allergically to an unannounced Western
helicopter. As Ms. Dussol tells it, every alarm bell rang. Security forces
detained her; the helicopter was seized and put under guard, and a few days
later she was summoned to this capital to face a group of about 35 stern men
representing, she said, the military and many ministries and including several
deputy ministers.

The hearing took most of the day, Ms. Dussol said, but it ended with a convivial
dinner in a restaurant and eventual permission for her to start Vietnam's only
privately run helicopter service.

She said she had convinced her interrogators that she had pulled up her roots in
France, sold her successful business and come here to devote herself entirely to
the modernization of the land of her birth.

"I have no children," she said she had told them. "I am divorced from my
husband. Condemn me to death, shoot me; it's all the same to me."

A Nightmare for Business

She staged her dramatic entry, she said, because her experience in another
business here in the preceding year had convinced her that it would have taken
at least four years to get permission to establish her company had she proceeded
conventionally.

Bureaucracy and old Communist habits make dealing in Vietnam a business
promoter's nightmare, despite the Government's expressed eagerness for foreign
participation and investment in its version of a market economy.

Ms. Dussol had come to Vietnam in 1992 for a French company, which she helped to
get contracts to build hotels in Ho Chi Minh City and the northern port of
Haiphong. She owned a company in Paris that specialized in restoring high-cost
town houses and apartment buildings.

But she said flying helicopters had always been her ambition. "Even when I'm
dreaming, I dream I'm flying," she said. So as soon as her business was good
enough to allow her to take the expensive lessons, she earned her pilot's
license.

She was still married then and followed her husband, an international lawyer, to
St. Martin's in the Caribbean, where she founded an island-hopping helicopter
company. "An extremely juicy business," she said.

Before getting into the real-estate business, Ms. Dussol said, she spent her
years between 18 and 20 touring the world as a "professional gambler." Then her
"scientific" roulette system, which had made her rich, broke down and devoured
the money it had won, she said. "So I decided to go to work."

After her divorce in 1992, she followed the call of her Vietnamese heart and
came to work here. Her fleet of two helicopters -- one of which she helped to
pilot all the way from Paris -- will double in June, Ms. Dussol said. Her
clients are mainly foreign businessmen whose tight schedules do not allow for
the arduous car journeys over northern Vietnam's overcrowded and narrow roads.

About Two Dozen Employees

Haiphong is the main destination, at $520 for the round-trip of 30 minutes each
way. The company, Heli-Jet Vietnam Air Service, a joint venture with a state
organization, employs two French pilots and two mechanics.  Nineteen other
employees are Vietnamese, including navigators who are required to accompany
each flight.

In a highly symbolic gesture next May, Ms. Dussol will pilot two flights to Dien
Bien Phu, where in May 40 years ago the Vietnamese Communist army defeated
French colonial forces and won the independence of this country.  The northern
half became Communist; the southern region was ruled by the American-supported
Saigon Government until its defeat in 1975.

For the anniversary commemoration of the end of French rule, Ms. Dussol said she
is to fly Vietnamese leaders, perhaps including Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, who
commanded the victorious army, and French veterans of the battle to the remote
mountain valley northwest of here on the Laotian border.

Ms. Dussol was 4 years old when she and her parents, who were French citizens
and named her Suzanne at birth, left for France. But she insists that despite
her Parisian, slangy French and halting Vietnamese, she never ceased feeling
that she is part of the country into which she was born.

"My life is Vietnam," she said.


LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

AT HOME WITH: Pete Hamill;
On Background

BYLINE: By ALEX WITCHEL

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 5;  Home Desk

LENGTH: 1991 words


IN the movies, at least, there was always a world-weary editor in the newsroom
with smarts to spare for a neophyte reporter. He would say something magical and
the kid would come back a star.

Pete Hamill, the former New York Post columnist and the newspaper's editor
during last year's frenzied Abe Hirshfeld reign, found such a mentor when he
showed up for the night shift there in 1960. Paul Sann, who Mr. Hamill recalls
smoked Camels and looked like Bogart (who else?), gave him a motto a journalist
could live by: "If you've got the story, tell it. If you don't have the story,
write it."

Mr. Hamill has a story to tell in his new book, "A Drinking Life" (Little,
Brown), his own story, and he tells it so well ("in the hard, spare prose of a
journalist," a reviewer wrote) that the book hit the New York Times best-seller
list last weekend at No. 9.

It is the story of Mr. Hamill's growing up in Brooklyn as the oldest of seven
children of Irish immigrant parents and how drinking helped define his sense of
identity as he established himself outside "the neighborhood." It is also the
story of how drinking came to destroy his memory, erode his talent and ruin his
home life until he finally gave it up in 1973.

"Confession alone is not necessarily good for the soul," he says, in his
Greenwich Village apartment. "People become writers in the first place by those
things that hurt you into art, as Yeats said it. Then they become separated from
what started out affecting them. Journalism forces you to look at the world so
you don't get cut off."

At 58, Mr. Hamill seems to have mellowed. His maverick, testosterone-fueled
columns at The Post, The Village Voice and The New York Daily News evoked a New
York where neckties were for loosening and subways smelled of sweat. He covered
Vietnam, Lebanon, Northern Ireland and Nicaragua, wrote fiction and idolized
Hemingway (who else?). A glass of whisky in his hand completed the picture. The
Lion's Head, the writer's bar in the Village, was his home base.

But for the last seven years, he has been married to the Japanese journalist
Fukiko Aoki and has two real homes -- this one, near the meat-packing district,
and another upstate in Ulster County. Here in the Village, he is surrounded by
his paintings and drawings (as a teen-ager he wanted to be a cartoonist and
before becoming a journalist earned his living as a graphic designer) and books,
books, books, floor to ceiling, wall to wall.

Ms. Aoki writes a column about American culture for Bunshun, a Japanese weekly
magazine. The marriage is successful, Mr. Hamill says, because she works even
harder than he does. The two met in Tokyo when she interviewed him. During the
interview there was an earthquake. "The earth moved, what can I tell you?" he
says.

On this sunny morning, with their black labrador, Gabo, lured to the kitchen by
the promise of a sesame bagel, Mr. Hamill settles on the couch. Change slides
from his pocket onto the cushions, unnoticed. He eats pastry and smokes
cigarettes and his face is creased in all kinds of directions. This is a man
from a bygone era, before bodies required preservation like works of art. But
he's far from unattractive. He says he has had romances with Shirley Maclaine
and Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, but turns a little pale at the prospect of a
rehash. "I'm a happily married man," he says, reaching for a cigarette. "Only a
cad would talk about his life that way."

He's more comfortable talking about men. "I started to write this book when
people I knew from the Lion's Head, people I had grown up with in the business,
started to die at ages like 46," he says. "Everyone knew I had stopped drinking
and always wanted to know how I did it. I had written a piece about it for New
York magazine years ago, but it was like a memo. And I thought, I really should
try to figure this out.

"The tone was the hardest to establish. I didn't want to be preachy or
judgmental about people who aren't as tough or as smart. To be clear about what
actually happened and be patient enough to allow it to develop and not get it
all in the lead like a newspaper story."

He draws on a Vantage. "Cigarettes are much harder to kick than whisky," he
says. "You can smoke and work, but you can't drink and work.

"In the literature of drinking, like 'Under the Volcano,' 'The Iceman Cometh'
and all over Fitzgerald, there are only drastic or extreme cases. One of the
things I was determined to do was not make it worse than it was. I never ended
up with the D.T.'s, shaking and seeing little men. I just wanted to write about
a condition that had its own form of damage. One of the things I learned is that
the functioning drinker causes more damage than the alkie in the doorway.

"I don't remember as much about the 1960's as I do when I was 12. No matter what
trick I use, I can't reconstruct a great night, what the jokes were, why we
laughed. When I was writing, I used triggers, tapes of hit songs of the 40's and
50's, and as I would listen to them, whole months would come back. Rooms,
linoleum, textures, pictures. It would all flow out of Bing Crosby singing
'Don't Fence Me In.' When I hear the Doors or Aretha, I think of Vietnam,
because that's what was playing in all those bars in Saigon. When I hear parts
of 'Hair' I remember the moratoriums. But I remember the things I covered,
rather than the life I lived."

Mr. Hamill's father, Billy, a clerk, began taking his eldest son to the bars
when he was 8. A stellar soccer player, the elder Mr. Hamill lost his leg to
gangrene after it was broken in a game and he had to wait a full day in a
hospital before receiving treatment. He drank. His son drank. When he quit
drinking he did it alone; he never went to Alcoholics Anonymous.

"It was hard to go to A.A.," he says. "Especially the Brooklyn part of me. I
just had to deal with it myself. If you're the oldest in a large family, you
tend to do everything yourself, particularly if you are the first American. You
begin a habit or pattern that makes it easy to reject other help. Also, in A.A.
there was a religious element I couldn't accept. It was irrelevant to what I
needed to be sober. Now I think there's an A.A. for atheists. A.A.A. or
something." He smiles. "They even fix flats."

He still goes to the Lion's Head, he says, but he doesn't stand at the bar.
"It's hard for me. And I don't want the other guys to feel judged. I don't get
aggravated with drunks as much as bored. Their conversation is like bad writing.
Everything is in italics."

One of the details Mr. Hamill remembered only when he began to write his book
was how as a child he was influenced by the magic potions his comic book heroes
would drink to become invincible. It sent a powerful message. So did what Mr.
Hamill calls "the Irish thing," meaning the accepted wisdom that anyone who was
too smart, who succeeded too much, became guilty of the sin of pride, having the
nerve to be better than everyone else. It is not coincidence that after Mr.
Hamill was admitted to an exclusive parochial school in Manhattan, he dropped
out. Or that after earning a high school equivalency degree in the Navy, he
enrolled in college but never graduated. Compounding "the Irish thing" was his
father's torment over his leg and everything that might have been.

"Clearly, my mother is the hero of the book," he says. "My father did shape me.
He didn't drive because he had one leg, and for years I never drove. I had no
mobility. The self-inflicted wound has an echo from things you don't even
consciously understand.

"But it was not him alone. My mother was also there. Last December, I was given
an award by the National Cartoonist Society as an amateur cartoonist, and they
found three letters I had written to Milton Caniff in 1946 and 1947 I didn't
know existed. The kid who wrote them was so straight: 'I want to be a
cartoonist, can you give me some tips.' None of my father's Brooklyn class
stuff, being poor. The green ceiling, as the Irish call it, seemed to some part
of me irrelevant.

"My mother had made me think I could talk to Milton Caniff or the President of
the United States as easily as a haberdasher. That's what it meant to be
American, what pulled people from other countries. To have a sense of the
possible."

Mr. Hamill's mother, Anne, is 83 and suffers from Parkinson's disease. She lives
in a nursing home in Brooklyn. His father died in 1986. His brother Tom is an
engineer for the New York State Power Authority; his only sister, Kathleen, was
until recently an editor for Navy publications. Brian is a still photographer
for movies; John is a speechwriter at the New York Housing Authority; Denis is a
columnist at The Daily News, and Joe is a television producer.

From his first marriage, to Ramona Negron, Mr. Hamill has two grown daughters,
Adriene Wellesley, a writer in Las Vegas, Nev., and Deirdre Hamill, a
photographer for The Phoenix Gazette. Mrs. Wellesley was indicted on Friday on
five counts of child abuse with substantial bodily harm and one count of murder
in the death of her infant son in 1991. Her husband, Charles Wellesley, was also
indicted in the death. Mr. Hamill says lawyers have advised him not to comment
on the case.

Though his children prefer living out West, Mr. Hamill will not leave New York.
He has lived and worked in Mexico, as a student and as a journalist, enough in
his lifetime to call it his second country, but his home is here.

"More than anything, New York interests me," he says. "The New York I evoke in
the 40's and 50's was a great big optimistic city. I felt I could grow up to be
a cartoonist, play left field for the Dodgers, even in spite of the Irish thing.
The older group was used to disappointment, but the kids had beaten Hitler. We
could do anything. I don't feel that out on Pitkin Avenue now."

He gestures toward the window. "The reason I like this neighborhood is that I
see people physically working. Seeing a guy with his cleaver reminds me so much
of that New York I miss. People stand differently when they have work. I go to
Coney Island every summer. Nathan's is more or less the same, though the rides
are all different. But the light is the same. Nobody can ruin that."

Rather than return to writing columns, Mr. Hamill wants to concentrate on books.
His next is a novel, and a collection of his columns and articles is also to be
published. But in here, those books will have to fight for space. There is
barely room for his easel and desk.

He shows off his collection of books from the old Bomba the Jungle Boy series,
bracketed by Yeats and Joyce. There are sections on journalism, crime, Japan,
Russia, New York, Georges Simenon, Mexico, Italy and Renaissance history. "If I
could move Florence to the Mexican Riviera and get Joe's Stone Crab from Miami
in the same town, I'd be happy," he says.

The wall over his desk is filled with faces. Masks from Mexico, mug shots of
gangsters. The infamous kiss photo, when Mr. Hirshfeld planted a big smacker on
Mr. Hamill, who looked as horrified as everyone else felt, hangs in his
bathroom. "I call it the Kiss of the Spider Man," he says. "When I got home that
day, poor Fukiko said, 'Does this mean that what he has, you have?' "

He also shows a few pictures of his mother. "She had a tremendous memory," he
says. "It's sad for me now to see her. She always believed in America. She
worked as a cashier at the RKO chain and wouldn't let my brothers into the
theater before each one got a library card and read. Grand Army Plaza Library
was so far away from where we lived, but it had so much more than the branch.
The sign on the wall said, 'Here are enshrined the longings of great hearts.'
And I looked at that sign and said, 'Let me be a great heart, please, whatever
it is.' " He throws his arms up in a praying motion.

"Sometimes," he says, "words even on the sides of buildings have meanings that
people underestimate."

NAME: Pete Hamill

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Pete Hamill with one of his own paintings. (Sara Krulwich/The
New York Times) (pg. C1); In March, Pete Hamill was kissed by Abe Hirshfeld,
then owner of The New York Post. (Associated Press) (pg. C10)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Art in Review

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KIMMELMAN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 25;  Column 2;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 244 words



George Dokoupil
'The New Immigrants'
 Tony Shafrazi Gallery
 119 Wooster Street (near Prince Street)
 SoHo
 Through March 12

These most recent paintings by George Dokoupil are, like his previous works,
derived from photographs and made with candle soot. The photographs are
projected onto the canvases, then Mr. Dokoupil traces the forms with a lighted
candle whose flame leaves black trails of soot. Charcoal drawing may come to
mind, but with a difference: the effect may be closer to enlarged
black-and-white snapshots seen through gauze.

These new works deal with immigrants and refugees from various hot spots around
the world: Cambodia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Haiti, Vietnam. Somehow in the
hands of Mr. Dokoupil (formerly Jiri Georg Dokoupil), they are most affecting
not for their subject matter but for his handling of light and texture, which
actually has a way of obscuring and negating the images themselves.

"Hope in Vietnam" is a dark picture of a mother and child in which the dramatic
light cast on the face of the child nods to Caravaggio. Pointillism comes more
to mind with the best work in this uneven show, "Refugees in Shelter, Casa
Romero, Calif.": a blazing white light seems to wash out all color and detail
and leave behind only a hazy geometry of forms that is the row of beds in the
shelter and the almost indecipherable figures around the beds. It's a sparkling
and even touching picture.   MICHAEL KIMMELMAN

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Decades Pass, and What's New Under the Sun?

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE

SECTION: Section B;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 814 words


That unfinished decade, the 1960's, began 30 years ago today when Cassius
Marcellus Clay Jr. inconclusively beat Sonny Liston for the heavyweight boxing
title. The decisive decade, the 2000's, may begin tonight when Nancy Kerrigan
gets the gold medal and Tonya Harding gets the cold shoulder.

This would sound like a stretch even to me, cold and miserable in New York
watching warm and happy people in Norway, except that 30 years ago, warm and
happy in Miami Beach, I found it impossible to believe that Clay -- viciously
attacked by the press as a fraud, a disgrace, an obnoxious fool, the dupe of a
dangerous gang of hate-mongers -- could actually avoid being damaged by the
intimidating champion.

What happened then was definitely ambiguous. Liston refused to respond to the
bell for the seventh round. Was he hurt, scared, bored, taking a dive? That
inconclusiveness became a signature of those times. We still don't know the
outcome of the Vietnam War (will Coke or Pepsi win?). And the War on Poverty,
the Civil Rights movement, the drive for gender equity -- all were highly
promoted contests that we have slowly come to realize are continuing struggles
without a final result. But a prizefight?

Thirty years to the day later, we may get closure in a figure-skating
competition. This time around, the rivals are two young women still stunted in
the prolonged childhood of their sport instead of the 22-year-old baby of the
universe and a 30ish thug. In those days, taking sides became a
political-generational litmus test. This time it's a gender-class litmus test.
Those who trash Tonya -- and the mail is even uglier than the public prints --
are attacked in turn as smugs, elitists, antifeminists and the kind of corrupted
cheerleaders who contend that all Americans can get a fair shake just so long as
they are willing to lend themselves a hand first. The Tonya trashers have made
me wish Tonya were a luckier skater.

Among those who trashed Cassius Clay in the week building up to his surprise
victory were newspapermen offended at what they perceived to be his lack of
humility, his lack of class, his incessant discussion of money. When a
sportswriter from Boston, where else?, upbraided him during a locker-room
interview, Clay said: "I'm making money. The popcorn man making money, and the
beer man, and you got something to write about. Your papers let you come down to
Miami Beach where it's warm."

There were, of course, other issues that week. Malcolm X and his family were in
Miami Beach taking their first vacation, celebrating with Clay over vanilla ice
cream. Malcolm had been silenced by the leader of the Nation of Islam for
remarks after President Kennedy's death. Malcolm would leave the organization
and be murdered, Louis Farrakhan would replace him as the Nation's most visible
spokesman, and Clay would stay and become Muhammad Ali.

The day after the fight, 30 years ago tomorrow, badgered about being a
segregationist in a time of integrationist hopes, Clay said: "In the jungle,
lions are with lions and tigers with tigers and redbirds stay with redbirds and
bluebirds with bluebirds. That's human nature, too, to be with your own kind. I
don't want to go where I'm not wanted."

Reporters began to argue with Clay, about civil rights and the role of the
sports idol. Quite suddenly, his voice rose and he said: "I don't have to be
what you want me to be. I'm free to be who I want."

That's a lesson we haven't yet absorbed. We didn't get it with Ali, we're not
getting it with Charles Barkley, and we will probably never have the chance to
really deal with Tonya on such a level unless she has far more emotional
resources and caring friends than we have seen, and she comes back someday to
win the world championship and the next Olympics. If she does, I hope she is
wearing the same clothes and the same makeup.

Ali, of course, is so different now, so sweetly nonthreatening, almost holy,
that his role for 30 years as a mobile, adjustable icon is often hard to grasp.
He is a chapter in every history of sport. Tonya will probably be, at best, a
frozen footnote.

If this were still the 1960's, if only in spirit, tonight's long program would
end inconclusively. Tonya and Nancy would collide or turn their ankles or have
to be evacuated from the rink in a bomb scare and never return. The 1960's ended
on a Sunday in 1974 when President Ford pardoned Richard M. Nixon and Evel
Knievel, expected to either jump the Snake River Canyon or die trying, merely
parachuted down.

But if this is to be the start of the 2000's, the least we can hope for is The
End. How's this definitive split-screen image: On the left, Nancy bares those
big teeth as the gold medal is lowered over her head; on the right, Tonya bares
those little teeth as she is led away, the handcuffs on her wrists covered with
a scarf of spangled red chiffon.

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cassius Clay with a left to Sonny Liston in the third round of
their world championship bout 30 years ago today. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: February 27, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1460 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2   2   ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car
                collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives
                of five families.

 2      1   6   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A
                computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss
                and is accused by her of sexual harassment.

 3      3  81   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 4      4  17   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 5      5   5   FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of
                mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a
                sylvan Vermont town.

 6      7  46   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 7      6   3   FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) A
                widow's affection for the close friend of her son, killed in an
                accident, creates familial tension.

 8      8   6   BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent
                deaths.

 9      9   5   HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B. Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) Three
                American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German activities
                in Buenos Aires in 1942.

 10    10  27   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 11         1   SAREK, by A.C. Crispin. (Pocket, $22.) The stormy life of
                Spock's father, an illustrious ambassador for the "Star Trek"
                Federation.

 12         1   THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun.
                (Putnam, $19.95.) Jim Qwilleran and his feline sleuths
                investigate a series of catastrophes.

 13         1   RAMA REVEALED, by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee.
                (Spectra/Bantam, $22.95.) The concluding volume in a series
                about the voyage of a starship.

 14*   11  10   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &
                Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates
                a child's mysterious death.

 15        18   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.)
                Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
                and a poem.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  42   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2      2  10   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 3      3   7   SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A
                psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.

 4      7  25   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 5      4  27   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 6      5  21   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 7      8  15   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More
                comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 8      6  13   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                100, reflect on their lives.

 9          1   LEAVING HOME, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $22.95.) From a
                childhood in foster homes to a column for The International
                Herald Tribune: the humorist's memoir.

 10     9   2   A DRINKING LIFE, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) The
                memoirs of a New York born-and-bred Irish-American journalist.

 11         1   ANN-MARGRET: My Story, by Ann-Margret with Todd Gold. (Putnam,
                $23.95.) The autobiography of the Swedish-born, Illinois-bred
                actress and entertainer.

 12    13  19   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 13    10  30   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 14    11  21   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

 15    12  81   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   6   MAGIC EYE, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when
                scrutinized at length.

 2      2  40   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 3      3  18   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.

 4      4  31   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 12, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE BINGO PALACE, by Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $23.) Three decent people
look for love on a windblown prairie in this novel whose daily life is enriched
by supernatural events and the presence of Indian spirits.

BRAZIL, by John Updike. (Knopf, $23.) In the vast, trackless wilds of a Brazil
the author freely admits making up out of whole cloth, a tragicomic
knight-errant and his dolly, madly in love, break all the rules of class and
race.

EXCURSIONS IN THE REAL WORLD: Memoirs, by William Trevor. (Knopf, $23.) Not an
autobiography but a series of sketches from the life of the marvelous Irish
short-story writer; well mannered, persuasive, showing exceptional powers both
of re-creation and forgiveness.

GOING NATIVE, by Stephen Wright. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) A road novel
that explodes the conventions of the genre as a weird, dangerous shape-shifting
protagonist remakes his identity on the way to California.

HARRIET BEECHER STOWE: A Life, by Joan D. Hedrick. (Oxford University, $35.) A
substantive, scrupulously researched life of the author of "Uncle Tom's Cabin,"
with cogent analyses of the book and the moral universe that gave rise to it and
to other controversial works by Stowe.

HOW WE DIE: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf,
$24.) The author, a physician, surgeon and teacher for 35 years, offers a wise,
humane and cultivated examination of what happens to people when they die,
omitting none of the clinical detail.

IMAGES: My Life in Film, by Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $27.95.) At 75, the great
Swedish film maker confronts and reveals himself as artist and man in this
evocation of his career, based on a fresh viewing of all his movies.

THE LATE SHIFT: Letterman, Leno, and the Network Battle for the Night, by Bill
Carter. (Hyperion, $24.95.) It wasn't as easy as offering Mr. Letterman $1
zillion, as this detailed, gripping account by a Times reporter shows.

LIBERTY AND SEXUALITY: The Right to Privacy and the Making of Roe v. Wade, by
David J. Garrow. (Lisa Drew/Macmillan, $28.) A monumental, insightful account of
the profound transformation in American attitudes about sexuality that
culminated in the 1973 Supreme Court decision that made abortion a
constitutional right.

PARALLEL TIME: Growing Up in Black and White, by Brent Staples. (Pantheon, $23.)
This memoir by an editorial writer for The New York Times is a complex work of
vivid self-scrutiny, a portrait of the worldly education of a young black man
who made it, haunted by the specter of a brother whose life was ended at 22 by
gunshots.

RAISING THE DEAD, by Richard Selzer. (Whittle Books/Viking, $17.50.) The author,
a former surgeon unusually sensitive to the contingency of life, describes his
own near-death experience, an ordeal in which the only comfort was his survival.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 27, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 874 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     2   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just
           before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret
           to an 11-year-old boy.

 2     3   NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A
           servant hopes to win an heiress's heart in Victorian-era
           Minnesota.

 3*    8   SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied
           Poland.

 4     2   JEDI SEARCH, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.)
           The first volume of "The Jedi Academy Trilogy," a "Star
           Wars" saga.

 5*    6   WINTER MOON, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The
           families of law officers are besieged by violence in Los
           Angeles and Montana.

 6     5   RUBY, by V.C. Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) A young woman seeks
           to discover the dreadful secrets of her family's past in
           New Orleans.

 7     9   DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine,
           $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent
           novelist.

 8     1   SAVING GRACE, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) The
           romantic problems of a 13th-century English widow.

 9     5   PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of
           murders in a small California town vexes a temporary
           district attorney.

 10    4   SUDDENLY, by Barbara Delinsky. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.)
           A pediatrician finds romance after the death of her dear
           friend.

 11    1   THE CAT WHO WENT INTO THE CLOSET, by Lilian Jackson Braun.
           (Jove, $4.99.) A collection of junk helps Jim Qwilleran
           solve a mystery.

 12   54   THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A
           law student investigates the murder of two Supreme Court
           Justices.

 13    4   TERMINAL, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $5.99.) A medical
           researcher's pursuit of a treatment for cancer and a
           nurse's pursuit of him.

 14*   1   THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del
           Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The final volume in a series about
           a fantasy land.

 15    5   DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) An
           ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a
           series of mysterious deaths.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1     7   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           Everyday spirituality.

 2    538  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 3    54   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) A memoir.

 4     7   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 5    24   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket,
           $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.

 6    124  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France.

 7    17   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a
           la A.A. Milne.

 8    39   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.)
           Menopause and today's women.

 9*    4   WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ... AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and
           Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Vietnam.

 10*  13   GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the
           physicist Richard Feynman.

 11*  138  YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine,
           $10.) The different languages men and women speak.

 12*  11   OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the
           television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.

 13   13   THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects
           of Taoist philosophy.

 14*  16   YOUNG MEN & FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of
           Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a
           Montana forest in 1949.

 15*  13   EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A
           woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of
           murders.

 16*  29   EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's,
           $6.99.) The veterinarian's memoirs.

 17*  27   UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on
           life's commonplaces.

 18*   5   A CALL FOR REVOLUTION, by Martin L. Gross. (Ballantine,
           $8.99.) More examples of Government waste, and how to stop
           it.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    154  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles to practice in the
           pursuit of success.

 2    161  THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and
           Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's
           diet.

 3     1   THE ERNST & YOUNG TAX GUIDE 1994. (Wiley, $13.95.) Ways to
           cope with the I.R.S.

 4    19   WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg,
           Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
           Advice.

 5*    5   A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (Harper
           Perennial, $12.) Counsel for daily life.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 12, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BENEFITS

SECTION: Section 9; Page 11; Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 1092 words


Roudabout Tribute
MONDAY -- Gene Feist, The founding director of the Roundabout Theater Company,
will be honored for his 30 years in the theater at a benefit at the Roundabout,
1530 Broadway at 45th Street. Alan Arkin, Karen Allen, Philip Bosco, Geraldine
Fitzgerald, Nancy Marchand and the Lar Lubavitch Dance Company will be among the
performers at the benefit for the Roundabout Conservatory Ensemble Company,
which trains young actors. Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by entertainment
at 8. Tickets, $50, from (212) 719-9393.


Masked Ball for Purim



WEDNESDAY -- The Jewish Museum will hold its annual masked-ball benefit at the
Waldorf-Astoria to celebrate Purim. "The Gardens of Alhambra," the evening will
include a tribute to the museum's Sephardic Heritage Society. Cocktails at 6:30
will be followed by dinner and dancing. Dress is black tie or costume. Tickets,
$500, from (212) 675-9474.


Celebrating a Space




SATURDAY -- White Columns, which provides gallery space for as-yet-undiscovered
artists, will hold a benefit auction of works by 125 contemporary artists. There
will be cocktails and hors d'oeuvres from 7 to 10 P.M. at the gallery, 154
Christopher Street near Greenwich Street. Tickets, $100, or $150 a couple, from
(212) 924-4212.


Whinter Ball at the Waldorf



SATURDAY -- The New York Junior League's 1994 Winter Ball will be at the
Waldorf-Astoria. The black-tie eveinging to benefit the league's 30 community
service programs starts with cocktails at 8, followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 288-6220, extension 267; or $65 in advance for dancing
and snacks starting at 9, $75 at the door.


Aid for Hungarian Hospital



SATURDAY -- A black-tie event at the Union Club, 101 East 69th Street, will
raise funds for specialized medical equipment for the Schopf-Merei Hospital in
Budapest. Sponsored by the Hungarian Freedom Ball committee, the evening starts
with cocktails at 7 followed by dinner and dancing. Tickets, $130, from (212)
685-3935.


Westchester Museum Party



SATURDAY -- The Katonah Museum of Art will hold a black-tie fund-raiser from 7
P.M. to midnight to benefit its educational programs for school children. A
buffet, dancing and a raffle will take place at the museum on Route 22 at Jay
Street in Katonah, N.Y. Tickets, $125 or $75 for dessert, dancing and drinks
from 9 P.M. to midnight, from (914) 232-9555.


Theater Company's Benefit



SATURDAY -- The Aboutface Theater Company will hold its winter benefit starting
at 9 P.M. at the Nat Horne Studios, 442 West 42d Street. The Wild West is the
theme of the party, which includes games of chance and dancing. Tickets, $10,
from (212) 268-9638, or $15 at the door.


A Reading by Writers



MARCH 7 -- The Authors Guild Foundation, which provides educational, legal and
professional services for writers, is holding a black-tie benefit at the
Metropolitan Club, 1 East 60th Street. Garrison Keillor will be the master of
ceremonies and Roy Blount, George Plimpton, Anna Quindlen, Calvin Trillin and
Wendy Wasserstein will read works they wrote especially for the benefit.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and the program. Tickets,
$500, from (212) 921-9070.


An Asian Feast



MARCH 7 -- A spectacular Asian feast of foods from China, Japan, Thailand,
India, Korea, Indonesia and Vietnam prepared by 21 Asian chefs will highlight a
benefit for Citymeals-on-Wheels, which brings hot meals to the city's homebound.
The benefit, from 7 P.M. to midnight, will feature performances by Asian dancers
and musicians at Bridgewaters in the South Street Seaport. Tickets, $250, from
(212) 687-1234.


Theatrical Anniversary



MARCH 7 -- Stockard Channing will perform the premiere of Terrence McNally's
monologue "Speech, Speech, Speech" at the 25th anniversary benefit of the
Off-Broadway Circle Repertory Company. The evening starts with cocktails at 7,
followed by dinner at 8 and the performance at 9, all at the Supper Club, 240
West 47th Street. Tickets, $250, from (212) 505-6010.


Readings for Feminist Press<HE<

MARCH 7 -- Eartha Kitt, Ruby Dee, Anne Meara, Gloria Steinem and 14 other
figures from the performance arts, literature and television news will offer
readings and performances on the theme "Mothers and Daughters: Reflections" at a
benefit for the Feminist Press at the City University of New York. Cocktails at
6 P.M. will be followed by dinner and the performances, all at B. Smith's
Rooftop Cafe, 771 Eighth Avenue at 47th Street, Tickets, $125, from (212)
360-5790.


'Spirit of the City' Awards



MARCH 8 -- The Cathedral of St. John the Divine will present leadership awards
at its 17th annual Spirit of the City Awards dinner in the nave of the
cathedral, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street. Those to be honored at Julian H.
Robertson, the chairman of the Tiger Management Corporation; Gwendolyn Calvert
Baker, the president and chief executive fo the U.S. Committee for UNICEF:
Teresa Heinz, the chairwoman of the Heinz Family Philanthropies and vice
chairwoman of the Environmental Defense Fund, and Dr. Preme Mathai-Davis, the
executive director of the Y.M.C.A. of the U.S.A. Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be
followed by dinner and the awards presentation. Tickets, $500, from (212)
675-9474.


Calling the Fitness-Minded



MARCH 8 -- All seven floors of the Vertical Club at 330 East 61st Street will be
turned into a celebration of exercise, with demonstrations and participation in
aerobics, weightlifting, martial arts, running, swimming, golf, basketball,
tennis squash, racquetball and even rock climbing. The event, starting at 7
P.M., will benefit the March of Dimes Campaign for Healthier Babies, which
involves genetic research and community health programs. At 8 P.M. there will be
a "fitness feast" and at 10 the health club will be turned into a disco. Dress
to work out. Tickets, $300, from (212) 685-1095.


Police Benefit Downtown



MARCH 8 -- The New York City Police Foundation, an independent organization that
supports police projects ranging from community crime watches to studies on
police suicides, will hold its annual black-tie benefit at police headquarters.
Richard A. Voell, the president and chief executive of the Rockefeller Group,
will be honored at the dinner party at One Police Plaza, at the Manhattan side
of the Brooklyn Bridge. Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. Tickets, $400, from (212)
751-8170.

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Don't Send in the Marines

BYLINE: By David Fromkin;  David Fromkin, author of "A Peace to End All Peace,"
is working on a book about American foreign policy in the 20th century.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 36; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1686 words


Isolation is no longer possible or desirable," the President said. It was
September 1901, the speaker was William McKinley and the subject of his address
at the opening of the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo was the role the United
States should play in the dawning 20th century.

McKinley's point was that modern technologies of transport and communications
had abolished distance. It was obvious even then. So internationalism evolved
into the dominant theme of American foreign policy. Today, though, with the
collapse of the Soviet Union, internationalism is losing its way as we stumble
from the narrow and chaotic streets of Somalia to Haiti and, possibly -- after
the mortar attack on a crowded Sarajevo market -- to the quagmire of Bosnia.

Even in its isolationist years, Washington often sent expeditions to deal with
trouble spots abroad -- from the shores of Tripoli (to suppress the Barbary
pirates) to the coast of China. Freed from preoccupation with the Soviet threat,
should the United States do more of this sort of thing? Should it right wrongs
-- in Somalia, Bosnia, Haiti?

THIS IS NOT THE EARLY 1900'S, WHEN THE United States treated the mini-countries
of the Caribbean and Central America like colonies. American motives are now
largely humanitarian rather than selfish; and yet, for that very reason, it may
be even more of a mistake to send in soldiers. For humanitarian goals tend to be
broad, while selfish goals tend to be narrow. And armed interventions seem to be
most successful when they are aimed at a narrow objective, tangible and clearly
defined, so that the troops, having accomplished it, can get out fast -- before
the local population has time to turn against them as an occupying force.

The armies we dispatch to foreign soil for humanitarian reasons can try to save
people from others or from themselves. In either case, the results are nearly
always perverse and disappointing.

Sending in an army rarely saves a nation that can't defend itself; it often just
postpones defeat until our forces are withdrawn. Thus the Persian Gulf war saved
Kuwait and perhaps Saudi Arabia from invasion by a predatory and much more
powerful neighbor; but in a few years, when United Nations forces and pressures
are removed, the problem of the imbalance of power in that region will recur.
President Bush could have solved the problem by allowing the heart of the
invading army, the Republican Guard, to be destroyed; but he did not, perhaps
for fear of lessening Iraq's ability to defend against the Iranians on the other
side, possibly giving rise to a new problem calling for yet another United
States-led military intervention.

The great danger in sending armed expeditions abroad to defend the weak is that
there will be no end to interventions: dispatching them will become the
country's everyday occupation. United States armies will routinely shuttle back
and forth to the Middle East to quell fire fights; or else, as with American
forces sent in 1950 to defend the South Korean frontier, they will stand guard
half a world away forever.

To police the globe in this fashion is beyond our means. But even were that not
so, such a program of continuous intervention would not result in a moral new
world order. For we can protect the weak only against the weak; we cannot
protect against the strong. We are powerful enough to liberate Kuwait from Iraq
but not to liberate Tibet from China. So at the very best, the regime we could
impose on the world would be morally hypocritical, bringing the petty thief to
justice while leaving the master criminal at large.

NOR ARE THE RESULTS MORE SATISFACTORY when we interfere between a foreign people
and its own government. In the twilight of the Bush Administration, Americans,
rightly horrified by the starvation in Somalia, and correctly perceiving that it
was caused by the country's rival warlords, sent in not only food but also
troops to insure that the food was distributed to the needy. But President Bush
did not face the question of what would happen when the troops were withdrawn:
would not the warlords go back to warlording and the Somalis back to starving?

When the mission of the United States-United Nations expedition broadened for a
time to include the overthrow of a particular warlord, yet another question was
raised: Who should replace him? Unless we are prepared to provide an alternative
government, and to dedicate to it, over the course of years or decades, the
support and guidance it needs to establish itself, we should stay our hand. It
is irresponsible of us to destroy even a wicked regime if we cannot replace it.
That is the behavior of a repairman who comes to the home or office, takes apart
all the machinery and plumbing, leaves the parts lying on the floor and then
goes away.

Military intervention, even if undertaken for purely humanitarian reasons, is
inescapably a political act. It implies that the country in question is being
governed either in the wrong way or by the wrong people -- otherwise why did we
have to send in not food and medicine, experts or advisers, but troops and guns
and airplanes?

Yet can we offer a better alternative? Our record of leaving honest, decent,
democratic new local leaders behind after we intervene is not a good one: Somoza
in Nicaragua, Duvalier in Haiti, Trujillo in Panama and Batista in Cuba are the
first names that come to mind. It seemed that everyone in America from Errol
Flynn to intensely radical postgraduate students at Columbia University were
enthusiasts for Fidel Castro when he took power in Havana.

Do we have the alternative of exercising a United Nations-mandated trusteeship
until the locals become capable of self-government? As Britain, France, Spain,
Portugal, Holland and Belgium had to learn at midcentury, when they still ruled
colonial empires, people will accept bad government but not foreign government
-- and that is even more true in the 1990's than it was a half century ago.

THE AMERICAN PUBLIC WAS RIGHT TO WANT to scuttle the Somalia expedition as soon
as American corpses appeared on the television screen. When the tools we choose
to use are soldiers, tanks, guns and bombs, we are going to be killing people,
and some of our troops are going to be killed, too. If the issue is not
important enough to be worth the lives of United States service personnel, we
should not be sending in the armed forces. Doctors, the Peace Corps, technical
advisers, yes; but not the troops. When, then, should we order our forces into
combat?

The answer is clearest with countries our own size, for to war against them is
to risk our national existence. We should not do so unless America's life is at
stake. The Founding Fathers wrote not of dispatching invasion forces or of going
to war, but of providing for the common defense; and historically, the United
States did not go to war unless it thought itself attacked. For all of the moral
fervor against Spanish rule in Cuba, it was not until Americans believed that
Spain had sunk the battleship Maine that they clamored for war.

The coming of the Second World War taught us to take a larger view of
self-defense. We saw that Hitler was picking off countries one by one, going
from strength to strength as he exploited the resources of those he had
conquered. If we had waited until he attacked us, it might have been too late.
We applied this lesson in a muddled sort of way to containing the expansion of
the Soviet sphere, taking stands in South Korea and South Vietnam as the only
alternative to taking a stand closer to home. However wrong in its application
to those two conflicts, the theory is sound: if necessary, we should fight to
protect our vital interests abroad -- those interests essential to our ability
to protect ourselves.

But today none of our vital interests are at risk. Nobody is cutting the flow of
Middle Eastern oil. Nobody threatens the Panama Canal. No single power is on the
march to dominate the whole of Europe or the whole of Asia. If the world were to
remain as it is today, the United States never would need to go to war again.

Yet, the temptation to use our armed forces in less-than-war situations is
strong now that we are so much more powerful than other countries. We have
national and humanitarian interests all over the globe, and often are told that
we can have our way at little cost. If we can bring humane and honest government
to Haiti, why not do so? It would be a good deed, and might solve our Haitian
refugee problem besides. If we can bring an end to the strife in Bosnia, why
not? It would not only rescue victims of terrible suffering, but also would
prevent a wider war that might draw in Greece, Turkey and Bulgaria, threatening
international stability.

Unfortunately, there are limits to what outsiders can do to solve a domestic
quarrel, and limits, too, to what can be done by armed force. If air strikes are
all it takes to get the contending parties in Bosnia to make peace, fine; but if
it takes an army, then, with due regard to the ruggedness of the terrain and the
ferocity of the inhabitants, surely what is required is hundreds of thousands of
troops.

And since the essential problem is that the intermingled peoples, driven by
blood feuds, will not live with one another in peace, how long will the troops
have to stay until a new generation grows up with a changed attitude? Ten years?
Twenty years?

There is nothing wrong with using force in pursuit of a national interest if the
interest is of sufficient importance, so long as armed intervention will solve
the problem, and at an acceptable cost. Our successful in-and-out raids in
Grenada and Panama were misleading precedents, chosen precisely because they
were exceptions: in the usual case, we sink in a quagmire.

Our commanding lead in weaponry, however useful in making war, does not
necessarily equip us to impose a lasting peace. Ascribed to more than one wit,
the wise 19th-century saying was, "You can do everything with your bayonets . .
. except sit on them."

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 27, 1994, Sunday

 CORRECTION:
The essay on Feb. 27 about United States intervention abroad misidenti fied the
country ruled by Rafael Leonidas Trujillo. From 1930 to 1938 and 1942 to 1952,
he was President of the Domini can Republic, not Panama.



GRAPHIC: /* //* //* //* //* //* //*
Photo: Getting them out fast: Members of the Third Battalion, Ninth Marine
Regiment boarding a plane in Mogadishu, Somalia, in January 1993, after their
Australian replacements arrived. They were the first of Restore Hope Operation
to return to their home country, and left before there were any major
confrontations between foreign troops and Somalis. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALFRED
YAGOBZADEH/SIPA)(pg. 37)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Mighty Nell's

BYLINE: By JOHN MARCHESE

SECTION: Section 9;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 2182 words


Perched on a red leather banquette, squeezed behind a hand-painted cafe table in
the nightclub named after her, Laura (Nell) Campbell raised her arms and waved
them from side to side.

"This is what I've heard they do," she said, "those rave people. They're all
doing ecstasy and whole rooms full of them do this for hours on end."

She feigned a happy trance and swayed her arms for a moment, then dropped her
hands demurely into her lap and said, "I really have to go to one sometime."

There was a time when all the raves were for Miss Campbell and Nell's. Though
there is a decided after-dark democracy these days, in which elegant supper
clubs or expensive, high-tech discos seem to hold no more cachet than the roving
and often illegal downtown dance parties called raves, night life was once a
monarchy, and Miss Campbell was queen.

And in an industry where the life spans of even the well-financed megaclubs
rival those of butterflies for briefness, Nell's, surprisingly, has survived for
more than seven years. "I've been amazed for years that it has stayed open,"
Michael Musto, a night life columnist for The Village Voice, said in an
interview. "It's just always there, sort of like Mount Everest."

Miss Campbell seems less than thrilled with the comparison.

"Ah," she said, and paused a long time. "Well, I guess we can only be flattered
by the grandeur of the image."

Whatever the varied reasons for Nell's longevity, the club had a brilliant
beginning. Almost from the moment that Miss Campbell set up the velvet ropes
outside a former electronics store at 246 West 14th Street in the fall of 1986,
people lined up behind them, longing to get in. Inside was a scene of decadent
Victorian elegance, a small space that had been converted -- with deft use of
wood paneling, beaded chandeliers, tufted velvet sofas and Oriental rugs -- into
what seemed the drawing room of a somewhat dissolute English aristocrat.

"Nell's appeared as a new concept at the time it opened," Rudolf Pieper, a
longtime nightclub impresario, said recently. "Remember, back then the major
clubs were big clubs, and this was going back to an intimate sort of gentleman's
club. And people went for that like crazy. It just attracted everybody."

Miss Campbell agreed. In her deadpan, ironic way and in her hybrid accent, the
mix of an Australian childhood and an English youth, she said: "It was a bit
crowded then. One looks back with pleasure on those days of excess."

Those days stretched from the mid to late 80's, a time when it seemed that tout
le monde was making buckets of money in junk bonds or the booming art market, or
by selling novels to Hollywood or modeling at $10,000 a day. And the place to
relax after all that became Nell's.

Not since the heyday of Studio 54 was there a more wilting review at the door.
Despite its elite pretensions, Nell's opened with a rare policy of charging
everyone $5 and letting everyone in (most other clubs let select people in free
and charged others $20). But Nell's had a capacity of only 250, and so many
people showed up that the policy became impossible. The attractive young men and
women who guarded the gates became the Scyllas of style, plucking entrants from
the lines of the hopeful that stretched toward the Hudson River. Most nights,
most people were disappointed.

When Bob Colacello made it past the ropes to write about the place for Vanity
Fair in early 1987, he noticed that "the young English aristocrats are here, but
so are the American art stars, including Papa Warhol himself." The article also
mentioned Mick Jagger, Jerry Hall, Bianca Jagger, Princess Alessandra Borghese,
Reinaldo and Carolina Herrera, Calvin and Kelly Klein, Lauren Hutton, Rupert
Everett, Jenny Lumet, Julian Sands and Deborah Harry.

Those rejected were equally famous. Cher was turned away. Not the right look;
too much fringe, Miss Campbell recalled. Michael Douglas was kept waiting as if
he'd just driven his Grand Am over the bridge from Bay Ridge.

Soon, other clubs copying Nell's intimacy and retro style (M. K. and Au Bar
being the most notable) were opening all over town. Mr. Pieper, who had recently
opened a large dance club called the Tunnel, was quoted as saying: "Nell's can
only fit 250. On a night when everybody is out, 2,000 trendies will be left in
the cold. The Tunnel doesn't mind getting Nell's refusals."

The trendies, of course, eventually moved on. Some simply came in from cold. By
the time Warhol died in 1987, the fabulous folks who had made up the
hard-partying nucleus of the legendary Studio 54 crowd had permanently
disbanded. Ms. Jagger is now dating Representative Robert Torricelli, Democrat
of New Jersey. The young writers and editors who chronicled the club scene have
moved on to other subjects and quieter lives. If Nell's was once hot as a flame,
it's heat came largely from people burning the candle at both ends. It couldn't
continue forever.

Somehow, Nell's has become an institution in a demimonde that shuns
institutions. Basically, anyone with $10 (less on some nights) gets past the
ropes. "I think that exclusivity was more the reputation than the fact," Miss
Campbell said. "Certainly it's not like that now." A few months ago the name
"Nell's" actually went up on the awning outside the club for the first time.

Miss Campbell herself, who turned 40 last year, has changed, but not too much.
Her red hair is still cut with Louise Brooks bangs; her pale skin is still set
off by bright red lipstick. In the early years, Miss Campbell, a cult figure
from her appearance as a motorcyle moll in the stage and screen "Rocky Horror"
shows, was a near-permanent fixture in her club, table-hopping, singing "sinful
blues numbers with double entendres" with the house jazz band, playing the
hostess "until I left with Ray Bans in the morning sun." Lately, she drops by
most nights but often leaves early.

Still, the woman who says "nightclubs are for lurid times" can quickly summon up
some outrageousness, one night unabashedly pushing up her cleavage to emphasize
the effect of her outfit, which she called "the medieval wench look." Michael
Musto remembers hearing of Miss Campbell "voguing naked on top of a table."

"I don't remember ever being naked," Miss Campbell said. "But I hope I was."

Even lurid times change. Nell's is no longer the great magnet of nocturnal New
York, but it manages to hold its attraction and, Miss Campbell said, is still
profitable. She is hard put to explain exactly why. Mostly, she said, it's the
look, which is "elegant and romantic in a faded way -- not unlike myself."

She gives a good deal of credit to her co-owner, Lynn Wagenknecht (Keith McNally
was a third owner, but he gave up ownership when he and Ms. Wagenknecht
divorced). Ms. Wagenknect has managed to keep her restaurants, Odeon and Cafe
Luxembourg, perennial favorites, too.

"My view," said Mr. Pieper, who now runs a club in Los Angeles, "was that Nell's
knew how to adapt to changing crowds and changing tastes. It accepted that the
Fabulous 500 wouldn't stay there forever. And in other ways, the secret was
remaining the same."

Eric Goode, the designer and artist who opened (and closed) Area and M. K.,
said: "The most important thing for its longevity is the absolute physical
appeal of that place. It never looked bad empty (and it did go through those
periods); it was always very sexy and inviting. It is simply a great bar."

Nell's may look conservative, but it isn't. David Hershkovits, an editor and
publisher of the downtown journal Paper Magazine, said: "Nell's is still very
vital. They're not afraid of mixing people. For a long time it was one of the
few places that not only played black music, but welcomed black people." The
current crowd at Nell's is quite a bit younger and even more integrated.

Today, the New York club scene has become increasingly tribalized, like society
at large. The large clubs like Studio 54, Area, Palladium and Mars (and smaller
clubs like Nell's) drew a mix of disparate groups of people. Now, each of those
groups has its own night at a particular club. Limelight might appeal to the
hard rock crowd on Tuesday; Palladium packs in hip-hop fans on weekends; Nell's
now reserves Tuesday night for club kids.

At the same time has come the reign of promoters, who develop a following by
assiduously networking in the various tribes (the fashion crowd, preppies,
models, gay weight lifters) and take over different clubs on different nights,
bringing their followers, for a fee. People don't go to clubs for the club
itself now; they pursue a promoter. "I can go out seven nights a week," said Jon
Furay, 30, an assistant editor at Doubleday, "and go to seven different clubs --
and see all the same people."

Nell's resisted the use of promoters for a long time, but Daryl Dismond, a
manager, said that the club was forced to try something different as it aged.

"By 1991, it was not a very desirable crowd," said Thomas Moller, a German
painter and downtown gallery owner who for years had worked as a bouncer,
doorman (he's the one who delayed Michael Douglas) and bartender at Nell's. Mr.
Moller now promotes two nights at Nell's. "I pulled in the art scene," he said
one Saturday night, pointing out the artists Jiri Georg Dokoupil and Andres
Serrano and the gallery owner Tony Shafrazi. "I have a pull in the downtown."

The nightclub business does not use much long-range strategic planning, really.
Success can depend on something as simple as a good lease (Miss Campbell said
hers is merely average for the neighborhood). The business is so fluid that new
ideas and new themes can be tried, overhauled and discarded in a matter of
weeks.

For instance, the popular once-a-week nightclub called Jackie 60, which is now a
couple blocks down 14th Street, began as a night at Nell's, a mix of poetry,
performance art and parody that was produced by Chi Chi Valenti and her husband,
Johnny Dynell, Nell's first disk jockey. Mr. Dynell said that Miss Campbell was
extremely open to new ideas while guarding her original ethos.

"Nell really had a vision for the club," he said. "It was a lot more like
Elaine's than like Palladium."

Recently, Nell's has given Sunday nights to Tony Torres Garavito, a young
Spaniard who promotes a show of flamenco dancing that he said has been drawing
fashion people, models and other young Spaniards. One recent Sunday, Miss
Campbell sat at her usual banquette near the bar with several friends, including
her boyfriend, Eamon Roche, a sculptor, who is much younger -- so young, Miss
Campbell said jokingly, "that his parents met here." As the dancers built to a
stomping, staccato finish, she shouted "Ole!" But she left long before closing
time.

A few days later, hours before the current crop of club denizens had decided
what to wear out that night, the chauffeured sedans were idling outside Nell's,
waiting for their charges to emerge from a party to celebrate the 69th
anniversary of The New Yorker magazine. Nell's has been actively marketing
itself for these early parties lately (Conde Nast's editorial director, James
Truman, held a "Wild Palms" party there in 1992; MTV had its Christmas party at
Nell's last year) as a way to introduce, or reintroduce, people to the club.

With Nell's house jazz band playing and the upstairs room filling toward
cocktail-party gridlock, the New Yorker editor Tina Brown moved about easily,
her own floating power table. Seven years ago -- eons in nightclub terms -- Ms.
Brown had used the pages of Vanity Fair to dub Miss Campbell "the new
style-maker of noctural New York."

"I haven't been here in seven years," Ms. Brown said. "It hasn't been a hot club
in a number of years. But it's just so good-looking and comfortable. I think
this kind of club is going to come back."

Miss Campbell was not far away, resplendent (and a bit naughty) in a very short,
very tight, red crushed-velvet dress. She couldn't hear Ms. Brown, but to her
such talk would no doubt be its own kind of ecstasy.

Nightclubs in Manhattan have long set a tone for the times. Studio 54 was, in
many minds, the first modern nightclub, with spiraling lights and stage
machinery and a cocaine residue. It was where the "fabulous people" who give
clubs their cachet, as well as the wannabees, would let loose all night in a
post-Vietnam, post-Watergate sybaritic whirl. Then came clubs reflecting a more
downtown spirit, places where making art was supposedly more important than
making money.

But the gloss and size of Studio 54 found perhaps its ultimate expression in the
mid-1980's at the vast Palladium, where you could spend most of the night trying
to find the person you arrived with. So the pendulum swung away from colossal,
futuristic spaces to the intimacy of Nell's, which opened in the fall of 1986
and mirrored the more conservative mood of the country. Since then, the megaclub
has come back -- Webster Hall and Club USA -- and the cycle spins round once
more.

Here are landmarks -- besides Nell's -- in the nightlife continuum.   Lisa W.
Foderaro

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Nell Campbell, right, in a Jean-Paul Gaultier dress with faux
Russian writing. Above, scenes from a Saturday night at Nell's. (Photographs by
Ed Quinn for The New York Times)(pg.1); Studio 54 in 1979, at the height of
discodom: a place to gyrate and be seen. (Bill Cunningham/The New York
Times)(pg.8)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 28, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Hanoi to Open Talks Aimed at Improved Relations

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;  Page 2;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 90 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Feb. 27


American and Vietnamese negotiators will begin financial and political talks
here on Monday that could help lead to diplomatic relations between the two
countries after nearly 20 years.

They are the first major political negotiations since the Paris Peace Agreement
of 1973 that ended American military involvement in Vietnam.

The talks follow the lifting of a 19-year American economic embargo against
Vietnam. President Clinton said when he lifted the embargo on Feb. 3 that his
action did not constitute normalizing relations.

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 28, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

At Morgan, New Markets and a Rohatyn Emerge

BYLINE: By SAUL HANSELL

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1607 words


In 1988, Nicolas Rohatyn asked J. P. Morgan & Company to bring him back from
Tokyo to run its small Latin American debt department, which sold the defaulted
loans that Morgan and other banks had made to developing countries.

Today, that department has branched out to include emerging markets in Asia and
Eastern Europe as well as in Latin America. And it has grown from 7 people to
200, who now underwrite, trade and sell securities, as well as loans.

Few areas of the financial world are as hot as the emerging markets, and
Morgan's department is one of the largest and most successful on Wall Street --
as well as one of the most profitable units at Morgan.

Profit Center

Revenue for the emerging-markets department in the last three months of 1993 was
about $200 million, Judah Kraushaar, a Merrill Lynch analyst, said. That would
surpass the total trading revenue of all but three American banks. And Mr.
Rohatyn, who at 33 years old is a Morgan managing director, is said to be among
Morgan's best paid executives, with an annual bonus well in excess of $1
million.

"There are a lot of good firms getting into this business, but J. P. Morgan,
along with Salomon Brothers, stands above the rest," said Rob Citrone, the
manager of Fidelity's New Markets Income fund, which has more than $400 million
invested in emerging-market bonds.

The greatest accomplishment of Mr. Rohatyn, the son of Felix G. Rohatyn, the
investment banker, was to foresee the explosion of investor interest in the
emerging markets.

Using the bank's penchant for taking large trading positions, Mr. Rohatyn was
able to offer the liquidity demanded by early speculative investors. Then, as
traditional investors became interested, Mr. Rohatyn offered them the numbingly
exhaustive research that is another Morgan trademark.

Morgan's historical weakness in underwriting has caused Mr. Rohatyn's unit to
lose its early lead in that area. But as investor demand shifts again from
securities denominated in dollars to those in local currencies, Mr. Rohatyn
hopes that Morgan's longstanding banking operations in many developing countries
will again give it an advantage over its growing competition along Wall Street.

Throughout the turmoil of the last five years, even competitors credit Mr.
Rohatyn with wielding a cool hand in a hot market.

"He is a real prodigy, very smart with a maturity of judgment," an executive at
a rival investment bank said. "Morgan has participated in a wider breadth of
markets and has been more successful in the securities business than other
commercial banks."

Mr. Rohatyn's rise reflects a shift in the balance of power on Wall Street. In
the 1980's, the hottest careers belonged to risk arbitragers and merger
specialists. Now the most lucrative and fastest-growing fields are the complex
worlds of options and other financial derivatives and the emerging markets.

Remaking Morgan

Mr. Rohatyn is also representative of J. P. Morgan's profound transformation
from a commercial bank to a securities firm. During the last decade, this most
blue-blooded of American banks has systematically pushed aside a generation of
middle-aged executives trained in what is now the declining art of lending. And
instead of hiring investment bankers and traders from Wall Street, as other
commercial banks have done, Morgan has largely tried to grow a new generation of
securities executives, recruited straight out of college and indoctrinated in
its sober culture.

Nicolas Rohatyn is very much in the Morgan mold, a focused and intense manager
who shuns the bravado and swagger of so many Wall Street traders. Unlike his
flamboyant father, Felix Rohatyn, the merger master of Lazard Freres & Company
and the former chairman of New York City's Municipal Assistance Corporation, the
younger Mr. Rohatyn maintains a deadly serious tone and a low profile.

He tries to play down the importance to his career of his youth -- and his
patrimony. "The market does not reward me for being my father's son," he said.
"It wasn't like I was brought into an existing structure and vaulted to the top.
When I started, we had seven people."

Mr. Rohatyn boasts, moreover, that his business serves a useful function by
channeling new money for development into many countries.

"This job offers the perfect combination between idealism and big trading that I
don't think I will find anywhere else," he said. "I personally am extremely
driven by the notion that by building the biggest and best group in the world to
intermediate capital between the developing and developed markets, it is a
fundamental good for the world."

Right Place, Right Time

Mr. Rohatyn, in fact, appears to have a good instinct for being in the right
place at the right time. He joined Morgan's training program in 1982, before the
bank had commenced its strategy to shift from a commercial lender to a
securities dealer.

At Morgan, he was first assigned to deal in swaps -- contracts that help
corporations manage their interest rate and currency risk, another of the
booming businesses of the 1990's.

When Mr. Rohatyn asked to be assigned to Morgan's small Latin American debt
department, its main business was as a broker, matching buyer and seller of the
defaulted loans. Soon it began to take larger trading positions in the loans,
selling them to speculative investors.

More investors were drawn into the market as Mexico and other Latin American
countries restructured their debts, transforming defaulted bank loans into new
Brady bonds -- named after Nicholas F. Brady, who was then serving as Treasury
Secretary -- some of which were partly backed by United States Treasury bonds.
This, in turn, paved the way for private companies to sell stocks and bonds to
raise money, and for governments to take state-owned companies public.

"If there is one thing that we and everyone else have done consistently over the
past five years, it is underestimating the size of this business," Mr. Rohatyn
said.

New Wave of Investment

Yet Morgan, more than most firms, anticipated how the market would change, with
its eventual leading players being mutual funds and pension funds instead of
speculative hedge funds and rich Latin Americans. Morgan has been among the
first to provide these new investors with the sort of detailed research reports
they are accustomed to in other markets.

Where Morgan may be at a disadvantage, however, is in underwriting new
securities issues for Latin American companies. Until recently, Morgan and other
banks have been prohibited by the Federal Government from underwriting
securities.

Last year, the bankers who handled stock issues in Mr. Rohatyn's department were
combined with Morgan's stock-underwriting division. Mr. Rohatyn admitted his
group needed to pay more attention to new issues.

"We've had so much to focus on in the last year in terms of new markets and
secondary trading that we have done some great new issues, but we have not
approached the overall process as aggressively as we want to," he said.

After an early lead, Morgan has fallen behind traditional brokerage houses in
underwriting new securities, especially stock issues. But it remains a powerful
force in research on and trading of existing bonds, as well as in the market for
the remaining nonperforming bank loans.

Still, for Mr. Rohatyn and the emerging-markets business, recent months have
been a triumphal time. The publicity surrounding the North American Free Trade
Agreement, which is seen as cementing economic development in Mexico, helped
raise investor activity in emerging-markets securities to record volumes last
year. Total trading volume is estimated to have reached about $1.5 trillion in
1993, double that of the year before. Morgan said that its own volume more than
tripled last year, though the company would not disclose specific figures.

Plans for Mexican Office

Morgan, in fact, is among the first companies to take advantage of the trade
pact, applying to open a branch in Mexico City, which it was not allowed to do
before the agreement's passage. Mr. Rohatyn plans to send 12 people to the
branch to trade pesos and Mexican securities. The treaty is also expected to
lead to an upgrading of Mexican securities this year, opening the markets to a
new class of more conservative investors.

Still, the success of emerging markets is drawing many new rivals and, thus,
shrinking profit margins. So Morgan and other firms are looking for new
frontiers in countries like Poland and Peru that were virtually given up as
economic deserts a few years ago. And it is searching for trading opportunities
in Vietnam, South Africa, and even Cuba for its proprietary trading book.

Of course, the new markets are more profitable because they are riskier. Yet the
may be little potential for profit from one of the biggest risks: the
possibility that interest in emerging markets will fade. Some people worry that
many bull markets in Latin America and Asia have been driven by investor
interest rather than fundamentals, and that this bubble will eventually burst.

While speculative profits are no longer available in nations like Mexico, Mr.
Rohatyn said, investors will still be attracted by above-average returns: "These
countries are competing for capital, they can afford to because they got the
growth."

"People get concerned that one country or segment of the market is at some point
going to blow up," Mr. Rohatyn said. "That is also true in the developed
markets. The important thing is that we have the market well enough established
and are well diversified to handle it."

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Nicolas Rohatyn, center, who runs the section at J. P. Morgan &
Company handling Latin America, Asia and Eastern Europe securities, talks with
Jeanne Feldhusen and Jared Chase, other Morgan managing directors. (Sara
Krulwich/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Toronto Journal;
Antiwar Wounds Are Healed and Canada Is Home

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 938 words

DATELINE: TORONTO, Feb. 28


After Eric Nagler, who was raised in Brooklyn, entered Canada fleeing the
Vietnam War draft, he lived for a time in a tiny log cabin without running water
or electricity, but he was "thrilled and happy to be there."

As the years have passed, he left the hippie way of life behind. He is a popular
children's entertainer and television personality with an enormous house on
wooded land north of Toronto. He married a Canadian, and they have four children
and about 80 animals, most of them native to Canada, except for the iguana and a
mating pair of boa constrictors named Jake and Baby.

"In the U.S., they use the term 'registered alien,' said Mr. Nagler, who is 51.
"The Canadians never considered me an alien. They just welcomed me with open
arms."

Mr. Nagler was among the 125,000 young American opponents of the war who came to
Canada between 1965 and 1975.

Memories of the 60's

Homesick, distressed by Canada's endless winters, unable to find jobs,
importuned by their parents, many returned home. But tens of thousands remained,
blending easily into Canadian society.

Most of them noted the news this month that President Clinton had ordered an end
to the trade embargo against Vietnam, a decision that was considered a major
step in a long healing process over the divisions caused by the war.

Interviews with some of them evoked memories of arrests, frantic night drives
along back roads to Montreal, communal life with other exiles and the gradual
discovery and appreciation of Canada. But it was clear that for most of those
who went to Canada, the healing process was completed long ago.

"It doesn't make any sense to maintain animosities just for the sake of revenge
or harboring past hatreds," Mr. Nagler said. "Remember, we were the aggressors
in Vietnam."

Jim Wilson, 49, who was raised in North Carolina and Virginia, makes and sells
handicrafts on a Chippewa Indian reserve outside of Sarnia, Ontario. "It's a
shame it took so long," he said. "I don't know how many Americans stand behind
the decision, but it's certainly the right thing."

Stephen Strauss, 50, the science columnist for The Globe and Mail, who grew up
in Denver, said he sees everything now with a "another mindset." He agreed that
it was "about time" for the trade reconciliation, but said he had not even
realized the embargo continued all these years.

Max Allen, 54, came up not to flee the draft but to protest use of his tax
dollars to bomb the Vietnamese He is now a Toronto-based producer for the
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. He said he was indifferent to the news. "Who
cares," he said. "Good grief! It simply means there's a good market there for
Americans."

Women came here as well, some accompanying those who fled the draft, some
searching for social and political change.

Mary Rauton, 58, who runs a cooperative in Toronto that makes leather goods, was
raised in Atlanta, and arrived in 1968. "There was no place for me in my
society," she said. "I felt a lot of sympathy for the black people, and I did
not like the killing of Asians." She, too, thinks now is the time for healing.

Mr. Nagler, who used to hang around Washington Square in Greenwich Village
playing the banjo, opened a folk music store in Toronto. Then he started making
music. He does children's concerts and television shows.

In addition to the banjo, guitar, mandolin and fiddle, Mr. Nagler can handle the
nose flute, psaltery, spoons, comb kazoo, tin can bongos and something he
invented from a plastic drain pipe called the sewerphone.

Mr. Wilson said it was not just the draft that brought Americans here. He has
two brothers who also became Canadians, decisions that had nothing to do with
the war.

Mr. Strauss recalled that he had been arrested going to Miami after having
earlier fled the country to avoid the draft.

He jumped bail and drove up the East Coast. "A mile inside Quebec, I had the car
stopped and flung myself out on rocky, weedy earth," he said. "Maybe kissed
ground marks the real emigration."

After President Carter's general amnesty in 1977, he went back to Denver for a
month and "found Denver was not where I lived but where I came from."

At first Canada welcomed those who came to avoid the draft. The Government of
Pierre Elliott Trudeau saw them as reversing the Canadian "brain drain" to the
United States.

But as their numbers grew and they competed for jobs, the welcome mat wore
thinner.

Nowhere was the competition keener than on university campuses.

Joseph Green, 59, professor of theater and administrative studies at York
University and a former dean of its Faculty of Fine Arts, had been teaching at
Hunter College when he got the offer in 1968 to come to York.

He was not of draft age, but grabbed the opportunity because he was unhappy with
American political conditions. Yet at York he found himself in the center of the
controversy.

At a meeting of the Canadian Conference of the Arts in 1973 after his name had
gone up as dean, a young Canadian poet yelled, "Fire that American pig, Joe
Green!" and threw a pitcher of ice water him.

Analysts say the immigrants have had a profound effect on Canadian life.
Canadian media attention and political energy were drawn into American issues.
Canadians started going on marches to Alabama and demonstrating here against the
war in Vietnam.

"There was a big injection of radical political thinking that almost overwhelmed
the Canadian left," said Prof. Stephen Clarkson, a Canadian-born student of the
era at the University of Toronto. "I would say those Americans helped redefine
the Canadian political agenda."

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: For the Americans who went to Canada instead of fighting in
Vietnam, the time of healing is long past. Eric Nagler, left, is a children's
entertainer in Shelborne, Ontario, and a very eclectic musician. Jim Wilson
lives on a Chippewa Indian reserve near Sarnia, where he makes and sells
handicrafts. (Kevin Argue for The New York Times (left); Glenn Ogilulle for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words



International A3-15

U.S. SHOOTS DOWN SERB PLANES
American fighter jets shot down four Serbian warplanes after the Serbs bombed a
Bosnian Government arms factory. It was NATO's first military engagement. A1



HOLDING THE BOSNIA LINE
News analysis: American officials said they did not see the attack as a sign of
an all-out Bosnian Serb offensive; in fact, they say the engagement makes
further trouble in the area less likely. A13

Bosnian Serb forces stepped up attacks on several fronts. A12

A negotiator awaits the outcome of Croat-Muslim talks. A13

A WARNING FROM ISRAEL
The Israeli Prime Minister condemned murderous settlers in the territories, but
he warned the Arabs not to use the killings to set unrealistic conditions for a
return to the Mideast peace talks. A1

A RIFT WITHIN ISRAEL
The anger demonstrated at the funeral of an Israeli Arab demonstrated the
worsening relations between Israel and the Arabs who live within its borders.
A15

The P.L.O. said it would return to talks if settlers are disarmed. A14
For settlers, a dream has gone sour. A15

The U.S. tried to find a way to revive Mideast peace talks. A14

For Arabs and Jews in the U.S., sorrow and trepidation. A15

RUSSIA IN DISARRAY
The Government of Boris N. Yeltsin was in disarray after he failed to stop the
release of his enemies. He fired his counterintelligence chief, and there was
confusion over whether he would speak to the nation. A1

LATVIA'S RUSSIAN PROBLEM
Three years after independence, Latvia is still struggling to come to terms with
how to treat its Russian population and detemine who is a Latvian citizen. A3

U.N. found no evidence of chemical weapons in Iraq. A10

Under pressure, Mexico agreed to change election rules. A10

Toronto Journal: For expatriates, Vietnam scars long healed.  A4

National A16-21

FURTHER GUN RESTRICITONS
As the Brady law took effect, the Administration announced another new
restriction on guns: rules for buyers of a favorite in the drug trade, the
rapid-fire shotgun.  A1

Gun buyers voice grudging acceptance of the Brady law.  A20

The trial begins in the shooting death of an abortion doctor.  A20

TV'S FUTURE: COMPACT DISKS
A glimpse of television's future is here now -- on the screens of millions of
home computers, some experts say. Computer disks known as CD-ROM's are offering
an eclectic array of video clips, animation, sound and text.  A1

DEBATING CALIFORNIA LIVING
Los Angeles, with its auto-loving culture, is in the midst of a soul-searching
ordeal over whether the earthquake demonstrates the need for new ways to live.
Nothing symbolizes the debate quite as well as the damaged Santa Monica Freeway.
A16

A NEW FACE IN POLITICS
Hugh Rodham, the President's brother-in-law, formally became a candidate for the
Senate, just a little more than two years after he first registered to vote.
A16

A MOVE ON EXPORTS OF WASTE
The Government asked Congress to bring the United States into line with a
five-year-old international agreement by banning most exports of hazardous
wastes.  A18

A PRESIDENTIAL ASSIST
President Clinton lent support to Representative Dan Rostenkowski, who is under
investigation, then appeared with Prime Minister John Major of Britain, who is
under pressure at home.  A18

HEALTH IDEA: ADD MEDICARE
A Congressional committee chairman has begun developing yet another alternative
to the Clinton Administration's health care proposals. This one would expand
Medicare to cover uninsured Americans.  A18

THE SIEGE JURY'S REASONING
For the jurors in the Branch Davidian trial, two facts stood out: Nobody could
say for sure who fired the first shot, and the Government made its own statement
of fault when top Federal officials were forced out of their jobs.  A21

CHILD PORNOGRAPHY CASE
The Supreme Court agreed to hear a child pornography case, and an argument over
whether free speech is involved could be resolved.  A21

IMMUNITY IN IRAQ LOAN CASE
A major figure in a case involving billions of dollars in federally guaranteed
loans to Iraq made by the Banca Nazionale de Lavoro's Atlanta branch has been
granted immunity to testify.  D1

Metro Digest B1

CRITICISM FOR A JOB FIRM
America Works says it will find jobs for people on welfare, and both New York
City and New York State have engaged its services. But the company has left a
trail of unhappy officials in other states.  A1

MISSING BOY RE-EMERGES
Two years after he vanished in Brooklyn amid a tug-of-war between his secular
family and an ultra-orthodox Jewish sect, a 15-year-old boy was reunited with
his parents. He told them he wants to be in the custody of an orthodox rabbi.
A1

Business Digest D1

Science C1-14

Opportunistic species invade the suburbs.  C1

The Komodo dragon lizard makes a comeback.  C1

Folic acid becomes a nutritional star.  C1

Arts/Entertainment C15-20

Theater: "Stomp." C15

"The Family Business." C19

Music: The Pop Life C15

Continuum plays Feldman.  C15

Oleta Adams at Town Hall.  C18

Dance: A new work by Peter Martins.  C16

"Ballet Builders." C18

Books: Essays by Gertrude Himmelfarb.  C19

Fashion B8-9

In London, "dress for excess" and other diversions.  B8

Inventive meets tailored in Italy B9

Obituaries B10

Sir Harold Acton, a legendary
esthete, scholar, poet and historian.

Laurence C. Craigie, a retired
Lieutenant General in the Air Force.
Sports B11-17

Baseball: Yanks take a new look at Boston. B14

Basketball: Knicks pull vanishing act. B11

Column: Araton on Olympics B11

Hockey: Rangers beat Flyers. B11

Devils are 5-1 winners. B13

Horse Racing: The snow days of Aqueduct. B11

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

The peripatetic Chancellor.

Hatred stalks the settlements.

New York's underground music.

A jury judges Waco.

Letters

Russell Baker: The recovery room.

A. M. Rosenthal: The worth of
Israel.

Amos Oz: Where is Israel's iron fist?

Wei Jingsheng: A hostage to the
Olympics.

Chronicle B6

Bridge C20

Chess C12

Crossword C19

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Market Place;
Some investors may be overly pessimistic on ARCO's outlook.

BYLINE: By Agis Salpukas

SECTION: Section D;  Page 6;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 701 words


FOR years Atlantic Richfield lived off the rich reserves of its domestic oil and
gas fields and its major 1960's strike in Prudhoe Bay, Alaska.

But the bonanza is running on low and a number of attempts to find big new
fields in Alaska have come up dry or have not paid off yet.

Thus the nation's seventh-largest oil company is looking for new oil and gas
reserves in far-flung places where its management has had only modest
experience, although the company has been in Indonesia and the North Sea in a
limited way for decades.

Between now and 1997, ARCO plans to spend about $3.3 billion on international
ventures, up from the nearly $2 billion invested over the last five years. Of
that, about $1.2 billion will be spent on two large gas projects, one under way
in Indonesia and one that has just begun in South China. In addition, ARCO has
acquired exploration rights in Algeria and Romania and is exploring in Yemen and
Ecuador. This week the company announced that it would explore jointly with
British Gas off the coast of Vietnam.

But the move to more reliance on foreign sources at a time of falling crude oil
prices has made investors nervous about ARCO's stock.

From a high of $127 last year, the share price has slid as the price of crude
oil fell last fall. And since Feb. 4, the stock has tumbled 8.7 percent. It
closed yesterday at $100, down 75 cents, in trading on the New York Stock
Exchange.

Nevertheless, ARCO stock has remained a favorite pick among some analysts.

They say that ARCO's new emphasis on gas and oil sources outside the United
States is a prudent move into relatively safe projects, mostly in natural gas,
that could bring a big payoff in a few years.
 "ARCO is not blindly throwing money at rank wildcats in unfamiliar territory,"
said Mary K. Quinn, the oil analyst for S. G. Warburg who did a recent report on
the company and recommended the stock.

She predicts that when ARCO begins production at its new gas projects in
Indonesia and South China -- as well as expanding in the North Sea -- earnings
from its international side will jump from a loss last year to $470 million by
1997.

She also estimated that production from the company's overseas operations, which
account for about 15 percent of last year's total, would rise to about 25
percent by 1997 when the two gas projects are in full production. Most of the
company's gas projects, she believes, pose little political risk and already
have long-term contracts under which ARCO will sell its gas to utilities.

"In my view when you look at the cash coming in from each sector, Prudhoe Bay is
shrinking in importance while the international side looms very large," Miss
Quinn said.

Yet most investors, she said, still think of ARCO as a domestic oil producer
whose fate is tied to Alaska.

Investors are also having trouble shrugging off the memory of last year's
announcements of exploration that found only dry holes or reserves that may not
be worth bringing into production. ARCO spent $163 million to drill 13 wells in
1993 in Alaska.

The lack of a major find since its strike in Prudhoe Bay and other areas in
Alaska continues to haunt ARCO, according to Robin Shoemaker, domestic oil
analyst at Lehman Brothers.

While the gas ventures promise to be profitable, he said, "They still don't
address the inability of the company to find a major source of oil."

He added, "There is the uncertainty of whether there will be anything to stem
the decline in Alaska which should begin in the mid-90's."

But both analysts do believe that there is strength in the refining and
marketing end of ARCO, which has a dominant position in gasoline sales in
California and is generally strong along the West Coast.

"They are extremely strong in the best gasoline market in the country," Miss
Quinn said.

She also cautions that it is too early to write off its prospects in Alaska,
which produces about 47 percent of ARCO's oil and gas. She predicted that the
company could end up adding to its reserves in several areas where it had
drilled successful wells.

"Investors are misperceiving the direction that ARCO is going and they are
overly pessimistic about Alaska," Miss Quinn concluded.

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Has 'Productive' Talks With Vietnam About Rights

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A;  Page 9;  Column 6;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 88 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1


The United States said today that it had a "productive exchange of views" with
Vietnam on Monday on human rights, a key issue for full normalization of
relations.

The talks were at Vietnam's mission to the United Nations in New York. The
four-member American delegation was led by Nancy Ely-Raphel, a Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State, and Vietnam's delegation was headed by its United Nations
delegate, Le Bang.

Vietnam said the talks were conducted "in an atmosphere of constructive and
mutual understanding."

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
ARCO GETS 50% OF BRITISH GAS PROJECT IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: Bloomberg Business News

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 101 words


British Gas P.L.C. said yesterday that it had assigned to ARCO a 50 percent
stake in a petroleum exploration project off Vietnam's coast in the South China
Sea. British Gas said in a statement on Monday that it would retain 50 percent
of the oil and natural gas exploration project and would be the operator. It did
not disclose what ARCO, based in Los Angeles, paid for its interest. The
companies will drill their first well in June or July. Petro Vietnam, the
national oil company, has an option to take a 15 percent stake in the venture if
ARCO and British Gas decide to develop any discoveries.

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Aldyn McKean; Gay Rights Advocate, 45

SECTION: Section D;  Page 22;  Column 4;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 189 words


Aldyn McKean, a singer and actor who was an advocate for gay rights and the
rights of people with AIDS, was found dead on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He apparently died during the weekend. He was 45.

The cause was AIDS-related complications, said Denny Lee, a spokesman for the
AIDS protest group Act Up.

For the last five years Mr. McKean was a frequent spokesman for Act Up,
representing that organization at international AIDS conferences and on national
television.

He also pressed for more and better studies of long-term survivors with the
virus that leads to AIDS.

He appeared in the film "Voices From the Front" and performed in the Broadway
production and national tour of "The Robber Bridegroom."

Born John Baldwin McKean, he was raised in Lewiston, Idaho. He came to New York
to do graduate studies at the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University
and completed his studies in 1975.

He was a member of the Harvard University class of 1970 and served a tour of
duty in Vietnam.

He is survived by his parents, Herbert and Nancy McKean of Lewiston, Idaho, and
two brothers, Scott and Arthur.


LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Seed by Seed, Row by Row: Hope for Ancient Plants

BYLINE: By ANNE RAVER

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Home Desk

LENGTH: 1666 words


SAVING seeds is a quiet, time-consuming, inglorious act. No bells rang in 1978
when Gary Nabhan, a botanist working for the Agriculture Department, descended
into an isolated valley in the Grand Canyon and asked the elders of the
Havasupai tribe, which has farmed there for 900 years, if he could have some
seeds of two ancient sunflowers.

He didn't know that 16 years later this same strain would be one of the few to
resist a rust fungus devastating sunflowers around the world.

When Frances Hoffmann, 77, took some seeds from a friend's yard in Boise, Idaho,
years ago, she had no idea that she was admiring grain amaranth, the sacred crop
of the Aztecs. Nor did she know that in 1975, the National Academy of Sciences
would call it one of the 36 most promising crops in the world.

Mrs. Hoffman was just doing what she always did.

"Saving seeds," she said. "For the future." The strange, six-foot stalk with its
blood-red plumes reminded her of some great beast. "Like here was this beautiful
big elephant seed head, and maybe tomorrow it would be mowed off and raked and
burned."

Seed saving has been going on for at least 10,000 years -- ever since a human
first put one in the ground and realized that more would be needed later. But
now, as the destruction of habitats continues, as farmers keep on growing
thousands of acres of a single crop that could be wiped out by a pest or virus,
as seed companies are bought up by multinational corporations that drop old
varieties in favor of new hybrids, the custom of saving seeds has become a
crucially important act: those endangered seeds could contain the genes that
might prove resistant to some insect plague or blight.

A small army of seed savers has been building over the last 20 years to collect
these "heirlooms" -- seeds handed down by families for generations -- as well as
many standard varieties that have been dropped.

It is impossible to know how many seed savers there are. Many are wizened
backyard gardeners. Some are collectors of hundreds of old-time beans or
potatoes. A few are nonprofit groups like the Seed Savers Exchange in Decorah,
Iowa, which has 7,000 members and an inventory of 10,000 vegetable varieties.
And about a dozen small companies have cropped up in the past 10 years to sell
unusual heirloom seeds.

One relative newcomer -- Seeds of Change, in Santa Fe, N.M. -- started selling
organic seeds in 1991 and by 1992 had sales of more than half a million dollars;
this year, its seeds are appearing in catalogues sent out by Smith & Hawken and
Gardener's Supply, and on the racks of some Home Depot stores in the Southwest.

So if you have been looking for the Calabash tomato, described by Seeds of
Change as "the ugliest tomato in the world," it may not be hard to find.  Its
large bulbous lumps look like "somebody's skin falling through a stocking," said
Kenny Ausubel, the company's founder and director. "Truly hideous. And you're
lucky if you can get it to the table without it falling apart. But it has an
incredibly rich, tomatoey taste."

Seeds of Change grows its heirlooms on a 128-acre farm in Gila, N.M., as well as
on the farms of 80 contract growers in 27 states. A sister company, Deep
Diversity, offers "open pollinated" varieties (those whose seeds produce the
same plants in subsequent generations) developed by its research director, Dr.
Alan Kapuler, a geneticist who has sought no patents for his work.

The National Gardening Association says that 42 million households have flower
or vegetable gardens, spending an estimated $600 million on seeds each year.

"I would estimate that about 2 percent of that is spent on heirloom seeds," said
Bruce Butterfield, the association's research director. "But then there's that
multiplying effect. People who buy heirlooms are going to save them, so this
might be an invisible giant in 10 years."

But those gardeners are working against a tide of loss.

Of 230 seed companies in the United States and Canada surveyed in 1984 by the
Seed Savers Exchange, 54 had either gone out of business or been taken over by
1987. By 1991, 41 more had disappeared or merged with larger companies. And
within that time, almost half the 5,000 non hybrid varieties once offered by the
companies had vanished with the takeovers.

"We're not anti-hybrid," said Kent Whealy, the director of Seed Savers,
conceding that some hybrids are vigorous and disease resistant. "But what
bothers me is the wholesale destruction of the traditional standard varieties
that has taken place with the advent of hybrids."

To him, the old standards -- the open-pollinated varieties that represent years
of testing by no-nonsense gardeners -- "are the cream of the crop."

The agrichemical businesses that are buying up family-owned seed companies are
more interested in hybrids that can stand up to mechanical harvesting and
cross-country shipping and crops that ripen all at once.

Mr. Whealy said seed companies favor hybrids whose seeds cannot be replanted
without reverting back to their parents, which compels farmers and gardeners to
buy more hybrid seed each year. Any company can reproduce and sell a standard,
or open-pollinated, variety.

Four years ago, Mr. Whealy received a MacArthur Fellowship to continue his work,
which started more than 20 years ago when his wife's grandfather Baptist Ott
handed the couple three jars of seeds.

One jar held seeds of a purple morning glory with a red star in its throat;
another, a succulent pink tomato that can grow as big around as a dinner plate;
the third a pole bean called Snipple. Grandpa Ott's father had taken them from
Bavaria to Iowa in the 1870's, and in the fall of 1972, Grandpa passed them on.

He died that winter, and the Whealys planted them the next spring. It was one of
those simple acts that reverberate.

In 1975, the couple started a little newsletter, asking if anybody else had
heirlooms: treasured varieties sewed into a pocket centuries ago on a boat to
America, or maybe just months ago on a boat from Vietnam.

At the end of the first year, the Seed Savers Exchange had six members who
traded seeds by mail. Now it has 7,000.

George Ball, the president of W. Atlee Burpee & Company, the 118-year-old home
gardening company, said he was tired of "hybrid bashing."

He said that the Burpee catalogue offers a wide range of both open-pollinated
and hybrid varieties, so that anyone who wants to go to the trouble can save
seeds. Though the company does offer fewer varieties now than in 1886 -- 15
peas, for example, compared with 28 -- Mr. Ball said, "you have just as much
diversity in peas in the 15 offered in 1994 as the 28 in 1886."

Burpee breeders have always gone after flavor and yield, he added, and their
hybrids draw from the genes of wild species as well as cultivated varieties.

Mr. Ball said Burpee drops a variety if fewer than 200 customers buy it "because
we're losing money on it, but that's when we have something to take its place."

But Mr. Whealy maintained that there was no substitute for the little brown and
white bean that came over on the Mayflower and surfaced in Iowa, or the corn and
beans carried over the Trail of Tears by the Cherokees, or the Moon and Stars
watermelon that showed up in Missouri.

Seed Savers grows 1,200 of these rarities each summer at its 180-acre Heritage
Farm outside Decorah. And its "curators" keep up collections like these around
the country: 680 varieties of potatoes, 700 of peas, 3,000 tomatoes, 3,500
beans, 600 lettuces, 700 peppers.

Seed preservationists emphasize the importance of growing seeds in the field,
both to increase their numbers and to continue their evolution.

"I'm grateful for seed banks," said Dr. Nabhan, the botanist who collected the
Havasupai sunflowers. "They're a necessary backup. But one problem is, they
freeze evolution. If you remove plants from field conditions -- and the pests
and diseases that are rapidly evolving -- these stored crops are not co-evolving
with them, and they have no chance to develop needed resistance."

Dr. Nabhan, who also won a MacArthur Fellowship, is a founder and the research
director of Native Seeds/Search in Tucson, Ariz., which seeks to preserve both
the native plants of the Southwest and the native farmers who tend them. The
group has restored traditional crops to native farmers who had given them up for
lost.

"When I was on contract with the U.S.D.A., I'd go around and talk to Indian
farmers, and they would ask me if I knew where they could get the seeds they
remembered," Dr. Nabhan said. "They didn't want the conventional seeds that were
being given out; they wanted the old seeds, because of their drought tolerance
and taste. In other words, you can't make traditional foods out of broccoli and
brussels sprouts."

Meanwhile, the world is not feeding itself on grain amaranth. It depends on only
20 species for 90 percent of its food, says the Harvard biologist Edward O.
Wilson. And just three crops -- wheat, corn and rice -- supply more than half.

As crops grow more uniform genetically, they can more easily be devastated by
pests and disease, sending scientists in search of a wild ancestor that might be
resistant.  Sometimes that gene comes from a plant like the Havasupai
sunflowers.

"It had been growing in isolation and probably developing resistance to this
rust," Dr. Nabhan said.

Tom Gulya, a plant pathologist for the Agriculture Department who has tested
1,000 kinds of sunflowers for resistance to rust, found only three that stand up
to it -- two of them from the Havasupai tribe. The tribe, like gardeners through
the ages, had saved the seeds of the best flowers, helping along natural
selection.

"It's an excellent example that there are characteristics of hidden value in all
these native American crops," Dr. Nabhan said. "If the genes of this sunflower
are transferred to commercial sunflowers, it will save millions of dollars in
crop losses that affect farmers from North Dakota to Australia."

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The harvest at Seeds of Change in Sante Fe, N.M. Amaranth
seeds, inset top, and Richard Pecoraro, the farm's manager, with amaranth.
(Photographs by Bruce Berman for The New York Times) (pg. C1); Mount Pima Indian
farmers from northwestern Mexico in the state of Sonora display their amaranth
seed heads, a source of seeds for Native Seeds/Search.; Cages covered with
screen, left, at Heritage Farm, operated by Seed Savers Exchange, keep insects
from cross-pollinating varieties of peppers and creating unwanted hybrids. Its
founders, Kent and Diane Whealy, above, direct an organization of 7,000 gardener
members and have an inventory of more than 10,000 varieties of seeds. (Gary
Nabhan; D. Cavagnaro; David Rusk for The New York Times) (pg. C6)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Seeing a City In the Windows Of Its Shops;
IN VIETNAM, ZIPPOS AND CABIAR

BYLINE: By Philip Shenon

SECTION: Section 6;  Part 2;  Page 8;  Column 5;  Sophisticated Traveler
Magazine

LENGTH: 330 words


BEHIND THE SUN-dappled shop windows along Dong Khoi Street in Ho Chi Minh City,
there is ample evidence of the tortured modern history of the Vietnamese city
still better known to the world as Saigon -- but there is also proof of its
glittering rebirth.

A stroll is best begun in the graceful decay of the lobby of the Majestic, once
the city's most elegant hotel. A sharp turn out the lobby door leads you onto
Dong Khoi Street, the leafy colonial-era thoroughfare that runs from the banks
of the Saigon River into the heart of the city.

The history lesson begins in the windows of the many tiny shops that sell
"antiques," the detritus of more than 20 years of American military presence in
South Vietnam. Some of the leftovers are good for a laugh -- old United States
Army-issue Zippo lighters engraved with dirty limericks; others are unsettling
-- dog tags that purportedly belonged to American G.I.'s but are, fortunately,
mostly fakes.

Farther along are the jewelry shops, many of the windows still crowded with the
gems and gold sold off by Saigonese families trying to buy their way out of the
country during the war.

Confirmation of the new Vietnam -- booming, optimistic, capitalist -- is found
in the windows of the art galleries and electronics shops. Several young
Vietnamese painters are considered among the most talented artists in Asia, and
their works often fetch high prices from the international collectors who pass
through Saigon. In the electronics shops are the shiny new video players and
microwave ovens that the new Vietnamese capitalists can afford.

Dong Khoi Street also offers a poignant reminder of how, as Vietnam's prospects
have brightened in the new world order, its former patrons in Moscow are still
struggling. Several windows display the sign "Caviar for Sale." Tins of beluga
have been sold to the shops by Russian diplomats so desperate for hard currency
that they are willing to part with a last luxurious taste of home.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: March 6, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1450 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   3   ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car
                collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives
                of five families.

 2      2   7   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A
                computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss
                and is accused by her of sexual harassment.

 3      3  82   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 4      4  18   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 5      7   4   FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) A
                widow's affection for the close friend of her son, killed in an
                accident, creates familial tension.

 6      6  47   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 7      5   6   FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of
                mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a
                sylvan Vermont town.

 8     12   2   THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun.
                (Putnam, $19.95.) Jim Qwilleran and his feline sleuths
                investigate a series of catastrophes.

 9     11   2   SAREK, by A.C. Crispin. (Pocket, $22.) The stormy life of
                Spock's father, an illustrious ambassador for the "Star Trek"
                Federation.

 10     8   7   BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent
                deaths.

 11         2   MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $22.95.) Archy
                McNally's search for the thief of a family's heirlooms uncovers
                a string of surprises.

 12    10  28   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 13    13   2   RAMA REVEALED, by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee.
                (Spectra/Bantam, $22.95.) The concluding volume in a series
                about the voyage of a starship.

 14*    9   6   HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B. Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) Three
                American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German activities
                in Buenos Aires in 1942.

 15         1   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  43   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2      2  11   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 3      3   8   SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A
                psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.

 4      6  22   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 5      4  26   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 6      5  28   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 7      9   2   LEAVING HOME, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $22.95.) From a
                childhood in foster homes to a column for The International
                Herald Tribune: the humorist's memoir.

 8     11   2   ANN-MARGRET: My Story, by Ann-Margret with Todd Gold. (Putnam,
                $23.95.) The autobiography of the Swedish-born, Illinois-bred
                actress and entertainer.

 9*    10   3   A DRINKING LIFE, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) The
                memoirs of a New York born-and-bred Irish-American journalist.

 10     8  14   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                100, reflect on their lives.

 11     7  16   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More
                comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 12         1   MY LIVES, by Roseanne Arnold. (Ballantine, $23.) The television
                personality discusses her professional life and private
                affairs.

 13         1   HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and
                surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."

 14    12  20   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 15    14  22   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon
                & Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem,
                relationships and spiritual growth.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   7   MAGIC EYE, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when
                scrutinized at length.

 2      2  41   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 3      3  19   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.

 4      4  32   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 19, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear In Mind
(Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interest)

EXCURSIONS IN THE REAL WORLD: Memoirs, by William Trevor. (Knopf, $23.) Not an
autobiography but a series of sketches from the life of the marvelous Irish
short-story writer; well mannered, persuasive, showing exceptional powers both
of re-creation and forgiveness.

GEORGE WALLACE: American Populist, by Stephan Lesher. (William
Patrick/Addison-Wesley, $29.95.) Governor Wallace presented as above all a
populist protest politician, articulating the complaints of "average" people.

HARRIET BEECHER STOWE: A Life, by Joan D. Hedrick. (Oxford University, $35.) A
substantive, scrupulously researched life of the author of "Uncle Tom's Cabin,"
with cogent analyses of the book and the moral universe that gave rise to it.

IMAGES: My Life in Film, by Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $27.95.) At 75, the great
Swedish film maker confronts and reveals himself as artist and man in this
evocation of his career, based on a fresh viewing of all his movies.

THE LANGUAGE INSTINCT, by Steven Pinker. (Morrow, $23.) A lucid guide for lay
people to current Chomskyan linguistics and its central thesis: we are born
programmed for language, with all the grammar we need right in our heads.

THE LATE SHIFT: Letterman, Leno, and the Network Battle for the Night, by Bill
Carter. (Hyperion, $24.95.) It wasn't as easy as offering Mr. Letterman $1
zillion, as this detailed, gripping account by a Times reporter shows.

LIBERTY AND SEXUALITY: The Right to Privacy and the Making of Roe v. Wade, by
David J. Garrow. (Lisa Drew/Macmillan, $28.) A monumental account of the
transformation in attitudes about sexuality that culminated in the 1973 Supreme
Court decision making abortion a constitutional right.

THE MAKING OF MEMORY: From Molecules to Mind, by Steven Rose. (Anchor/Doubleday,
paper, $12.95.) By studying memory, a neurobiologist seeks to bridge the gap
between chemistry and consciousness, supporting his argument with experimental
results.

ON THE REAL SIDE: Laughing, Lying, and Signifying -- The Underground Tradition
of African-American Humor That Transformed American Culture, From Slavery to
Richard Pryor, by Mel Watkins. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) The creative dealings
of black folk with the paradox of life in a land professing equality; by a
former editor at the Times Book Review.

PARALLEL TIME: Growing Up in Black and White, by Brent Staples. (Pantheon, $23.)
This memoir by an editorial writer for The New York Times is a vivid portrait of
the worldly education of a young black man who made it, haunted by the specter
of a brother murdered at 22.

THE RIFLES, by William T. Vollmann. (Viking, $22.95.) The hyperactive dream
logic of this third book in a projected meganovel of North America conflates
Franklin's fatal Arctic expedition of 1845 with a novelist's adventures in 1989.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 6, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 860 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     3   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just
           before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret
           to an 11-year-old boy.

 2     9   SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied
           Poland.

 3     2   SAVING GRACE, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) The
           romantic problems of a 13th-century English widow.

 4     7   WINTER MOON, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The
           families of law officers are besieged by violence in Los
           Angeles and Montana.

 5     4   NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A
           servant hopes to win an heiress's heart in Victorian-era
           Minnesota.

 6     3   JEDI SEARCH, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.)
           The first volume of "The Jedi Academy Trilogy," a "Star
           Wars" saga.

 7     2   THE CAT WHO WENT INTO THE CLOSET, by Lilian Jackson Braun.
           (Jove, $4.99.) A collection of junk helps Jim Qwilleran
           solve a mystery.

 8     6   RUBY, by V.C. Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) A young woman seeks
           to discover the dreadful secrets of her family's past in
           New Orleans.

 9     6   PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of
           murders in a small California town vexes a temporary
           district attorney.

 10    1   WINTER PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) Lucas
           Davenport in pursuit of a new kind of criminal in
           Wisconsin's cold woods.

 11    2   THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del
           Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The final volume in a series about
           a fantasy land.

 12   10   DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine,
           $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent
           novelist.

 13    1   TEXAS SUNRISE, by Fern Michaels. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The
           dying mistress of a fashion empire mitigates her family's
           passions.

 14*  55   THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A
           law student investigates the murder of two Supreme Court
           Justices.

 15    1   THE TEN THOUSAND, by Harold Coyle. (Pocket, $6.50.)
           American troops have to fight German forces after a mission
           in Ukraine.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1     8   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           Everyday spirituality.

 2    539  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 3    55   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) A memoir.

 4     8   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 5    25   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket,
           $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.

 6    125  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France.

 7*   40   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.)
           Menopause and today's women.

 8    18   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a
           la A.A. Milne.

 9     5   WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ... AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and
           Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Vietnam.

 10   14   THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects
           of Taoist philosophy.

 11*  139  YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Communicating.

 12*  12   OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the
           television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.

 13*  14   EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.)
           Southern murders.

 14*  44   TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The
           charms of rustic France.

 15*   6   A CALL FOR REVOLUTION, by Martin L. Gross. (Ballantine,
           $8.99.) Government waste.

 16*  14   GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the
           physicist Richard Feynman.

 17*   2   BITTER BLOOD, by Jerry Bledsoe. (Onyx, $5.99.) Murders of
           members of two families.

 18*  140  LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper
           Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and
           emotions.

 19*  30   EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's,
           $6.99.) The veterinarian's memoirs.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    155  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles to practice in the
           pursuit of success.

 2    162  THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and
           Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's
           diet.

 3    11   BOTTOMS UP! by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.99.) Exercises
           for women to achieve good health and fitness.

 4    20   WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg,
           Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
           Counsel for parents-to-be.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 19, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SUNDAY VIEW;
Two on the Aisle, Yes, but Which Aisle?

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2176 words


THE PLACE: THE MAJESTIC Theater. The time: a recent Saturday night a few minutes
before the start of the performance of "The Phantom of the Opera." A grim-faced
middle-aged man, trailed by a worried woman I took to be his wife, went past me
up the stairs at my elbow. He carried his coat, his wife's coat and their ticket
stubs, which he read with a squint. "One more row," he said to no one in
particular, "and we'd be outside." They moved on. I was cheered: they had even
worse seats than the one I was in.

It was a time of stress for us all. After paying $65, which is also the cost of
a seat in the orchestra, you have reason to be shocked when you find yourself
high above the Majestic's equivalent of a timberline. That is, you're in row D
of what's termed the rear mezzanine, eight rows (E through L) from the back of
the theater, sitting on a level with the unadorned plaster above the proscenium.
The stage is far below.

What you learn when you check the "Phantom" price scale is that, on Friday and
Saturday nights, every seat in the house costs $65 except for those in the last
seven rows. In the first five of those rows, the seats go for $50 and, in the
last two rows, for $37.50. In my $65 seat, I was within spitting distance of
steerage. Did I say $65? In fact, it was $99.75 -- but I'm getting ahead of
myself.

Two weeks ago, I went to see Broadway's four longest-running musicals: "Cats"
(which opened Oct. 7, 1982), "Les Miserables" (March 12, 1987), "Phantom" (Jan.
26, 1988) and "Miss Saigon" (April 11, 1991). I was putting myself in the
position of a mythical out-of-towner, a businessman who knows nobody and who was
caught in Manhattan from Friday night of the President's Day weekend through
Tuesday. What to do? Gentle counsel buzzed in this tourist's ear: "Have fun. See
four shows."

My idea was not to write a piece on ticket prices, or to consider the phenomenon
of Cameron Mackintosh, the shows' British producer, or that all four are English
imports. Instead, I wanted to check on ticket availability, to note how well the
productions are holding up, to try to understand what makes a hit a hit, and to
see how much value is given for the dollar. Yet when you talk about value, you
have to go into the matter of prices. Top prices for lousy seats kill the
conviviality of a theater outing faster than a heart attack.

The ticket for "Cats" (Winter Garden) was no problem: a center section seat, on
the aisle in the sixth row of the orchestra, purchased on Friday afternoon for
that night's performance. The cost: $65, the top price at each of the four
theaters. "Miss Saigon" (at the Broadway) was a little more difficult for Monday
night. There was nothing in the orchestra. The seat, bought on the day of the
performance, was in the front mezzanine, one row from the back of the section,
on the aisle next to the right wall. It also cost $65 but, because the location
is not too far from the stage, it didn't seem unreasonable.

Much better was Tuesday night's $65 seat for "Les Miserables" (at the Imperial),
purchased the day before the performance. It wasn't in the orchestra, but it was
in the front mezzanine, second row center, with sight lines probably superior to
those of the seats under me in the orchestra.

"Phantom" was something else. When I went to the Majestic on Friday afternoon,
having set my heart on seeing the show the next night, I noticed a car with
Connecticut license plates, a mud-encrusted, gray Sentra sedan, parked directly
in front of the theater. The driver was a friendly fellow who hailed me. I
thought I must know him until he said, "Good tickets for tonight's performance!"
Having been instructed from childhood never to buy theater tickets from friendly
fellows in mud-encrusted gray Sentras, I passed on.

The man in the box office couldn't fill my request. Indeed, he seemed surprised
at my surprise. I was the last person in New York to know that "Phantom" is
always sold out on weekends. Leaving in some embarrassment (the woman behind me
was buying tickets for April), I sought out a ticket agency in a nearby hotel.
"You're in luck," I was told by the man behind the counter. He had one $65
ticket. Gosh, I thought, how great. I certainly didn't want to go to all this
trouble and wind up with a cheap seat in the rafters. I asked if the seat were
in the orchestra. "Not the orchestra," said the man. "Even better. The
mezzanine." The mezzanine? I was dubious. He was enthusiastic. "I always like
this seat," he said, as if he sat in it with some regularity. "You can watch the
chandelier as it begins to fall." I left, feeling giddy with good fortune. Good
fortune?

The cost of that ticket: $65, plus the agency's $25 fee and the $9.75 fee of the
hotel. The $99.75 total is a fairly stiff price to pay on impulse. But then, in
the course of my four-show binge, I talked to only one other person who had
bought a ticket at an agency. Everyone else had planned ahead. They cared.

The young couple sitting next to me at "Phantom" had bought their tickets
through the mail three months earlier, which only increased their anger at
finding themselves so close to the roof. They weren't of a mood to sympathize
with producers' worries about rising production costs, union wage scales and the
precarious nature of Broadway investments in general.

The Friday night performance of "Cats" turned out to be the nearly perfect way
to begin a bogus tourist's odyssey. Except for four giggly teen-age girls who
arrived at the Winter Garden in a silver-gray stretch limo, we all seemed to be
from not only out of town but also out of country: Japan, Germany, Scandinavia,
France, Russia, as well as other places that speak languages not immediately
identifiable by me.

THE EVENING WAS LESS A theater-going experience than a Circle Line cruise. Our
guide: the severe voice of Big Sister over the public address system. Hers was
not a voice to tangle with. In a manner that made everyone hop, she instructed
us when to take our seats. When she laid out the rules against camera use, I
felt guilty of a crime I'd never thought of perpetrating. An announcement about
an intermission sale of cast-autographed posters (to benefit AIDS research) was
received as if it were a non-com's command to volunteer.

The result: the most docile, intimidated, apprehensive, scared group of people
I've been a part of since the day I was inducted into the navy.

That may explain the passivity with which the performance was received. There
was plenty of applause, but it hardly varied from one number to the next. It
sounded less like a spontaneous reaction than an attempt to do the right thing.
The main problem: unless someone was dancing, few of us had a clue as to what
was happening on the stage. The T. S. Eliot lyrics were mostly unintelligible
(only those for "Memory" were familiar enough to be understood), even to those
English-speaking patrons sitting down front.

For once this didn't seem to be the fault of the amplification equipment or the
singers but of the lyrics themselves. They could as easily have been based on
material from "Finnegans Wake." The virtually plotless show otherwise appeared
to be in good if unexciting condition, like something at Disney World; it moves
swiftly as if pre-set by computer. There's no compulsion to understand it. It's
accepted as spectacle.

The same is true of "Les Miserables," "Miss Saigon" and "Phantom," which, in
addition, are somewhat more fully understood in spite of sound problems.

Of the four shows, "Les Miserables" would seem to be the best buy, but then I
had a good seat, which was not true when I saw "Miss Saigon" and "Phantom."
Though the music for "Les Miserables" isn't memorable, it has a huge, utterly
adequate cast, an epic Victor Hugo plot (conveniently cut down for the stage and
synopsized in the Playbill), and superb direction by Trevor Nunn and John Caird.
Using a large revolving platform, the directors give the complicated production
something of the seamless freedom of cinema.

Both "Miss Saigon" and "Phantom" look as pristine and move as swiftly as they
did in their opening weeks, but the star performances by Jonathan Pryce ("Miss
Saigon") and Michael Crawford ("Phantom") are missed. There's nothing badly
wrong with their current replacements, but the stars' departures have left each
show with no highs to set off the lows. The supporting players in these musicals
also seem to be moving around a lot, or maybe just having a run of flu. When you
open any Playbill, it's as if it were stuffed with pressed butterflies: little
white sheets of paper bearing the names of the actors substituting at this
performance.

The binge produced one overdue epiphany: people seeing these long-running hits
are not seeing the shows the reviewers saw. I'm referring not only to changes
effected by cast replacements but also to the fact that reviewers receive
preferential treatment when it comes to seats. They are near the stage. Their
sight lines are unobscured. If an actor hiccups, they hear it. But, even during
a long run, how many members of the ticket-buying public ever see a show from,
or in the vicinity of, a fourth-, fifth- or sixth-row aisle seat in the
orchestra?

This question is not raised to suggest that reviewers be packed off to the
balcony -- oops, I mean rear mezzanine. It's to call attention to the fact that,
because the musicals are designed, directed and played primarily for the benefit
of orchestra patrons, those less fortunate should not have to pay the same
prices. Either that, or the shows should be so produced that someone sitting in
the rear mezzanine has the same experience as the patron down below.

What astonishes me is not that the theater is in trouble but that it still has
so many loyal supporters among people accustomed to television, which depends on
a succession of tight close-ups. Everything in the theater is seen in a long
shot, which is the magic and the point of theater in a small house, and in a big
one when you're in the sixth row. From row D in the rear mezzanine of a house as
big as the Majestic, the long shot becomes a dimly seen animated picture
postcard.

The sound is no better. Today's amplification equipment has a way of gobbling up
words and shredding them into unintelligible syllables. Comprehension vanishes.
At "Phantom" the other night, the sound also was so denatured and so spread
around the auditorium that all sense of the origin of a voice was lost. You
could only tell who was singing by finding the moving mouth, which wasn't easy.
The entire show might as well have been prerecorded. It could be that theater
patrons no longer care. It's possible they now accept a musical theater
performance more or less the way they accept a music video, in which a singer
may or may not bother to lip sync the lyric. All that's required are an image
and some sound.

The Broadway Theater's sound equipment for "Miss Saigon" gives the singers'
voices a piercing edge that's not quite human. It also seems to favor orchestra
patrons. At least, I had no trouble making out the lyrics when, almost three
years ago, I saw the opening performance from an orchestra seat. The other
night, sitting by the right wall of the front mezzanine, I thought I was having
a seizure. The show looked pretty enough and I could hear isolated words, but I
couldn't put them together. At intermission I asked the young woman to my left,
a Seattle environmental consultant, if she were having any problems. "Oh," she
said with relief, "I thought I was going deaf."

Like "Miss Saigon," "Phantom" is in decent shape in all superficial ways. I'm
still not sure of the reason for the show's long-lived appeal. Like its thin,
sweet, Puccini-esque Andrew Lloyd Webber score, "Phantom" makes no serious
emotional demands on the audience. It soothes, as does "Miss Saigon," which
simultaneously updates Puccini's "Madama Butterfly" to Vietnam and pushes
Vietnam back into a past defined mostly by a love that cannot be. For all of the
social unrest and political melodrama in "Les Miserables," its passions are
unthreatening, safely romantic, evoking a 19th-century world as far removed from
ours as life on a private island off Tahiti. Is escape the only reason for the
longevity of these shows?

Although the people sitting around me at "Phantom" were a fairly disgruntled
lot, the word-of-mouth from the orchestra patrons must continue to be good. That
Saturday night's performance was sold out. Twenty minutes before the curtain,
approximately 40 people waited for cancellations on the sidewalk in the bitter
cold. There were standees during the performance.

As I had been promised, I could see the chandelier. In fact, I could almost
touch it. I spent much of the evening staring down at it and then up at the
mechanism by which it would descend. I saw it begin its fall but, inevitably, I
suppose, it was an anticlimax. It looked less like a lethal object than a
Roosevelt Island gondola, high above the East River, swinging serenely toward
Manhattan.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Liz Callaway, above left, as Grizabella in "Cats," (Martha
Swope/"Cats") directed by Trevor Nunn, and David (Dudu) Fisher as Jean Valjean
in "Les Miserables," (Marc Bryan-Brown/"Les Miserables") directed and adapted by
Mr. Nunn and John Caird -- Is escape the only reason for these shows' longevity?
(pg. 10); The rehearsal scene from Act I of the long-running Andrew Lloyd Webber
musical "The Phantom of the Opera" -- Top prices for lousy seats kill the
conviviality of a theater outing faster than a heart attack. (Joan Marcus/"The
Phantom of the Opera")(pg. 5)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART;
The Immigrant Experience in the 90's

BYLINE: By VIVIEN RAYNOR

SECTION: Section 13WC;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 759 words

DATELINE: THE BRONX


WITH "Beyond the Borders," the Bronx Museum of the Arts must hope to eat its
diversity cake and have it too. Why else would the guest curator, Betti-Sue
Hertz, go to all the trouble of locating 30 immigrant artists from 27 countries
only to mount a show that in the end celebrates individualism?

Still, with the ebb and flow of peoples now a worldwide manifestation -- and one
that has done little to promote international understanding -- the production
deserves attention.

Except for boat people, the masses now arrive by plane relatively unhuddled and,
in the case of the artists among them, ready to make dislocation their subject
matter -- even to capitalize on it. And, unlike their forebears, they come with
media-fostered illusions, although these are often no more than updated versions
of "streets paved with gold." All of which may explain why "Beyond the
Boundaries" is arranged under curiously unhelpful headings like "Grounded
Transmissions" and "Informed Interference."

In any case, the viewer, as usual, is left holding the bag, determining which of
its esthetic contents were imported and which acquired in the United States,
particularly by the artists who have studied here.

Among the show's redeeming features are the biographical statements, some of
them quite poignant. For example, Dinh Le, from Vietnam, speaks of having
followed the Confucian doctrines of obedience to elders and loyalty to family
until overwhelmed by the American " 'me' value system." The result in the show
is a series of large C-prints featuring dolls with the faces of Cher, Michael
Jackson, Vanilla Ice and others.

After these idols, all depicted without clothes, come the fantasies of Emilya
Dunayets. Most are dark pencil and watercolor landscapes inhabited by pale-faced
humans and polymorphs reminiscent of Chagall. Ms. Dunayets comes from Ukraine
and, feeling "like an alien in a cruel and restless world," she admits to using
art as a form of self-defense.

Anold Etienne explains that he is a self-taught painter because there were no
art schools in his part of Haiti. But his high-keyed landscapes, though brimming
with incidents, like a bus falling off a hill, are too well organized to be
regarded as wholly naive. Formerly an engineer, Moses Daramola from Nigeria is
now an artist working with sand and colored beads on mahogany panels to produce
intricate patterns, like that of a tall woman bent double over a red pot.

From this to Mo Bahc's "Traditional Breeze II" is a few feet and many
psychological miles. As if there were no alternative, Mr. Bahc devotes himself
to reconciling the irreconcilable, notably his own country, South Korea, with
the United States. He does it with paint, video or, as here, with a tree-like
assemblage involving hand-held fans and the electric kind.

Among the many artists taking a political route is Shirin Neshat, an Iranian
molded by five years' study at the University of California at Berkeley. On a
recent visit to her native land, Ms. Neshat was impressed to see women wearing
the veil again but at the same time doing military service. In the
photographer's larger-than-lifesize black and white prints, they pose with
rifles.

Toyo Tsuchiya from Tokyo celebrates his ties with Manhattan's Lower East Side
with a large image of a neighborhood sculpture garden. Mike Gyampo looks back to
life in Ghana by way of bronze sculptures incorporating African motifs. As an
artist born in China, Wucius Wong is well acquainted with the art of ink
painting; as an admirer of Hudson River School landscapes living on the Hudson,
he combines the media with gouache to impressive effect in views of mountains
and clouds.

Although born in the Philippines, Pacita Abad draws inspiration from the art of
Melanesia. She produces large, bright wall hangings of ferocious figures made
with cowrie shells, beads, a mirror and other objects.

Although the artists all share the immigrant experience, few apply themselves to
studying their adopted land as thoughtfully as Felipe Galindo of Mexico. His
drawings, in ink, watercolor or pastel, are on materials that most people
discard as trash. Thus, on a cake box he depicts a delicatessen with beer signs,
using the plastic insert as a window; a bus transfer is grounds for a vignette
of a couple waiting at a bus stop, and so on. For an adult, changing countries
is like learning to walk again. Mr. Galindo's scratchy little observations sum
up the awkwardness of it all.

The show continues through June 12. The number is (718) 681-6000, extension 36.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Roasted Ducks," watercolor, pastel and ink on Chinese food
container by Felipe Galindo.; "Melanesia," a mixed construction by Pacita Abad.
(Photographs from the Bronx Museum of the Arts/Tony Velez)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Clinton Tries to Make Major Feel Special

BYLINE: By JOHN DARNTON

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 919 words

DATELINE: LONDON


ADMITTEDLY, the Group of Seven summit meeting in Tokyo wasn't the most
propitious venue to initiate a search for one's roots. The idea apparently was
born during one of those moments when bonding leaders scratch around for small
talk. Prime Minister John Major, chatting with President Clinton and into his
second whisky, ventured the recollection that his grandfather had worked the
steel mills in Pittsburgh and that his father had in fact been conceived there.
He was fuzzy on the details.

So on a wintry night last Monday the leader of the United States took the leader
of the United Kingdom on a tour of downtown Pittsburgh, where not a trace of the
steel mills remains. Instead of braving the blast furnace, they strolled through
the renovated Station Square shopping mall past blue jeans and chocolate chip
cookie counters. In a Pro Sports shop Mr. Major bought a "Mighty Ducks" hockey
shirt for his son for $69. Not quite a pilgrimage to the old homestead, but Mr.
Clinton had made his point: when it comes to Mr. Major, he'll go to great
lengths to show him a good time.

Mr. Major's 48-hour visit was filled with other outward shows of bonhomie. The
two dined in a hilltop restaurant, compared airplanes, took in some fireworks on
the banks of the Monongahela and held a convivial news conference back in
Washington. And please note, briefers on both sides of the Atlantic said, that
Mr. Major stayed overnight in the White House -- the first foreign leader to do
so since Winston Churchill.

The problem with all the hoopla was that it followed a year of unusually
strained relations between London and Washington and the public rift over Mr.
Clinton's decision to give a visa to Gerry Adams, the Irish nationalist fighting
the British presence in Ulster. And so it came across as an elaborate display of
friendly intentions with a methinks-she-doth-protest-too-much undercoating, like
a person covering a snub to a friend with extra politesse. The Washington Post
even drew a perverse lesson from it: that what is most special about the current
state of U.S.-British relations is the symbolic lengths the Clinton
Administration felt it had to go to this week to prove its specialness.

But old Atlantic hands, if there is such a thing, were feeling a bit more
sanguine. They noted that the much-vaunted "special relationship," in
Churchill's now shopworn phrase, always looked a little rosier in retrospect.

It is true that the United States and Britain were drawn together when fighting
a common enemy and that ties were closest when the fight was hot and heavy,
whether against Hitler in the 1940's or the Soviet threat thereafter. And it is
true that there was a remarkable confluence of interests and pooling of
resources, notably in the field of intelligence, as the British Empire crumbled
and the United States moved in to shoulder the international burden.

But nationalist considerations never quite faded away and the pooling of
resources was never quite as selfless as nostalgists made out. It was a marriage
of convenience that looked good to both partners because the rest of the world
looked so bad. There were often rough patches when the interests clashed, most
notably in 1956 when President Eisenhower stymied the British-led campaign to
recover control of the Suez Canal from the Egyptians.

In fact, much of the "specialness" of the relationship seemed to depend upon the
ideological compatibility and personal chemistry of the two leaders of the time.
Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher breathed the same zealous oxygen. John F.
Kennedy and Harold Macmillan felt an affiliation that bridged their generations.
Two eloquent patricians, Roosevelt and Churchill, started the whole business.
But Richard M. Nixon and Edward Heath never hit it off, in part because Mr.
Heath was oriented toward the rest of Europe. And Lyndon Johnson and Harold
Wilson got on each other's nerves and were opposed on the central issue of
Vietnam, where Mr. Wilson refused to commit even a token British force. Mr.
Major got off to a rocky start with Mr. Clinton even before the 1992
Presidential election, when Conservative aides gave George Bush campaign
ammunition.

Those who believe the Cold War was the glue that held the two nations together
believe that Washington will be inexorably drawn to the economic powers of
Germany in Europe and the rising countries of Asia. To them Washington's
cavalier attitude toward Britain in recent years is not an accident; it is
freighted with historical significance since it represents the discarding of an
unequal alliance that no longer serves the larger partner. Washington has begun
to treat Britain as if it were just any other country. Or, as one British
newspaper put it, "the trouble with the special relationship is that it is
special to only one side."

But others feel that the relationship is deeper than a political-diplomatic
alliance, that it is a complex and rich bundle of shared values, language, and
history. They believe that it is reinforced by such things as cheap
trans-Atlantic travel and cultural endeavors like the joint BBC-WGBH TV
production of "Middlemarch." If Britain can hold on as a regional financial
center in the emerging global marketplace and a cultural power with English
becoming the world's lingua franca, then the Washington-London axis is likely to
thrive.

For them Mr. Clinton's gesture of escorting Mr. Major on a roots tour through
the Pittsburgh shopping center was not a photo op, it was penance.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing: (Nancy Carpenter)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Remembering Kahane, and the Woman on the Bridge

BYLINE: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 993 words


EACH time the evil that Rabbi Meir Kahane left behind surfaces, as it has with
the killings in Hebron by one of his disciples, I think back to the winter 23
years ago when I profiled him, when he begged me not to write about Estelle
Donna Evans, the woman who had jumped to her death from the Queensboro Bridge
because of him.

It was 1971 and for the first time Rabbi Kahane was gaining notoriety. The
Jewish Defense League he had founded was holding protests at Soviet diplomatic
sites. Its adolescent members shouted "Never Again" as they demanded emigration
for Russian Jews and threw bags of excrement at the Soviet offices. In what
seemed a parody of black militant groups of the time, J.D.L. members posed in
front of Temple Emanu-el with tire chains, offering protection that no one at
the Fifth Avenue synagogue asked for or needed.

I was assigned to find out who the rabbi was and where he had come from. Over
several weeks I learned how he had dabbled in right-wing politics and how he had
tried to set up a consulting firm representing foreign governments in
Washington. He had written a book, published under shadowy imprimatur, called
"The Jewish Stake in Vietnam," in which he argued that the day was coming when
the opposition to the war by liberal Jews would lead to a withdrawal of
Washington's support for Israel. In some circles he had called himself Michael
King, writing under this name and even telling some of those who knew him in
this way that he was a Presbyterian.

He quickly acknowledged all this when I interviewed him. Smart and cocky, he
readily talked of his early failures, like flunking the bar exam and his
dismissal as rabbi by a congregation in Howard Beach, Queens, that thought him
too orthodox. He admitted that his attempt to establish campus organizations in
support of the war came to nothing. But now, he told me, with the J.D.L. things
were different. He had found a constituency that would make him known.

He told me, "We have no great funds, no great influence, so the answer is
simple: to do outrageous things." It was a formula he used for the rest of his
life, one that led to his being killed, one that is still being used by his
followers.

What was striking was his will to force himself into history. He reveled in the
loyalty of the militantly strutting minions, who, like him, seemed persecuted
only in their imaginations. In a series of interviews he seemed to me a
redeeming thug, a man creating himself by merging traits of biblical heroes,
charismatic rabbis and the shtarkers of Brownsville's Murder Incorporated. He
wanted to be a leader who could not be ignored, who could impose his fantasies,
even if only on his small legion of admiring youngsters.

As I was leaving my first meeting with him, he handed me some League brochures
with an advertisement asking for contributions to "the Estelle Donna Evans
Foundation," described as a fund to help needy people in Israel. I returned to
ask about it. Yes, said the rabbi, she was a gentile who had worked as his
secretary in the consulting venture. She had died tragically and her well-to-do
family, he said, endowed the foundation. He was very convincing, but as I
checked the story, the facts turned out to be quite different.

SHE was not rich. Her real name was Gloria Jean D'Argenio. She adopted Estelle
Donna Evans when she looked for modeling jobs. By 1966 she was involved in a
romance with Rabbi Kahane. She was 22 years old. Her roommate told me that
Estelle had told her the rabbi had promised marriage. Then, the roommate said,
he sent a letter breaking everything off, admitting he was married with children
and saying he could not leave them. On July 30, Estelle Donna Evans jumped from
the bridge. Pulled from the water, she died in Bellevue the next day. The letter
was in her pocketbook.

I confronted the rabbi with what I had learned. He put his hand on my knee and
said, "I loved her." He acknowledged everything and told me he had placed roses
on her grave for months. He then began pleading with me not to publish the full
account of this story. His self-assuredness vanished and he started to stutter.

He came to my office. He told me that writing about his affair would torment his
ailing mother and inflict pain on his wife and his children. At one point he
promised that if I withheld the story he would abandon public life. On another
visit he told me a story about a rabbi who as a young man wanted to save all the
Jews in the world. In middle age he wanted to save the Jews of Poland, and when
he had grown old he hoped to save just one Jew, himself. "I am that rabbi," he
said.

In the end I wrote about Estelle Donna Evans and her death, but I did it
elliptically and without emphasis. I devoted six discreetly worded paragraphs to
the romance and the suicide and these did not appear until midway through the
5,000-word article. Some readers may have missed the point.

Years later, when racist supporters of the Rabbi's Kach movement screamed that
their Israeli critics slept with Arabs or lived with shikses, I re-examined my
choices and wished I had stressed the Estelle Donna Evans story more prominently
in my expose. Looking back, it seemed more central to the rabbi's motivations.
When last weekend I read of the slaughter in Hebron, I realized once more that
Rabbi Kahane's legacy was compounding itself, and again I thought back to the
woman on the bridge.

Had I written more boldly, would the rabbi's credibility with his followers have
lessened? Would young men like the then 19-year-old Baruch Goldstein have freed
themselves from the rabbi's spell? Was that my job, to bring the rabbi down?

I do not know. Over the years I have asked a number of rabbis about it. Some
said that setting out to destroy a reputation by revealing secrets of a private
life is tantamount to murder. But I am more impressed by those who told me that
showing mercy to the cruel is wrong and sinful.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Estelle Evans being rescued after jumping off the Queensboro
Bridge in 1966. She died the next day. (George Lockhart/The Daily News); Kahane,
1971

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Surf's Up in Sydney

BYLINE: By ERIC WEINBERGER;   ERIC WEINBERGER, who lives in the Netherlands,
recently spent five months in Australia.

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1747 words


THE American visitor flying from Hawaii or Los Angeles gets a first glimpse of
Australia's Bondi Beach from the air. The flight skirts the coast of New South
Wales above Sydney, grazing the city at the northern and southern headlands
where the harbor forms; directly below the extended claw of South Head a
crescent is carved, a sliver of sand where city meets surf. This is Bondi. The
plane goes on, to land farther south at Botany Bay, but one can easily return by
taxi or city bus.

Some will be disappointed. The city presses hard into Bondi (pronounced
BONN-die), as it does to most of its 34 ocean beaches. The beach is not long,
just over half a mile from end to end. Larger, less congested shores can be
found up the coast in northern New South Wales or Queensland. But Bondi is where
the Australian myth of surf and sand began, its surf life-saving club
Australia's oldest -- the world's oldest, it asserts -- formed in 1906.

Australia is an urban country, with nearly three-fifths of the population
inhabiting only five cities, and its recreations are urban too. In its growing
pains Sydney has spread far beyond the original site in Sydney Cove (now
Circular Quay), squeezed between the present-day Opera House and Harbor Bridge,
and now occupies a larger area than metropolitan Los Angeles. Each wave of
immigrants has taken the city out farther, but Bondi, some four miles to the
east, was always where they came to play.

In his books on other topics -- Cambodia, Britain and Vietnam (Australia too) --
the journalist John Pilger usually begins with Bondi, his hometown, where as a
child in the 50's he would watch the first Italian immigrants "unfold" on the
beach, "starting with a spectacular lemming-like dash into the Pacific Ocean,
unafraid of the surf and currents and sharks," adding: "They would be duly and
cheerfully swept away, then rescued with a large trawling net." It was a ritual
to be followed by later-arriving Greeks, Lebanese, Turks, English, Chileans and
Chinese, "as if their immigrants' journey was only complete once they had
baptized themselves in the surf of an Australian beach."

They have been joined since by other people -- Russians, Vietnamese,
Indonesians, Malaysians, Brazilians and orthodox Jews. Many have stayed on in
Bondi, where they run groceries, self-service laundries, hardware shops and
takeouts (in Australia, "takeaways"). Often they hope to move. A Brazilian (now
a citizen) I met at his apartment on Curlewis Street showed me the one room he
shared with his wife and son, a home to be abandoned soon as they prepared to
move into a house in Lane Cove in the spacious northern suburbs. But Bondi is
where he first came to stay, and where his child, the new Australian, learned to
surf.

Bondi, the community behind the beach, has little to distinguish it; it has
always been something of a shantytown on the ocean, a suburb "caught between red
roofs and faded posh," in Mr. Pilger's words. The Bondi roofs, once notable for
the sheets of corrugated iron reaching over the front, in the fashion known as
Australian bullnose, are now all heavy tile, covering low flat bungalows with
wide eaves and short stubby blocks of apartments. Many still stand today, in
faded pastels and scrubby worn red brick, along with luxury apartments and some
other new development -- among them a huge, disproportionate palace of a hotel,
the Ramada on the beach.

With the building and rebuilding sure to come now that Sydney has won the
Olympic Games for the year 2000, Bondi, the suburb, may change more than at any
time in the past. But it is hard to believe it will ever completely lose its
raffish, broken-down appeal. It is separated from Bondi Beach by the wide lanes
of seedy Campbell Parade, the street that follows the curving beach, where in
the raucous evenings preening youths in silken shirts perambulate, their
girlfriends propped on cars for a smooch, like hood ornaments.

It gets noisy along Campbell Parade, with people clambering into the packed
vastnesses of the Hotel Bondi for dancing, drinks and a game of pool. And the
traffic is no help: there are so many lines painted and erased in the asphalt,
barriers advanced and partly withdrawn, that the only solution is to zoom
straight through. "Shot through like a Bondi tram" is a local expression, a
reminder of the days when you could get from Circular Quay to the beach for a
threepenny coin. The trams haven't run for 30 years; Sydneysiders are still
shooting through.

The path to the beach is through a park by the side of Campbell Parade, which
slopes down to a concrete walk that curves around the sand. A good 50 or 60
yards of sand lie between wall and water when the tide is low, and the beach
itself, hemmed in by cliffs and rocks at its northern and southern ends,
stretches for about half a mile. On closer inspection those who may have been
disappointed earlier tend to recover their spirits, and see the beach in a new
light, generally a strong, reflected light so bright the eye is forced to
squint. Sunglasses are required, and what Mr. Pilger has dubbed the "necessary
burnt offerings": an Esky, for keeping drinks cool, and a tube of the sun-cream
Australians call zinc.

Bondi is home not only to its surfers, body-boarders and lifesavers, arriving
barefoot down Hall Street or driving themselves in from the city in cars, but
also joggers, roller-bladers, power-walkers, strollers and swimmers, who start
coming out even before first light at six. Swimmers are asked to keep within the
red-and-yellow flags, slightly toward the northern side; surfers hang around the
south, where they wait lazily, treading water, for that perfect roller out to
sea.

A slow walk along the beach from north to south is a chance to take this all in,
and begins properly at the rocks named Ben Buckler, where the waves are
fiercest. Through an unkempt residential street, and back onto the beachside
walk, one passes the headquarters of two surf life-saving clubs of Bondi and
North Bondi: the dividing line between the two rivals is hard to draw and
belongs, probably, to tradition. Immediately after that is the Bondi Pavilion, a
community arts center with a snack bar in the front and basketball courts
behind. Next to the pavilion there is the park, with picnic tables, not always
clean.

AT the extreme southern end of the beach, built into the cliffs, are Bondi's
ocean baths, a landmark since 1887, a crumbling stucco structure quite at home
in generally crumbling Bondi. Above the pool, filled with ocean water
overflowing the rocky seabed, stands the home of the celebrated Icebergs, men
who must swim three of every four Sundays for five years to qualify as members.
This is not as taxing as it may sound -- to people from colder climes than
Australia's the water in the ocean is seldom too cold to swim. The lowest water
temperature in midwinter is around 60 degrees. The effort is what counts, the
showing-up. The Icebergs are under challenge now, as the local council is loath
to commit money to repair the baths and clubhouse so long as women are excluded
from membership. The men won't budge -- women belong to the Icebergs' sister
outfit, the Bondi Mermaids, they say, and need not join them. The case is still
to be decided. Except for Sunday mornings, however, the ocean baths, like the
beach, are open to the public.

In Australia the beach is for all, where everyone meets as equals under the sun.
The bodies, while not always young, are lean and hard; if not always graceful,
surely agile and athletic. There is nothing soft or flaccid about Bondi's
particular brand of hedonism. Visitors will discover in Bondi a delightfully
immoderate place to stop for a while, among the Eskys and zinc cream.



WHERE CITY MEETS THE STRAND
Getting There

Bondi Beach is a Sydney suburb, and can be reached from anywhere in the city by
taxi (about $8, calculated at 71 cents to the Australian dollar) or public
transport ($3). The 380 and 381 buses run from the city center (Circular Quay or
Hyde Park) along Oxford Street.

Places to Stay

Rates at the following hotels are for rooms facing the beach.

Ramada Grand Hotel, Campbell Parade and Beach Road, Bondi Beach, New South Wales
2026, Australia; telephone 365-5666, fax 365-5330 (the dialing code for
Australia is 61, the code for Bondi and Sydney is 2). A total of 203 rooms
ranging from $117 to $354. The hotel has a restaurant, bar and underground
parking.

Ravesi's on Bondi Beach, 118 Campbell Parade, Bondi Beach, New South Wales 2026,
Australia; 365-4422, fax 365-1481. A self-described "boutique" hotel with only
16 rooms and suites. There is a restaurant and cocktail bar on the terrace.
Rates from $63 to $94, including breakfast.

Hotel Bondi, 178 Campbell Parade, Bondi Beach, New South Wales 2026, Australia;
30-3271, fax 30-7974. A Bondi landmark since the 20's, distinguished by its
gaunt wedding-cake facade. The hotel is the beach's largest -- and busiest --
night spot until the early hours. The rooms, however, are fairly quiet. The
street is not. Avoid the interior rooms, but the front rooms (facing the sea,
with balcony) are Sydney's greatest bargain, at $36 to $57. Be prepared, though,
for tiny prefabricated bathrooms and bent Venetian blinds.

Places to Eat

Campbell Parade, lining the beach, has dozens of possibilities, from McDonalds
and snack bars up. There are also several small restaurants, many newly opened
and eager to please, with innovative menus from $7 to $14, not including wine.
Often they are bring-your-own-bottle places, sometimes with a corkage fee of 35
to 70 cents.

Try the Bondi Trattoria (34b Campbell Parade; 365-4303), the Lamrock Cafe, 72
Campbell Parade at the corner of Lamrock Avenue (30-6554), or Ravesi's. The
Bluewater Grill (168 Ramsgate Avenue; 30-7810) enjoys a good reputation for its
seafood.

What to See

A beach is a beach is a beach, but check local newspapers to see if there might
be a surf carnival the weekend you are in town: a splendid sight. The lifesavers
are, generally, the beach's star attraction -- most mornings they can be seen
training for races in their large wooden surfboats, driven by oars. Right on the
beach is the Bondi Surf Livesavers Club, Australia's oldest. It has a room of
exhibits open to the public, mostly plaques, trophies and framed photographs,
representing a social history of the beach since the turn of the century. A
donation is requested.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sociability, not tranquillity, is the point of a visit to Bondi
Beach. The lively Hotel Bondi, "a pub with rooms." Bondi's lifeguards show their
form at a carnival. (Photographs by Jean-Paul Ferrero/Auscape International)(pg.
22); Ravesi's, a self-described boutique hotel, has 16 rooms. (Ross
Barnett/Auscape International for The New York Times)

Map of the Sydney area showing location of Bondi.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 7, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

New Refugees May Still Leave Vietnam;
Do What's Right

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 162 words


To the Editor:

I agree with your Feb. 22 editorial on the boat people: It is time to put the
wars in Indochina behind us. Replacing the remnants of our negative policies
with positive steps is long overdue. But would the involuntary return of 80,000
refugees in camps in Southeast Asia really be, as you maintain, a step in that
direction?

As anyone who has seen the camps will tell you, the inmates don't want to go
back. They left their homes and families not to make more money, but to escape
repression. Especially for those who survived the perils of the sea to reach
sanctuary in camps in Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines, to return to
Vietnam and live, if lucky, as an unwelcome, marginalized, propertyless
underclass evokes strong opposition. The United States and other Western
countries should do what's right and take the refugees in.

JAMES H. MCNAUGHTON
Bethesda, Md., Feb. 27, 1994

The writer is a former Foreign Service Officer.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 7, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

New Refugees May Still Leave Vietnam

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 326 words


To the Editor:

Re "The Boat People: A Chapter Closes" (editorial, Feb. 22):

Since South Vietnam collapsed in 1975, more than 1.5 million Vietnamese have
fled by boat (and a few by land) to other countries in Southeast Asia. With the
major exception of 1979, when thousands were pushed back, temporary asylum has
been granted, pending resettlement in third countries; the only country towing
off new Vietnamese arrivals the last few years has been Malaysia.

On Feb. 14, a United Nations meeting ended special status for refugees from
Vietnam. Almost all the remaining asylum seekers in camps in the region have
been declared economic migrants, with no choice but to return to Vietnam. The
conference stopped short of sanctioning forced repatriation in 1995.

It is regrettable that the United States, which led the way for 19 years in
maintaining the temporary framework for boat people, almost adopted a position
more radical than the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to force
Vietnamese home next year. To set a date for forced repatriation would permit,
even encourage, countries of asylum to make their own forced repatriation deals
with Vietnam without monitoring.

Let us hope voluntary return can be promoted instead, based in part on the
improved economic prospects in Vietnam following the lifting of the United
States trade embargo. (A small number of asylum seekers who have a well-founded
fear of persecution if returned to Vietnam should be permitted to resettle.)

The United Nations conference did not spell out the right of future asylum
seekers from Vietnam to a hearing before subjecting them to repatriation. Though
the flow of refugees from Vietnam has virtually ended, the United Nations
refugee agency and United States embassies in the region should be alert for new
asylum seekers with legitimate claims as refugees.

LIONEL A. ROSENBLATT
President, Refugees International
Washington, Feb. 25, 1994

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Plutonium-Test Series Wins Polk Award

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section C;  Page 20;  Column 4;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 751 words


A reporter for The Albuquerque Tribune has won the George Polk Award for
national reporting for a series of articles about secret plutonium experiments
conducted on American citizens by the Government.

The awards were announced yesterday by Long Island University, which administers
the awards for excellence in journalism.

The Albuquerque Tribune reporter, Eileen Welsome, who spent seven years
researching the articles, was cited for "old-fashioned sleuthing that uncovered
the names of patients," which the Federal Department of Energy had refused to
release for decades. "By putting faces and names on the victims," the award
citation said, "the story of this and other atomic abuses captured the nation's
attention."

Isabel Wilkerson, the Chicago bureau chief of The New York Times, won the Polk
Award for regional reporting for her articles about the "epic struggle between
man and the river" during the Mississippi River floods last summer.

Ms. Wilkerson was cited for the way she "looked searchingly into the lives of
the victims" of the flood. In one article noted by the award citation, Ms.
Wilkerson told the story of the people of Hardin, Mo., who lost their dead as
the local cemetery was flooded.

Keith Richburg, a correspondent in Africa for The Washington Post, won the award
for foreign reporting. Mr. Richburg has chronicled the starvation and fighting
in Somalia, including a case in which American helicopters opened fire on crowds
of Somali men, women and children who were said to be throwing grenades and
shooting at United Nations troops.

The Polk Award for local reporting was won by Ying Chan, a reporter for The New
York Daily News. Her series on the smuggling of immigrants into New York from
China, the award committee's statement said, was "informed not only by skill but
by her status as one of the few reporters to cross over from the ethnic press to
a major English-language daily."

The awards were established in 1949 in memory of George W. Polk, a CBS
correspondent who was killed in 1948 while covering the civil war in Greece.

These were the winners in other categories:

MEDICAL REPORTING: Larry Keller and Fred Schulte of The Sun-Sentinel in Fort
Lauderdale, Fla., for a series on accusations that health maintenance
organizations caused patient deaths or injuries by delaying or denying medical
care to them.

MAGAZINE REPORTING: Oliver Sacks, the widely published neurologist, for an
article in The New Yorker about the world of intellectually gifted people with
autism.

BUSINESS REPORTING: Paul Nyden of The Charleston (W.Va.) Gazette for a series
called "Coalfield Contracts: Mining at What Price?" It showed that two major
coal companies had failed to pay $200 million in wages, taxes, environmental
fines and workers' compensation premiums.

POLITICAL REPORTING: The State Journal-Register in Springfield, Ill., for a
series called "Cash Transactions." Using a computer to analyze political
contributions, the newspaper showed that lucrative state contracts were
routinely awarded to political contributors.

FINANCIAL REPORTING: Scot J. Paltrow of The Los Angeles Times for a report on
fraud by the Prudential Insurance Company of America and its Wall Street
subsidiary, Prudential Securities. His articles led to inquiries by the
Securities and Exchange Commission and state regulators and to the imposition of
the largest financial penalty ever imposed on a retail brokerage firm, $371
million.

RADIO COMMENTARY: Daniel Schorr, described by the awards committee as "the last
of Edward R. Murrow's legendary CBS team still fully active in journalism," for
his interpretations of national and international events on National Public
Radio.

BOOK: David Remnick, a former Moscow reporter for The Washington Post who is now
a staff writer for The New Yorker, for his book "Lenin's Tomb: The Last Days of
the Soviet Empire." Mr. Remnick chronicled the collapse of the Soviet Union,
writing that among the most important reforms was the restoration of truth about
the past.

TELEVISION REPORTING: Christiane Amanpour of CNN who, wearing a flak vest and
helmet, has reported from the former Yugoslavia longer than any other American
journalist.

CAREER AWARD: Richard Dudman, a correspondent and bureau chief for The St. Louis
Post-Dispatch for 37 years, was honored as a "fearless reporter" who is best
known for his coverage of the Vietnam War. Mr. Dudman was The Post-Dispatch's
Washington bureau chief until he retired in 1981.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

$1 Million Religion Prize for Capitalism Defender

BYLINE: By PETER STEINFELS

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 609 words


Michael Novak, a scholar known for formulating a theological defense of
capitalism, has won a prize of nearly $1 million established by one of
capitalism's most successful practitioners.

Mr. Novak, whose religious arguments linking democracy and capitalism influenced
opinion in Eastern Europe and are echoed in Pope John Paul II's writings, was
named the winner yesterday of the 1994 Templeton Prize for Progress in Religion.

The prize, created 22 years ago by Sir John M. Templeton, an American-born
British subject who is widely considered the dean of global investing, honors a
person judged to have advanced the world's understanding of religion. Valued at
£650,000 -- $968,500 at yesterday's exchange rate -- the prize will be awarded
by Prince Philip at Buckingham Palace on May 4.

Sir John, who is active in the Presbyterian church, stipulated that the prize
money should always surpass that of the Nobel Prizes, which he felt had
overlooked religion. He sold his money management firm, Templeton, Galbraith &
Hansberger, for $913 million in 1992 and now, at the age of 81, lives in the
Bahamas.

Previous winners include Mother Teresa and the Rev. Billy Graham. Last year's
winner was Charles W. Colson, the former special counsel to President Richard M.
Nixon who established a prison ministry after serving seven months for his role
in the Watergate cover-up.

Mr. Novak, a 60-year-old Roman Catholic who once studied for the priesthood, was
a proponent of many of the changes in Catholic teachings and practices
introduced by the Second Vatican Council, which he covered on special assignment
for Time magazine in 1963. He was an outspoken opponent of the war in Vietnam
while teaching religious studies at Stanford University in the mid-1960's.

In the 1970's, when he also taught at the State University of New York at Old
Westbury, L.I., and at Syracuse University, Mr. Novak moved into the ranks of
neoconservative thinkers and politicians. In 1978, he became a resident scholar
in religion and public policy at the conservative American Enterprise Institute
in Washington.

Encountering opposition to capitalism in politically active religious circles,
Mr. Novak in 1982 wrote "The Spirit of Democratic Capitalism" (Simon & Schuster)
arguing that capitalism and democracy were mutually supportive embodiments of
Christian principles. He also wrote several books criticizing the socialist
elements in Latin American liberation theology.

Drawing bitter criticism from many of his former liberal allies in the church,
Mr. Novak also organized opposition to the American Catholic bishops' pastoral
letters on nuclear weapons and on the economy in the mid-1980's. At a news
conference yesterday in Manhattan, he said he had largely agreed with the
bishops' final versions of those documents.

In her memoirs, Margaret Thatcher, the former British Prime Minister, said Nr.
Novak's writings had influenced her views on "quality of life" issues. Lady
Thatcher served on the nine-member panel of judges who awarded the prize. The
panel also included James Billington, the Librarian of Congress, and George
Gallup Jr., the pollster.

The Needle's Eye

Mr. Novak said he would use much of the prize money to finance scholarships at
colleges where he studied and to support Crisis, the conservative Catholic
monthly that he edits.

Asked about the New Testament's warnings against riches, Mr. Novak replied, "The
more you have, the stricter your judgment will be, and the more you are
responsible for."

Sir John, who attended the news conference, added, "I just hope we haven't kept
Michael out of the kingdom of heaven."

NAME: Michael Novak

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 10, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING;
Hope, not despair, is the United Negro College Fund's new message.

BYLINE: By Michael Janofsky

SECTION: Section D;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 751 words


THROUGH more than 20 years of public service announcements, the United Negro
College Fund has reminded people, "A mind is a terrible thing to waste." Many
who agreed have contributed mightily to the organization, keeping it high on the
list of American philanthropic benefactors.

Until this year, the message has generally shone through announcements showing
the forlorn and frustrated families unable to finance their children's
continuing education. As the backdrops varied from one year to the next, two
themes remained constant: the poignancy of the message and the pain of despair.
The 1983 announcement was a good example, concluding, "When bright young minds
can't afford college, America pays the price."

But for 1994, the 50th anniversary of the fund, its executives and a creative
team at Young & Rubicam Inc. agreed that the poignancy remained relevant as ever
but perhaps not so the pain. They decided it was time for a change. Dare they
dream, it was time for hope.

Their efforts led to the creation of two spots for this year, each reflecting a
shift toward the pride of accomplishment and heritage. In one, a grandfather who
presumably had not had the chance to attend college fairly beams in joy from the
audience at his grandson's graduation ceremony. The other features Maya Angelou
reading a condensed version of a deeply emotional poem she wrote many years ago
called "Still I Rise."

Both will be shown in public for the first time tonight at a dinner in New York,
celebrating the fund's anniversary. President Clinton is scheduled to be the
keynote speaker.

While all long-running campaigns change, the tinkering is not so easily managed
when the purpose is so important and the signature line has proved both durable
and effective. In 1972, the year a copy supervisor at Young & Rubicam named
Forrest Long wrote the line, the fund received $11.1 million in donations. Last
year, donations totaled $81.9 million for the 41 colleges and universities that
are members of the fund.

"This is a simple selling idea, one that's unarguable, and you can't debate the
issue," said Alexander S. Kroll, chairman of Y.& R. "It transcends just
recruiting money for college. It transcends race, creed or color. It becomes
something like a cause or a crusade."

It nearly began with a tone more shrill, perhaps reflecting the turbulence of a
time when the country's political agenda was dominated by civil rights and the
war in Vietnam. Mr. Long, who has since retired to become a freelance writer,
first suggested, "A mind is a hell of a thing to waste," said Mr. Kroll, who was
then the agency's creative director.

At the time, the agency was also managing a campaign for the New York Urban
Coalition that featured advertisements imploring people to "Give a Damn."

"It was attention-getting but maybe not appropriate for young people going to
college," Mr. Kroll said. Mr. Long returned to his desk for amendments.

During the years, the words have accompanied a variety of scenes, but all with
the sad feelings, whether with cleaning women, working men, wistful high school
graduates or others. They all rued educational opportunities blocked by
financial limitations.

But just as more people of various backgrounds are making their way into the
American educational mainstream, the new campaign, called "The Mind Is to
Dream," was designed to acknowledge the success blacks are having. While the
underlying message remains, flashed into view in the final frames, the new
presentations project a more upbeat feeling. At the graduation ceremony, the
grandfather stands, almost as if unconsciously pulled by the sheer power of
education. His grandson turns back to him and smiles.

The announcement with Ms. Angelou is riveting in other ways. The screen is
filled with alternating frames of her speaking the poem, which is more a
performance, and a graduation procession. Soft music fills the background. While
not so succinct as Mr. Long's single line, her words are no less moving.

Just like moons and like suns,

With the certainty of tides,

Just like hope springing high,

Still I rise.

Out of the huts of history's shame

I rise

Up from a past rooted in pain

I rise

I'm a black ocean, leaping and wide,

Willing and swelling, I bear in the tide,

Leaving behind nights of terror and fear

I rise

Into a daybreak miraculously clear

I rise.

Bringing the gifts that my ancestors gave,

I am the hope and the dream of the slave. And so

I rise

I rise

I rise.


LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A new commercial for the United Negro College Fund's 50th
anniversary features Maya Angelou reading a version of her poem, "Still I Rise."
(Young & Rubicam)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 10, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

A War Hero Fights Corporate Foes

BYLINE: By ALISON LEIGH COWAN

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1786 words


It was the January board meeting of a private shipping company. The directors
were holding it by phone, and when the topic of whether the company should
pursue a merger came up, the chief executive quickly dismissed the idea. The
company had too many financial problems, period.

But one director dug in his heels.

"You don't know if it's a bad purchase until you know what price you'd have to
pay," prodded the director, Adm. Elmo R. Zumwalt Jr., U.S.N., retired, seated in
his Washington office, taking notes with a pink pencil. "For a dollar, it might
be a good deal."

The admiral's brute logic finally prevailed, and the reluctant chief executive
agreed to check out the opportunity.

Why had the admiral refused to be buffaloed? Management, he said, was engaging
in subterfuge. "They are protecting their jobs,." he said.

The incident speaks volumes about why Admiral Zumwalt has become one of
shareholders' best allies in the board room, and has been turned away by a fair
share of boards. Although he made his name plying the brown waters of Vietnam
and later shaking up the Navy, the admiral these days is one of corporate
America's toughest independent directors. If his toughness does not scare some
companies, his growing appearances in court as an expert witness against big
polluters might.

"Between us kittens," one top executive recruiter said, "I wouldn't put him on a
board. He's too much of a maverick. I'm not proud of what I'm saying, but boards
want people who go along. They want blue-chip, rubber-stamp types."

Some of the chief executives who have recruited him to their boards have had
second thoughts. "He's been very independent, almost too independent," said
Harold C. Simmons, the chairman of NL Industries Inc., a chemical company in
Houston.

Mr. Simmons invited the former war hero onto his board in 1985 without an
interview because of the marquee value of his name. In 1989, when Mr. Simmons
wanted to merge NL with Valhi, another company he controlled, Admiral Zumwalt
balked. One of three independent directors Mr. Simmons needed to approve the
deal, Admiral Zumwalt wanted a bigger price for NL's investors than the Texas
raider was offering. The adjustment would have cost Mr. Simmons another $10
million if the deal had not been scuttled.

"He wasn't about to do it my way just because I wanted it that way," Mr. Simmons
recalled. "I was the controlling shareholder and could have fired him."

It is not only Admiral Zumwalt's outspoken nature that offends some chief
executives. At 73, he is past most companies' retirement age. And while
shareholder activists recommend that directors confine themselves to three or
four outside boards, Admiral Zumwalt serves on the boards of 11 for-profit and
12 not-for-profit companies. (Frank C. Carlucci, a former Secretary of Defense,
holds the record, serving on the boards of 14 for-profit companies, according to
Directorship, a research company in Greenwich, Conn.)

"A lot of organizations look askance at individuals who are on 10 or 12 boards
for the obvious reasons," said Peter C. Garrett, publisher of Directorship. "How
can you do it?"

The admiral also flouts the conventional wisdom that says directors should own
lots of stock so they think like shareholders. Admiral Zumwalt says he thinks
less is more. "If you were a major shareholder, you might be tempted to be more
evasive in a financial statement," he said. "The director also has an obligation
to make sure the company is a good corporate citizen and doesn't kill anyone. A
modest investment makes it easier to keep all those in mind."

The Youngest Commander

But the admiral's biggest liability seems to be that he earned his stripes not
by climbing the corporate ladder, but by vaulting over 33 higher-ranking
officers to become the Navy's youngest commander. Chief executives prefer other
chief executives on their boards, both for their expertise and their tendency to
tolerate high pay packages.

"I'm doing six board searches right now and there's no way he'd be considered,"
said Peter D. Crist, managing director of Russell Reynolds, an executive
recruiting firm. "He's exactly what they don't want -- an anachronism."

The admiral understands. He, too, is all for imposing mandatory retirement ages
on directors. And he sympathizes with the siege mentality that makes chief
executives feel compelled to find directors who are steeped in the ways of
business rather than the military or academia.

'A Former Sailor'

A modest man who will introduce himself as "a former sailor," he has been
training for the role his entire life. An honors student and debate champion at
his high school in Tulare, Calif., Admiral Zumwalt ended up at the Naval Academy
at Annapolis, the family's way of trying to tame his impish streak. As a
teen-ager, he had landed in court for throwing eggs at a hitchhiker. It was just
"a few harmless eggs," he said of the incident. His punishment: washing the
family's dishes and doing yard work for a month.

The kudos came fast and furious for the young sailor. Though he opposed the war
in Indochina, he ran several of the Navy's operations in Vietnam and issued the
orders to spray Agent Orange, a chemical defoliant, to expose enemy positions
and minimize American casualties.

The decision haunts him. He says he believes the chemical killed many
servicemen, including his son, Elmo 3d. He has vowed to devote the rest of his
life, if necessary, to prodding the Government into compensating servicemen
whose health problems may be linked to their stints in Vietnam.

A Flurry of 'Z-Grams'

In 1970, President Richard M. Nixon stunned the Navy's brass by entrusting the
49-year-old with the Navy's top job, Chief of Naval Operations. Admiral Zumwalt
breezed through his four-year plan in three months, and then worked to improve
the re-enlistment rates through a series of plain-talking memorandums called
"Z-grams." One of the 121 memorandums lifted the restrictions on long hair and
casual clothing, while others raised controversy for insisting that blacks and
women enjoy equal opportunities.

The reforms never sat well with the Nixon Administration, and in July 1974, when
his four-year tenure was over, the admiral was grateful to move on.

There was a brief flirtation with politics two years later when he tried, as a
Democrat, to unseat Harry Byrd, a Republican Senator from Virginia. Disclosure
documents at the time placed the admiral's net worth at $65,000, but one of his
former handlers said money did not cause his defeat.

Admiral Zumwalt was a washout because he was too honest. His staff, said William
Thompson, one of Admiral Zumwalt's top advisers in the campaign, said, " 'Hey,
you don't have to say all that.' The most successful politicians never answer a
question but they'll talk your head off.' "

A Good Fit

Friends cushioned his defeat. Lester Crown, a Chicago industrialist whose family
had donated money to the Naval Academy while Admiral Zumwalt ran the Navy, came
through with a place on the board of Esmark, the giant company that eventually
became part of Beatrice. Other big companies followed, including Navistar,
formerly International Harvester, and Ames Department Stores, which brought him
on board while it was in bankruptcy protection.

Corporate America was a good fit, fellow board members say. It offered plenty of
room for the admiral to apply the lessons he had learned running the Navy, like
how to create "opportunities," as he delicately calls them, for executives past
their prime.

And years of protecting the Navy's $30 billion budget from Congressional
poachers had left him with a dizzying command of finance. "You had to be able to
demonstrate that defense-related companies would go bankrupt if you didn't keep
the money coming," he said of those anti-war years.

Using Connections

The admiral has been scrupulous about not trading on his name to help the
military industry, though he is otherwise willing to use his connections to help
cut red tape or pursue new business opportunities.

When the national bone marrow registry he runs needed money, he secured a
$25,000 corporate contribution from Daniel P. Tully, the chief executive of
Merrill Lynch. The two men once served together on the board of the American
Stock Exchange.

For a veterans group that wanted to challenge the 1984 class action settlement
they had received for their injuries from Agent Orange, the admiral helped get
the help of a crucial state attorney general. When the veterans' lawyers
reported back to Admiral Zumwalt in January that all 50 states and Puerto Rico
had supported their Supreme Court appeal, the admiral wanted to know if there
was anything more he could do. "Did we get Guam?" he volunteered.

He also helped Navistar navigate Washington's backwaters so it could get the
Government's permission to sell some used trucks to Iran that were needed for
civilian purposes. Because his assistance is so valued, Admiral Zumwalt is one
of a handful of directors for whom Navistar has waived its usual retirement age.

"He knows how things work and how to get things done," said Robert M. Hager, the
Washington lawyer who represented the veterans group.

A Role as Peacemaker

At Gifford Hill, a construction company that was plagued by infighting, Admiral
Zumwalt got to play peacemaker, helping to broker a sale of the company that was
acceptable to all the feuding parties. M. D. Sampels, a fellow board member, was
impressed and recommended Admiral Zumwalt for a vacancy on the board of Dallas
Semiconductor five years later. "So many boards are made up of fellow C.E.O.'s,"
Mr. Sampels said, referring to Admiral Zumwalt by a nickname. "Bud's background
brings a perspective you don't normally get."

Oddly, the one public company the admiral ran, American Medical Buildings, based
in Milwaukee, was no success story. At the urging of its founder, the builder of
doctor's offices and clinics tried to diversify into the medical information
business after Admiral Zumwalt had stepped down as chief executive in 1979, and
ended up wildly overpaying for a satellite transponder.

Brought back as interim chief executive in 1983, Admiral Zumwalt got rid of the
founder and refinanced the company's debts. But he ultimately had to cut back
his involvement when his son's health declined. The company filed for bankruptcy
protection in 1990.

Would he ever return to government, say in the top military job, the one Bobby
Ray Inman, Washington's other famous four-star admiral, failed to get? "I would
not go back into government because I love the independence I have," Admiral
Zumwalt said with a smile. "I'm my own boss."


NAME: Elmo R. Zumwalt Jr.

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 18, 1994, Friday

CORRECTION:

An article in Business Day on March 10 about Elmo R. Zumwalt Jr., the retired
Navy admiral who is a director of several companies, misstated the political
affiliation of Harry F. Byrd Jr., the Virginia Senator whom the admiral
unsuccessfully sought to unseat in 1976. Senator Byrd was an independent at the
time, not a Republican.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Adm. Elmo R. Zumwalt Jr., U.S.N., retired, standing in front of
the military records of his late son, Elmo Zumwalt 3d, a victim of Agent Orange,
in the log room of the U.S. Naval Memorial Museum in Washington. (Kirsten
Bremmer for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Keep Vows, Christopher Tells Tokyo

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1312 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Friday, March 11


Secretary of State Warren Christopher accused Tokyo of failing to live up to its
promises to President Clinton on opening markets. He reminded them that "great
nations keep their commitments."

Mr. Christopher's uncharacteristically strong words, delivered at a tense
meeting on Thursday with Japanese leaders, were followed today by further tough
remarks prepared for delivery to a senior business group.

Both were part of a continuing effort by the Clinton Administration to step up
diplomatic pressure on Japan at the same time it is warning of trade sanctions.
They came at the first top-level contacts between the two nations since Prime
Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's mission to Washington last month ended in an
unprecedented impasse.

In the speech, prepared for delivery to the executive group, the Keizai Doyukai,
Mr. Christopher struck at Japan's greatest fear: that the trade tensions could
spill over into other aspects of the country's alliance with the United States.

"For the world's two largest economies, agreeing to disagree is not good
enough," he said. "We must not allow a situation to persist that might
eventually erode public and political support for our overall relationship."

While he praised Prime Minister Hosokawa as a reformer, he made it clear that he
was losing patience with the explanations Japan has offered for its slow pace of
change.

"We cannot let political deadlock, or bureaucratic inertia, or outdated thinking
stand in the way," the Secretary said. And he cited cases in which American
competition has aided Japanese consumers by driving down prices, citing price
cutting now under way here in personal computers because of the entry of Compaq,
Apple and Dell, among others.

It was far from clear, though, that Japanese executives in Mr. Christopher's
audience regard that competition, which has greatly cut into some of their
profits, as an experiment they are eager to replicate.

On Thursday, Japanese Government officials had appeared unmoved, saying only
that by the end of this month they would signal the "direction" of a series of
voluntary market openings. In Washington, Mr. Hosokawa held out a somewhat
similar prospect, and now, with his coalition Government enmeshed in political
insecurity and infighting, officials here say that they do not expect a more
specific plan to be ready until the July meeting of the Group of Seven
industrial nations.

A senior Japanese official said that Mr. Hosokawa, who had met with Mr.
Christopher for an hour Thursday, "made no commitments" beyond expressing a
desire to end the tension between the two countries soon.

Mr. Christopher's intense concentration on trade again underscored how
dramatically his job has changed in the last year, to the point that a visit
here from the Secretary of State has become almost indistinguishable from a
visit by the Treasury Secretary or the United States trade representative.

While he spent some time discussing North Korea's nuclear weapons effort and
prepared for a lengthy review of Japan's security needs, wherever Mr.
Christopher went today, he reminded Japanese officials of their commitment to
"significant decreases" in the trade surplus with the United States.

Mr. Clinton's decision last week to reinstate Super 301 provisions of the trade
act, giving him the power to quickly impose sanctions against countries whose
markets are closed, was never brought up, Japanese and American officials said.

"My presentation to the Japanese leaders today was straightforward and, I
believe, candid," Mr. Christopher said a news conference Thursday night. "I said
simply that great nations keep their commitments. In making the framework
agreement last July, Japan and the United States made commitments. We agreed to
cut our deficits and improve our competitiveness," he said, suggesting that the
United States had already delivered on its pledges.

Areas of Special Concern

"No one would agree, I think, with the contention that Japan has met its
commitments," Mr. Christopher pointedly added.

The accord he mentioned was signed in July by Mr. Clinton and Mr. Hosokawa's
predecessor, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa. It is intended to address areas in
which the United States says it needs far greater access to Japanese markets,
from public works contracts to autos.

But officials on the two sides got bogged down in a circular debate over how to
define "numerical indicators" of progress, with the Japanese accusing the United
States of trying to manage trade by insisting on specific results rather than
letting market forces work. It was that dispute, among others, that led to the
standoff between Mr. Clinton and Mr. Hosokawa, and little has changed since.

Mr. Christopher seemed eager to find a way to defuse the question of numerical
targets, which he said had become "a fairly sterile discussion." He seemed to
hint, though, that there was flexibility in the American demands, saying the two
sides simply had to "find some way to achieve a set of programs that will
produce some tangible results."

But he did not say what that would be. Nor was that expected: Winston Lord,
Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia, said earlier this week that Mr.
Christopher would not be in Tokyo "as a negotiator, because there is nothing to
negotiate about."

Yet there have been some signs of modest progress. Over the last two weeks, the
American Ambassador here, Walter F. Mondale, has opened a back channel of
communication with Japan's most powerful politician, Ichiro Ozawa. Mr. Ozawa,
who founded the Japan Renewal Party and serves as the governing coalition's
chief strategist, is widely reported to be heading for Washington at the end of
the month. It is unclear what message he might bring.

Mr. Christopher had considered using his trip to Asia to visit Vietnam, weeks
after the United States lifted its economic embargo. He would have been the
first Secretary of State to go there since the end of the Vietnam War. But in an
illustration of diplomatic triage, he told reporters on Saturday that Washington
had urgent business in Tokyo, and "it is a good time to be in Japan to
underscore the President's desire to seek access to the Japanese market."

Despite all the tensions, Mr. Christopher's presence here was barely noted.
Japanese television, accustomed to one after another American Cabinet member
visiting to complain about trade, showed him only briefly, after reports on the
latest scandal in Japan's construction industry and long lines forming to buy
scarce bags of domestically produced rice.

Mr. Christopher acknowledged today that many of Japan's Asian neighbors, along
with some in Europe, had denounced Washington's tactics in dealing with Japan,
apparently fearful that these tactics might be used in dealings with other trade
partners.

But he said he thought that governments would applaud the United States if the
methods it is using prove successful. Defending the American approach in less
colorful language than Mickey Kantor, the trade representative, used in
Washington yesterday, Mr. Christopher said, "I think the rest of the trading
world will be very relieved and pleased if the United States can take steps that
will open the Japanese market."

Mr. Kantor had implied that European critics of the tough American policy toward
Japan were dishonest and sanctimonious, and spoke of progress in opening the
Japanese market to Motorola cellular phones. Today, a Motorola official, who was
not identified by name, said his company and a Japanese concern, I.D.O., had
reached a basic agreement that would expand Motorola's access to Japan's
cellular-phone market and avert threatened sanctions.

Mr. Christopher, ever the pragmatist, said of America's critics, "I think
whatever their position now, the rest of the world will applaud if we can
achieve good results."

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary of State Warren Christopher reacting to a question
yesterday at a U.S. Embassy news conference in Tokyo, where he continued the
Clinton Administration's push for changes in Japanese trade practices. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Citibank Plans Vietnam Units

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D;  Page 6;  Column 6;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 93 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, March 10


Citibank plans to open two branches in Vietnam in the next two years, its local
representative said this week.

The plan, dependent on approval by the State Bank of Vietnam, matches that
announced last month by the Bank of America, the only other United States bank
operating in Vietnam.

Citibank will focus on trade financing at the beginning, working with
correspondent banks in Vietnam. Later, it will look at corporate finance
transactions.

Citibank opened a Hanoi representative office last November and one in Ho Chi
Minh City a week ago.

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
A Brash Outsider Inside Hollywood

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2489 words


NO one who has seen "Kiss Me Deadly," the director Robert Aldrich's nasty little
film-noir masterpiece, is likely to forget its vision of a Southern California
so spiritually parched that a single match struck at the wrong moment could
unleash the fires of hell. In Aldrich's scorching 1955 film adaptation of Mickey
Spillane's hard-boiled detective novel, Los Angeles, photographed in angular
black-and-white, looks terminally irradiated. A burly, crew-cut Ralph Meeker
plays Mike Hammer, Spillane's tough-guy alter ego, with a blank muscularity that
suggests the young Marlon Brando with his soul burned out of him.

In "Kiss Me Deadly," assorted thugs, molls and law officers chase each other
around the city, casually knocking each other off in a frantic search that makes
"The Maltese Falcon" seem like a genteel scavenger hunt. The object of their
quest turns out to be the radioactive equivalent of Pandora's box. When Mike
locates the sinister black container and opens its lid just the tiniest crack,
it emits a searing ray of light that leaves an ugly blister on his cheek.

It remains for a modern-day Pandora to unleash its apocalyptic horrors. As
Gabrielle, a gun-toting gamine driven by insatiable curiosity and greed, Gaby
Rodgers gives one of the great cameo performances of the era. With her husky
tomboyish voice, and hollow frightened eyes, her Pandora is an icon of 1950's
depravity: lethal, empty and seductive in a phosphorescent, spidery way. Amid
bloodcurdling screams and white hot flames, she ushers in what looks
suspiciously like the end of the world.

It's little wonder that when "Kiss Me Deadly" was released, Cahiers du Cinema's
critics went wild and hailed Aldrich as the first film maker of the atomic age.

"Kiss Me Deadly," which is part of an Aldrich restrospective that opens today at
the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, was the fifth film that he directed
in a career that began in 1953 with the baseball movie "The Big Leaguer."
Starting with that film and ending in 1981 with ". . . All the Marbles,"
Aldrich, who died in 1983, directed 30 Hollywood movies, including such hits as
"Vera Cruz" (1954), "What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?" (1962), "Hush . . . Hush,
Sweet Charlotte" (1964), "The Dirty Dozen" (1967) and "The Longest Yard" (1974).
That career also included a number of clunkers, most notoriously the
two-and-a-half-hour 1963 biblical epic "Sodom and Gomorrah." In the new series,
Apocalypse Anytime! The Films of Robert Aldrich, which runs through April 8, 24
of his films will be shown in a chronological career summary.

The series, which is presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center in
collaboration with the Directors Guild of America, should help solidify the
artistic reputation of a director who, despite his successes, was always
something of an outsider in Hollywood. Rebellious and skeptical, more admired by
French New Wave directors like Francois Truffaut than by the Hollywood
establishment, Aldrich took a certain relish in biting the hand that fed him.
Three of his movies -- "The Big Knife" (1955), "What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?
and "The Legend of Lylah Clare" (1968) -- were lurid Hollywood exposes. And both
"The Killing of Sister George" (1968) and his last film, ". . . All the
Marbles," took a jaundiced view of show business.

Genre Subversion

If Aldrich never made a Hollywood film to match the grandeur and scope of "The
Godfather" or "Nashville," or even "East of Eden," he had a knack for subtly
deconstructing familiar genres and infusing them with his own subversive
skepticism. He was a master of the men's action film, especially the western and
the war movie. And the roster of actors he used in these films amounts to a
partial who's who of sweaty macho brawn. Burt Lancaster and Jack Palance, in
particular, projected the mixture of toughness and anguished soul-searching that
lent his leading male characters an almost Shakespearean dimension.

Aldrich also employed a group of superb supporting actors who became almost a
repertory company. Among them were Eddie Albert (usually as a mean and
unbalanced authority figure), Richard Jaeckel (a loyal foot soldier) and Wesley
Addy (a morally conflicted middle man or bureaucrat).

Aldrich, who was born in 1918 into a patrician Rhode Island family that was
related to the Rockefellers, rebelled against his strait-laced Republican
background and went to Hollywood without graduating from college. His
film-making apprenticeship began in 1941 as a production clerk for RKO Studios.
From 1944 to 1952, he worked as an assistant director on movies by Lewis
Milestone, Charlie Chaplin, Joseph Losey and Jean Renoir, among many others.

When Aldrich became a full-fledged director in the early 1950's, he used many of
the same technicians in the same way he used actors, as an informal repertory
company of colleagues. They included Joseph Biroc, his cinematographer for 22
films; Michael Luciano, his frequent film editor, and the composer Frank DeVol.

Political Currents

The thread of anarchism that runs through many of his films and the striking
recurrence of authority figures who are portrayed as dangerous and untrustworthy
are indications of Aldrich's rebel stance. Many of his movies also express
leftist political sympathies and can be read as veiled allegories about
everything from the Hollywood blacklist and McCarthyism to the Vietnam War and
Richard Nixon.

In their scholarly study "The Films and Career of Robert Aldrich" (University of
Tennessee Press), Edwin T. Arnold and Eugene L. Miller Jr. quote the director as
saying that in "The Longest Yard" the manipulative, power-mongering prison guard
played by Eddie Albert "is Richard Nixon."

That character is only a slightly softened version of Harry Hoff, the
thunderously imperious Hollywood studio chief in "The Big Knife," the film that
followed "Kiss Me Deadly." One of the most scabrous portraits of Hollywood ever
filmed, "The Big Knife" was adapted from Clifford Odets's rhetorically
overheated 1949 stage play. Jack Palance plays Charlie Castle, a popular
action-adventure star who wants out of his movie career but is too valuable a
property for the studio to allow to leave Hollywood. Using blackmail, Hoff makes
him sign a long-term contract to make more schlock films. Wendell Corey is
Hoff's evil enforcer, a quietly reptilian lackey who will stop at nothing, not
even murder, in the service of a boss who has the manners and mentality of a
gangster.

With its supporting cast of such pathetic and sleazy Hollywood types as the
groveling agent (Everett Sloan), the poisonous gossip columnist (Ilka Chase) and
the loudmouthed alcoholic starlet (Shelley Winters), "The Big Knife" portrays
Hollywood as a moral cesspool of such odiousness that even the movie's posh Bel
Air settings look somehow contaminated.

No Buddy-Buddy

Mr. Palance's portrayal of Charlie was the first of two riveting performances in
two years in which the wiry, cavernous-faced actor played a martyr to his own
principles. In Aldrich's World War II movie "Attack!" (1956), Mr. Palance
portrayed Lieut. Joe Costa, a courageous but hotheaded Army officer who is
ordered by his superior, the inept, cowardly and alcoholic Captain Cooney (Mr.
Albert), to lead his platoon on a disastrous mission.

Although the Germans mow down most of the platoon, six soldiers, including Joe,
make it to their goal. When Cooney breaks his promise to provide protective
reinforcements and the survivors have no choice but to stumble back over open
terrain, Joe miraculously survives. But he is consumed by a murderous revenge
against his superior, and ends martyred.

"Attack!" is as subversive of establishment values in its way as "The Big
Knife." Its portrayal of demoralized soldiers, exploited by a cynical military
hierarchy, is a far cry from Hollywood's typically ennobling buddy-buddy vision
of combat. It's no wonder that the United States Army refused to cooperate in
the making of the film.

It was the first of several Aldrich movies that the director called his "patrol
pictures," movies that examined questions of honor, heroism and authority among
a group of men. Some of the same tensions crop up in "The Flight of the Phoenix"
(1965), about a group of men struggling to stay alive in the desert after their
plane crashes. James Stewart, Richard Attenborough, Peter Finch, Ian Bannen,
Ernest Borgnine, Dan Duryea, George Kennedy and Hardy Kruger each exhibit
different degrees of courage and cravenness, grace and indignity under pressure.

In "The Dirty Dozen" (1967), a far more motley group of misfits and criminals is
trained to infiltrate German lines and assassinate the military brass, with the
assurance that the survivors will have their prison sentences commuted. Among
the actors playing the dirty dozen were Charles Bronson, John Cassavetes, Jim
Brown, Trini Lopez, Telly Savalas and Donald Sutherland.

The movie, which caught the anti-establishment mood of the moment, became a
blockbuster hit that allowed Aldrich to realize his long-held dream of buying
his own studio. That dream, once realized, lasted only four years and four
pictures before his studio went broke.

Davis and Crawford

If "The Dirty Dozen" was Aldrich's biggest hit, and "Kiss Me Deadly" his most
prestigious picture, his most famous film is still probably his 1962 Grand
Guignol black comedy and camp classic, "What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?" In an
inspired bit of casting, the movie teamed Bette Davis and Joan Crawford,
legendary film divas who had never worked together and who were known for mutual
dislike.

The two stars play aging spinster sisters, Blanche (Crawford) and Baby Jane
Hudson (Davis), who live together in embattled misery. Blanche, a once-famous
movie actress, has had to use a wheelchair since an automobile accident abruptly
ended her career. She is tended by the hatefully sadistic Jane, a former child
star who has never got over the fact that Blanche eclipsed her in fame. The film
includes many harrowing scenes of the demented Jane psychologically and
physically brutalizing the helpless Blanche.

If "Baby Jane" is miles away in style and tone from the ersatz Greek tragedy of
"The Big Knife," its portrait of bizarre doings on the fringes of Tinseltown can
be read as a similarly savage critique of the Hollywood ethos and its twisted
values. The movie was so popular that it spawned a mini-genre of shock movies
starring aging Hollywood actresses.

Aldrich followed his Hollywood Gothic hit with a Southern Gothic variation, the
hugely successful "Hush . . . Hush, Sweet Charlotte," in which Davis became the
victim and Olivia de Havilland, oozing a curdled Melanie Wilkes-style sweetness
and light, was the torturer.

As welcome as the return of these two 1960's camp fests to the big screen may
be, it would a pity if they obscured lesser-known but arguably worthier pictures
like "Hustle" (1975), "Twilight's Last Gleaming" (1977) and especially "Ulzana's
Raid" (1972).

How the West Was.  . . .

"Ulzana's Raid," Aldrich's first film after he lost his studio, is a revisionist
western made in the shadow of the Vietnam War. Exploring the conflict between
homesteaders in the Southwest and a rampaging Apache chieftain and his warriors,
it questions the concept of Manifest Destiny without denying the savagery of the
Apache chief Ulzana, who practices extreme torture.

In the role of McIntosh, the maverick Army lieutenant who leads a party of
soldiers to kill Ulzana and end the atrocities, Burt Lancaster gives one of the
subtlest and least mannered performances of his career. Pessimistic and cynical,
but also extremely intelligent and suffused with a sad wisdom, McIntosh may be
the quintessential antihero of Aldrich's mature films. Like the director
himself, he knows too much of the world to put on moral blinders. He knows
exactly how tough the world is and how little genuine protection it affords.

Aldrich's Point of View



 Apocalypse Anytime! The Films of Robert Aldrich, a retrospective of the
director's movies, runs through April 8 at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln
Center, 165 West 65th Street. Most of the screenings are double features;
admission is $7 for each double feature, or for a single screening when that is
the case. Information: (212) 875-5600. Here is the schedule:

Today

"THE BIG LEAGUER" (1953), 2 P.M.

"KISS ME DEADLY" (1955), 3:30 and 7:45 P.M.

"WORLD FOR RANSOM" (1954), 5:45 P.M.

Tomorrow

"THE BIG LEAGUER," 3:30 P.M.

"APACHE" (1954), 5 and 9:10 P.M.

"KISS ME DEADLY," 7 P.M.

Sunday

"WORLD FOR RANSOM," 3:30 P.M.

"VERA CRUZ" (1954), 5:15 and 9:15 P.M.

"KISS ME DEADLY," 7:15 P.M.

Wednesday

"VERA CRUZ," 2 and 6 P.M.

"APACHE," 4 P.M.

Thursday

"KISS ME DEADLY," 2, 4:15, 6:30 and 8:45 P.M.

March 18

"THE BIG KNIFE" (1955), 2 and 6:30 P.M.

"AUTUMN LEAVES" (1956), 4:15 and 8:45 P.M.

March 19

"ATTACK!" (1956), 3:30 and 8 P.M.

"THE BIG KNIFE," 5:45 P.M.

March 20

"AUTUMN LEAVES," 3:30 and 7:40 P.M.

"10 SECONDS TO HELL" (1958), 5:40 P.M.

March 22

"10 SECONDS TO HELL," 2 P.M.

"ATTACK!" 4:15 and 8:45 P.M.

March 23

"SODOM AND GOMORRAH" (1963), 2 and 7:45 P.M.

"10 SECONDS TO HELL," 5:30 P.M.

March 24

"THE DIRTY DOZEN" (1967), 2 P.M.

"THE FLIGHT OF THE PHOENIX" (1965), 5:30 P.M.

March 25

"WHAT EVER HAPPENED TO BABY JANE?" (1962), 2 and 7:05 P.M.

"HUSH . . . HUSH, SWEET CHARLOTTE" (1964), 4:30 and 9:45 P.M.

March 26

"WHAT EVER HAPPENED TO BABY JANE?" 3:30 and 9 P.M.

"HUSH . . . HUSH, SWEET CHARLOTTE," 6:15 P.M.

March 27

"THE DIRTY DOZEN," 3:30 and 9 P.M.

"THE FLIGHT OF THE PHOENIX," 6:15 P.M.

March 29

"THE LEGEND OF LYLAH CLARE" (1968), 2 and 7 P.M.

"TOO LATE THE HERO" (1969), 4:30 and 9:30 P.M.

March 30

"TOO LATE THE HERO," 2 and 7 P.M.

"THE LEGEND OF LYLAH CLARE," 4:30 and 9:30 P.M.

March 31

"THE GRISSOM GANG" (1971), 2 and 6:40 P.M.

"ULZANA'S RAID" (1972), 4:30 and 9:10 P.M.

April 1

"ULZANA'S RAID," 2 and 6:30 P.M.

"THE GRISSOM GANG," 4 and 8:40 P.M.

April 2

"EMPEROR OF THE NORTH" (1973), 3:30 and 8:45 P.M.

"THE KILLING OF SISTER GEORGE" (1968), 6 P.M.

April 3

"THE KILLING OF SISTER GEORGE," 3:30 and 8:30 P.M.

"EMPEROR OF THE NORTH," 6:15 P.M.

April 4

"THE KILLING OF SISTER GEORGE," 2 P.M.

April 5

"HUSTLE" (1975), 2 and 6:40 P.M.

"THE LONGEST YARD" (1974), 4:15 and 9 P.M.

April 6

"TWILIGHT'S LAST GLEAMING" (1977), 2 and 8:15 P.M.
April 7


"THE CHOIRBOYS" (1977), 2 and 6:30 P.M.

". . . ALL THE MARBLES" (1981), 4:15 and 8:50 P.M.

April 8

". . . ALL THE MARBLES," 2 P.M.

"THE CHOIRBOYS," 4:15 P.M.

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jack Palance and Shelley Winters in Robert Aldrich's "Big
Knife." (The Film Society of Lincoln Center); Kim Novak in Robert Aldrich's film
"The Legend of Lylah Clare." (The Film Society of Lincoln Center) (pg. C16)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 11, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

TVWeekend;
On an Anarchic Journey Into Darkness's Heart

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section D;  Page 17;  Column 3;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 587 words


Joseph Conrad's 1902 novella "Heart of Darkness" has finally been made into a
movie. The director Nicolas Roeg ("Performance," "The Man Who Fell to Earth")
has translated the story into a film starring Tim Roth as Marlow and John
Malkovich as Kurtz. Well, sort of. Mr. Roeg's "Heart of Darkness,"
characteristically loopy, begins a run Sunday on TNT.

In the late 1930's, Orson Welles worked feverishly on a "Heart of Darkness"
movie project that was eventually abandoned, forcing the theatrical wunderkind
to switch to a film called "Citizen Kane." In the late 1970's, Francis Ford
Coppola used the Conrad story as a structural underpinning for his Vietnam
movie, "Apocalypse Now." Obviously, the novella's theme of alienation, greed,
corruption and exploitation have struck some of this century's more dominant
chords.

Mr. Roeg's Marlow is the narrator, describing a journey he makes for a Belgian
trade company up the Congo River to find Kurtz, a former company agent suspected
of hoarding vast quantities of ivory. With a crew of black workers, Marlow
navigates the river through a series of work stations, each run by white men
straining pitifully for the semblance of power that money from the ivory will
bring them. All of their talk is of the mysterious Kurtz, who, depending on the
speaker, is either insane or a prodigy, an illuminated man.

Marlow is, of course, making a journey into his own soul. One man warns him,
"The jungle has designs on everything; it invites you to dig down within
yourself." The dreamy adventure becomes a nightmare. Yet there is no turning
back unscathed. The troubled but clear-sighted Kurtz warns that there is "no
more detestable creature in nature than the man who runs away from his demons."

Determined to capture the story's spiritual anarchy, Mr. Roeg appears to fall
back on a kind of production anarchy of his own. Marlow drifts from one work
station to another (the filming was done in Belize), confronting a series of
characters played by actors who seem uncertain what exactly they are supposed to
be doing. The supporting cast, including James Fox, Peter Vaughan and Patrick
Ryecart, is strong, but seldom able to make a personal imprint. One exception is
Isaach de Bankole ("Night on Earth") as Mfumu, Marlow's enigmatic guide.

This "Heart of Darkness" is riddled with flaws, not least several speaking
accents that are sometimes impenetrable, and yet Mr. Roeg has captured a good
deal of the magic and menace at the heart of "Heart of Darkness." His conception
may occasionally be puzzling, but never boring. Mr. Roth and, in a much smaller
role, Mr. Malkovich see to that. This is not your average television movie and
it's not, certainly, for heads fatally addled by an excess of sitcoms.

Heart of Darkness
TNT, Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M.

Directed by Nicolas Roeg; screenplay written by Benedict Fitzgerald, based on
the novella by Joseph Conrad; director of photography, Anthony B. Richmond;
editor, Louise Rubacky; costume designer, Deborah Everton; music by Stanley
Myers; production designer, Paul J. Peters; co-producer, James Westman; produced
by Bob Christiansen and Rick Rosenberg for TNT.

Marlow . . . Tim Roth
Kurtz . . . John Malkovich
Mfumu . . . Isaach de Bankole
Gosse . . . James Fox
Harlequin . . . Morten Faldaas
De Griffe . . . Patrick Ryecart
Harou . . . Michael Fitzgerald
Delcommune . . . Geoffrey Hutchings
Director . . . Peter Vaughan
The Intended . . . Phoebe Nicholls
Verme . . . Allan Corduner

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Malkovich in "Heart of Darkness," Sunday on TNT. (Erik
Heinila/Turner Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 13, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 881 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     4   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just
           before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret
           to an 11-year-old boy.

 2    10   SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied
           Poland.

 3     3   SAVING GRACE, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) The
           romantic problems of a 13th-century English widow.

 4     4   JEDI SEARCH, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.)
           The first volume of "The Jedi Academy Trilogy," a "Star
           Wars" saga.

 5     3   THE CAT WHO WENT INTO THE CLOSET, by Lilian Jackson Braun.
           (Jove, $4.99.) A collection of junk helps Jim Qwilleran
           solve a mystery.

 6     5   NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A
           servant hopes to win an heiress's heart in Victorian-era
           Minnesota.

 7     8   WINTER MOON, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The
           families of law officers are besieged by violence in Los
           Angeles and Montana.

 8     7   RUBY, by V.C. Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) A young woman seeks
           to discover the dreadful secrets of her family's past in
           New Orleans.

 9     2   WINTER PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) Lucas
           Davenport in pursuit of a new kind of criminal in
           Wisconsin's cold woods.

 10*   3   THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del
           Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The final volume in a series about
           a fantasy land.

 11   11   DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine,
           $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent
           novelist.

 12    7   PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of
           murders in a small California town vexes a temporary
           district attorney.

 13    2   THE TEN THOUSAND, by Harold Coyle. (Pocket, $6.50.)
           American troops have to fight German forces after a mission
           in Ukraine.

 14    1   THE THROAT, by Peter Straub. (Signet, $6.99.) The vicious
           attack on a woman in a small town leads to the reappraisal
           of past crimes.

 15   56   THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A
           law student investigates the murder of two Supreme Court
           Justices.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1     9   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           Everyday spirituality.

 2    540  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 3    56   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

 4     9   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 5     1   CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A
           night on the town for five teen-age girls leads to torture
           and murder.

 6    126  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France.

 7    41   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.)
           Menopause and today's women.

 8*   19   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as
           seen through the A.A. Milne character.

 9*   26   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket,
           $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.

 10    6   WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ... AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and
           Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A three-day
           battle in Vietnam in 1965.

 11*  140  YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine,
           $10.) The different languages men and women speak.

 12*  15   EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A
           woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of
           murders.

 13*  15   THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects
           of Taoist philosophy.

 14    7   A CALL FOR REVOLUTION, by Martin L. Gross. (Ballantine,
           $8.99.) Government waste.

 15*  13   OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the
           television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.

 16*  17   YOUNG MEN & FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of
           Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a
           Montana forest in 1949.

 17*  45   TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The
           charms of rustic France.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    156  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles to practice in the
           pursuit of success.

 2    163  THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and
           Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's
           diet.

 3    21   WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg,
           Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
           Advice.

 4     2   THE ERNST & YOUNG TAX GUIDE 1994. (Wiley, $13.95.) Ways to
           cope with the I.R.S.

 5*    1   MONEY DOESN'T GROW ON TREES, by Neale S. Godfrey and
           Carolina Edwards. (Fireside/S&S, $11.) How to teach
           children about spending.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 26, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SUNDAY VIEW;
'Damn Yankees' Scores With a Team Effort

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1614 words


THE NOISE YOU HEAR COULD BE coming from the Marquis Theater, where a carnival of
antic ghosts, all alive even if two are technically dead, has taken up residence
in the revival of the 1955 Broadway hit "Damn Yankees." From the big brassy
overture, played at a pitch that once awakened the three-martini butter-and-egg
men, until the finale, "Damn Yankees" is a mostly breathless recollection of a
kind of sophisticated, slightly bogus Broadway innocence that still charms.
Though some of the contributors don't always deliver, the show early on achieves
a momentum of good feeling that carries the performance aloft and safely keeps
it there.

As much as anything else, "Damn Yankees" is a salute to that most resilient of
Broadway wizards, the 106-year-old George Abbott, who directed the original
production and collaborated on its book. He was sitting down front at the
Marquis the other night, but his sleight-of-hand was apparent in virtually
everything that was happening on the stage under the direction of Jack O'Brien.

The other irrepressible spirits are Richard Adler and his collaborator, Jerry
Ross, who died in 1955, the team responsible for the score, and Bob Fosse, the
original choreographer. Though Mr. Fosse died in 1987, his jazzy signature dance
movements are fondly recalled in the new choreography by Rob Marshall.

You might not realize it when you see "Damn Yankees," but by the time it was
first put on, Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II had already completed
most of their seminal collaborations, from "Oklahoma!" and "Carousel" through
"The King and I." Rodgers and Hammerstein may have forever enlarged the
possibilities of the musical theater, but they didn't destroy the heritage of
the fast-paced, hole-in-the-head show that was designed only for fun. They
rearranged that heritage but so subtly that "Damn Yankees" today seems to have
been conceived on a different planet. Not quite so.

As adapted by Mr. Abbott and Douglass Wallop from Wallop's comic novel "The Year
the Yankees Lost the Pennant," the show is a farcical tale about a middle-aged
man, a baseball fanatic, who sells his soul to the Devil to become a crackerjack
young slugger. His mission: to lead his beloved Washington Senators to a triumph
over the loathed New York Yankees. The musical seems not to have a thing on its
mind. Yet because the feather-light book and the sweet melodic score are so well
matched in their ambitions, it's safe to say that "Damn Yankees" is a
beneficiary of Rodgers and Hammerstein. It's an integrated show.

This "Damn Yankees" is still set in its own time, the middle of the 1950's,
which I think of as the decade that discovered Sandra Dee. Mostly without the
benefit of hindsight, the show satirizes Eisenhower's America as a very dull,
very conformist sort of place. Airwick removed all odors that might offend
America's nostrils and Roto-Rooter cleaned its drains. Though the period is
reflected in Douglas W. Schmidt's nifty cutouts that are often integral to his
design, it's also built into the book. From where we now stand, it seems
perfectly logical that in the mid-1950's (post-Korea, pre-Vietnam) a baseball
fan, even one less dedicated than the show's Joe, might strike a terrible
bargain with the Devil -- anything for a little excitement.

This production does have its problems. Recreating the roles of the Devil (here
named Applegate) and his handmaiden Lola, played by Ray Walston and Gwen Verdon
in the original show and the 1958 film adaptation, are Victor Garber and Bebe
Neuwirth. Theirs aren't thankless tasks, but, for one reason and another, they
never turn them into personal triumphs.

In Mr. Garber's performance,
Applegate comes across more as a vain B-picture star than as a comic incarnation
of evil. His Applegate remains vaguely aloof, someone who depends on ersatz
suavity when a little manic hustling is called for. He's always less spontaneous
and funny than the show's special effects. On the night I was in the theater, he
also came out for an encore that the audience had not really demanded. Whether
it was his decision, or one imposed on him, it was unfortunate.

In all technical ways, Ms. Neuwirth is made-to-the-order of Lola, who is
summoned by Applegate to Washington when his ballplayer Joe becomes difficult to
control. Instead of seducing Joe as ordered, Lola starts to like the guy, which
is her undoing. Ms. Neuwirth can sing a throaty innuendo with humor, and she's a
dancer who kicks high and true. Yet her stage personality lacks the sharp edge
that would transform a decent performance into a comic show-stopper. She tries
too hard. Her Lola should be secure in the knowledge that, having been "the
ugliest girl in Rhode Island" before making her deal with Applegate, she can now
have any man she wants. Except young Joe.

It's in the supporting roles that this show works best. Jarrod Emick is
exceptionally good as young Joe, the clean-living, miraculously successful
slugger with a profile so square that he looks perfectly at home on the boxes of
Wheaties he endorses. Also welcome are Dick Latessa, as the manager of the
Senators, who leads his team in the rousing, intentionally overstated anthem
"Heart"; Vicki Lewis, as the "news hen" (which is what women reporters were
called in the 1950's) with a singing voice that might shatter an eight-carat
diamond; Dennis Kelly, as the older Joe, and Linda Stephens, as the loyal wife
of both Joes.

Then, too, there are the men who play the dancing, leaping, forward-flipping
members of the Senators' squad. They are the corps de ballet for this show, and
they astonish throughout. In no number are they more spectacular than in the
"Blooper Ballet," a priceless mixture of song, dance and sheer athleticism that
spells out the reasons for the Senators' dismal stats on the ball field.

The Adler and Ross score bewitches, not only the familiar numbers such as
"Heart" and "Whatever Lola Wants" but also the less well known ones: the gentle
love songs, "A Man Doesn't Know" and "Near to You," as well as "Two Lost Souls"
(sung in this production by Applegate and Lola), a rueful, cockeyed ode to
palship, which once was obligatory in Broadway shows.

Because of the magical, silent machinery with which the Marquis stage is
equipped, the spare and imaginative Schmidt sets and Mr. O'Brien's relentless
pacing, "Damn Yankees" moves faster, with fewer timeouts, than any pennant game
I've ever watched. Which is meant as praise.

'Kiss of The Spider Woman'

One of the three producers of the 1955 "Damn Yankees" was Harold S. Prince.
Sometime during his subsequent career as one of the American theater's most
creative forces, he dropped the initial to become simply Harold Prince, the
director of a long list of innovative shows including "Kiss of the Spider
Woman," last year's big Tony-winner still at the Broadhurst. It was by chance
that I went to see "Kiss of the Spider Woman," with its new cast members, at a
Wednesday matinee the day after attending "Damn Yankees." The effect was eerie.

The astonishing, quite riveting differences between the two shows describe,
within the boundaries of Mr. Prince's career, the evolution of the post-Rodgers
and Hammerstein Broadway musical over a period of nearly 40 years. How far we've
come. But then, where are we now? I'm not sure. "Damn Yankees" is as bright,
clear and weightless as sunlight; "Kiss of the Spider Woman" as dark, scary and
uncertain as the soul's night is supposed to be.

Each has at its center a femme fatale who, in "Damn Yankees," is a loving joke,
and, in "Kiss of the Spider Woman," an icon of camp that comes to symbolize
death itself. The great thing about "Kiss of the Spider Woman" is not always
what it successfully brings off but the stretch it provides Mr. Prince, Terrence
McNally, who wrote the book, and John Kander and Fred Ebb, who wrote the score.

Manuel Puig's freewheeling novel still reads better (and plays better as the
1985 Hector Babenco film) than it plays in the theater. The glitzily realized
old-movie fantasies on stage tend to overwhelm the two men who share those
fantasies. Grand show-biz know-how distracts from their perilous situation:
mismatched cellmates in a brutal Latin American prison. Jeff Hyslop, who's now
playing the homosexual window dresser, and Brian Mitchell, as the macho
political prisoner, sing well and give intense, fully realized performances,
though neither is a match for Chita Rivera's Spider Woman (the role played in
London by Bebe Neuwirth as Ms. Rivera's replacement). Ms. Rivera is amazing on
the stage. She's tiny, but her presence is as big and all-embracing as a movie
image at Radio City Music Hall. Her production numbers, part oldtime Hollywood,
part contemporary fever dream, were choreographed by the same Rob Marshall
responsible for "Damn Yankees." The score, though uneven, contains some of the
best, most complex work yet done by the Kander and Ebb team.

At intermission, an elderly woman in the orchestra stood up and stretched. "It
keeps your attention," she said pleasantly to a couple behind her. "You aren't
bored." The couple remained seated and hugged their coats. The woman chatted on.
Noting the even more elderly woman with her, she sighed and said, "We were going
to see 'My Fair Lady,' but it was too far uptown."

This is the way theatergoing should be: the seats so available that impulse
shoppers aren't discouraged.

DAMN YANKEES The revival's bewitching score and fine supporting cast combine for
a home run.
KISS OF THE SPIDER WOMAN Nearly 40 years after 'Damn Yankees,' it's an
evolutionary musical, all right, with fully realized performances.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Joey Pizzi, left, Scott Wise and Cory English in the revival of
the 1955 musical "Damn Yankees" at the Marquis Theater on Broadway -- It's in
the supporting roles that this show works best. Jarrod Emick and Bebe Neuwirth
are friends first and last in the musical. (Photographs by Carol Rosegg/Martha
Swope Associates/"Damn Yankees")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ARCHITECTURE VIEW;
Claiming a Potent Piece of Urban Turf

BYLINE: By Herbert Muschamp

SECTION: Section 2;   Page 38;   Column 1;   Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1201 words


"RECLAIMING OUR PAST, Honoring Our Ancestors," at the Urban Center will echo in
this city's memory long after the show comes down. The 30 architectural projects
on view (through April 21), entries in a design competition held in January,
share a historical focus. They commemorate the African Burial Ground, an
18th-century grave site unearthed three years ago in lower Manhattan. But the
show also has emphatic designs on the future. While the projects are intended to
preserve a historic site and honor those buried there, their mission is also to
protect a tradition of cultural diversity for generations yet unborn.

The architects faced an unusual challenge. They were not just competing against
each other. They were also up against the haunting power of the site in its
present form. Above ground, the site is a void, to all appearances a vacant lot.
This in itself is a historical milestone. Four years ago, plans were proceeding
to erect a building on this spot: a four-story annex to the new Federal Office
Building now nearing completion on Broadway at Duane Street, two blocks north of
City Hall. The discovery of skeletons during excavation of the site led
historians to identify this as the "Negros Burial Ground," the nation's oldest
known black cemetery.

Located just outside Colonial New York's northern boundary, the cemetery was
created in the early 18th century because blacks were denied burial in the
city's churchyards. The remains of as many as 20,000 people had been interred
here by 1793, when the expanding city covered the area with landfill and
developed it for housing. What the excavation turned up, in other words, was not
just bones, not just history, but a living metaphor of racial oppression -- a
meaning compounded by the Government's plan to build over the site once again.

In August of 1992, after a series of protests, Congress acted to halt
construction of the annex and declared the site a National Historic Landmark.
Subsequently, the city's Landmarks Preservation Commission designated the
surrounding area a historic district. The preserved plot is only a fraction of
the original five-acre burial ground. Even so, it is a potent piece of urban
turf. Like the election of David Dinkins, a leading opponent of the annex, the
vacant lot symbolizes the hope that the excluded can breach the wall and enter
into the life of the city.

The design competition also represents an unearthing: an outpouring of the
imaginations of mostly young, unknown designers. It is rare to see an
architecture show so charged with passion. Organized by a group of civic and
professional organizations, including the New York Coalition of Black
Architects/National Organization of Minority Architects and the Municipal Art
Society, the juried competition was held not necessarily to choose a final
design but to generate public discussion about possible approaches. The
architects were given almost unlimited freedom to design the site as they chose.

This is partly a show about language, about discovering a visual vocabulary to
express the meaning of a place. If the language displayed here occasionally
verges on visual Babel, that is because this place holds multiple, at times
contradictory, meanings. The beliefs and customs of the dead. The injustice of
their exclusion. The struggle, only partly victorious, of their descendants over
racism. And on whose behalf are these languages supposed to speak? Who are the
intended listeners? Does the word "our" in the show's title refer exclusively to
those of African ancestry? Or does it include others who have sought shelter
within the city's tradition of social tolerance?

Whether or not any of these schemes is ultimately built, the show itself is a
brilliant commemoration: the very diversity of the proposals captures the spirit
of the undertaking as well as any single project could. Some of the designers,
it seems fair to say, got carried away with the program, overloading the site
with auditoriums, museums and other amenities that would indeed be welcome if
they didn't threaten to bury the cemetery one more time. In other cases, it is
the forms that are intrusive. An abstract composition of folded planes by the
Australian architects Anton James and Mark Jackson, for example, would make a
fine cenotaph for French deconstructionist philosophers, but its connection to
pre-Revolutionary blacks remains obscure.

Two of the four "first prize" winning projects followed nearly opposite paths to
reach equally compelling designs. Lester Y. Yuen and Nana D. Last took the route
of less-is-more. Like Maya Lin, architect of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, Mr.
Yuen and Ms. Last sense that a dramatically understated form can elicit great
depth and range of emotional response. They propose a glass wall, four stories
tall, embedded with 20,000 brass pins, enlarged versions of shroud fasteners
that were excavated from the site.

Radiant, vertical, this is the antithesis of Ms. Lin's sunken, brooding wall.
Yet like that wall, this design is rigorously refined, not only in its plain
geometric form -- the play of light over and through the glass would be a
constant marvel to behold -- but in its distillation of meaning into ideas
easily conveyed by visual means. The transparency of the glass inverts the
burial ground's 200-year concealment; the ascending grid of pins counts the
lives brought to light. A political as well as a spiritual afterlife is summoned
forth by this imagery: here, living and dead bond to enlarge their place in the
sun.

NO ONE COULD ACCUSE KAREN Bermann and Jeanine Centuori of excessive refinement
or, for that matter, of undue dwelling on the past. Their proposal is a brash
outburst of contemporary street smarts. Guided by the idea that the African
grave site is "an 'animate charm,' a window that enables communication between
living and dead," Ms. Bermann and Ms. Centuori want to surround the site with
sidewalks embedded with a mosaic of "graveyard goods": marbles, toys, pottery,
bottles, seashells and false teeth contributed by New Yorkers.

This approach somewhat sidesteps the problem of devising an original formal
vocabulary. Still, the mosaic effect -- evoking urban graffiti as well as the
repetitive patterns of quilts -- combines visual forms associated with black
experience. And it weaves into the urban fabric the custom of making funeral
offerings to placate the deceased. Some viewers will also be reminded of jazz,
an art form that has awakened many to the improvisatory beauty of the New York
cityscape.

Although the project by Marti Cowan and Jennifer Sage was not honored by the
competition's jury, it is commendable in its desire to retain something of the
site's present state of triumphant desolation. The architects propose a simple
plaza, paved with rectangular granite blocks, interrupted at irregular intervals
by grave-sized plots of grass. This is a resting place. Three of the granite
blocks are raised to provide seating, creating a pause from urban bustle, and it
does the design no discredit to imagine that the homeless might well see the
place as an open invitation to take their ease. Some of the living remain
outside the walls.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lester Y. Yuen and Nana D. Last's glass wall embedded with
20,000 brass pins, enlarged versions of shroud fasteners that were excavated
from the site. Karen Bermann and Jeanine Centuori, in an outburst of street
smarts, want to surround the site with sidewalks embedded with a mosaic of
"graveyard goods." (Photographs by Dwight Primiano)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY: CORRESPONDENT'S REPORT;
Travel Industry Prepares For a Rush to Vietnam

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr.

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 678 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WITH the end of United States trade sanctions against Vietnam, the number of
Americans traveling there is likely to increase markedly, whether they are
motivated by business opportunity, family ties, historical interest or the
imponderable attraction of old soldiers to battlefields they cannot forget.

Although it will take months for all the arrangements to fall into place, the
travel industry is already planning for the rush.  United Airlines and Northwest
Airlines have applied for permission to fly from American cities to Ho Chi Minh
City, formerly Saigon. United would fly from Los Angeles, Northwest from Detroit
via Tokyo. Continental and Delta are also considering providing service.

But the American companies cannot sell tickets until the United States and
Vietnam work out aviation agreements, which, an official in the United States
Transportation Department said, were unlikely to be completed by this summer.
Until then, travelers from the United States must fly to some other Asian
country, like Bangkok, Taiwan, Hong Kong or Tokyo, and take a foreign airline to
Vietnam. Tour operators say they expect a steady increase in business, even
though the embargo did not bar Americans from traveling there.

"Adventurous backpackers of the Vietnam and post-Vietnam generations have been
going there in droves for the past two years," said Edward Hasbrouk of the Aereo
Travel Group in San Francisco, who estimates that most of the tickets his agency
sold to Southeast Asia last year were to people planning to spend at least some
time in Vietnam.

Even they have had misconceptions about the embargo, he said, often assuming
that they had to arrange their flights and visas from Bangkok, not realizing
that United States agents could obtain visasfrom Mexico or Canada. (Visas are
not yet available in the United States.)

Inner Asia Expeditions of San Francisco, which has been sponsoring tours in
Vietnam for a few years, is offering a new trip that takes voyagers down Route
9, a link on the famous Ho Chi Minh trail, across the old demilitarized zone
between the north and south, and across the newly opened border into Laos.
Typical tours of 8 to 12 days cost from $1,600 to $3,000, not counting air fare.

Gannon Travel of Reston, Va., is another agency developing a specialty in
Vietnam, where its parent organization, the Gannon Companies, has permanent
offices in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City staffed by Vietnamese and Americans.

Gannon, which also is involved in the construction business in Vietnam, says
that a portion of its profits from Vietnam are to be donated to Operation Smile
Vietnam, an enterprise that has sponsored medical assistance to Vietnamese
children since 1989.

Beginning in April, Gannon will offer day and overnight tours from Hanoi,
including bicycle tours, visits to villages, and festival events. The company is
also planning to offer a 14-day nationwide tour priced at about $4,000, plus air
fare. While travelers can go solo to Vietnam, that approach remains difficult
and complicated, especially for those who want to venture far from the former
Saigon, a city that still boasts plenty of Western-style hotels and where it is
easy to find a car and an English-speaking driver.

There are few first-class hotels outside Saigon, but Heather Smith, who has been
to Vietnam twice investigating the trade in endangered species for the Earth
Island Institute, a San Francisco environmental group, said she was pleased with
the inexpensive hotels she stayed in.

"You can get a great hotel for 10 bucks a night," she said. "In the north they
have a hot shower, but in Saigon they don't."

Credit cards issued by American banks cannot yet be used, until the regulatory
agencies work out the arrangements. And there may be a charge of up to 5 percent
on traveler's checks, which will be cashed in Vietnamese currency that cannot be
converted back to dollars. So travelers may want to take as much cash in dollars
as possible, bearing in mind the risk of loss or theft. The dollars will be
readily accepted.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Vietnam showing location of Ho Chi Mihn City.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MAKING IT WORK;
Firemen in Waiting

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 3;  Column 1;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1798 words


FIREFIGHTERS spend most of their time waiting, fidgeting benchwarmers at a game
they can only anticipate. While they wait, they make their own beds, scrub their
own toilets, polish their truck (they call it an apparatus). In full fire
regalia, they take their shiny red truck to the supermarket, then cook feasts
together. They drill on techniques, lift weights, watch television and read
mountains of Playboys dating back more than a decade.

At Ladder Company 176, in a tattered corner of Brooklyn, firefighters go about
their tasks with a camaraderie found in few groups outside the Boy Scouts.
(Women are still a rarity, accounting for just 35 of the city's 11,800
firefighters.) In fact, the men like their jobs so much they routinely arrive an
hour or so early.

Despite the probability that most will be injured at least twice during their
careers, the undisputed high point of their day is a fire; Ladder Company 176
puts out some 40 a month (more than most units but less than one just a few
miles away, in Crown Heights), and responds to about 30 false alarms as well as
sundry emergencies, from a cat up a tree to a domestic dispute to a woman giving
birth.

But to firefighters, anything less than a glorious conflagration -- especially
an "occupied structural work," a burning building in which people are trapped --
ranks only slightly higher than snarling guard dogs.

"Anything else is like kissing your sister," allowed John T. Vigiano, the
company commander, who won a bout with smoke-induced throat cancer a decade ago.
"Everything seems to come up two or three notches when there's a good fire. It's
like a game."

Despite the heroics, the Fire Department has its critics. One of the most vocal
is Raymond D. Horton, president of the watchdog group Citizens Budget
Commission, who contends that firefighters misuse their time. He argues that
since urban fires are started by people, people can prevent them. And
firefighters, whose duties are defined in union contracts, should be busier
conducting inspections, enforcing regulation and educating people. "A perfectly
functioning Fire Department would go out of business," he says.

Such revolutionary thinking goes against the machismo grain, though Ladder
Company 176 now does inspections two half-days a week. "Firefighters don't want
to do building inspections; they don't want to do housework," says Captain
Vigiano, a 32-year veteran. "They want to go to fires."

A ladder company's function is to find the fire, ventilate the rooms and rescue
people trapped inside, while the engine company's job is to actually put out the
fire. Ladder Company 176 and Engine Company 233 share a modern firehouse,
situated where the neighborhoods of Bedford-Stuyvesant, Bushwick and Brownsville
converge, an economically bedraggled area of vacant lots, storefront churches
and Chinese takeout places with bulletproof glass.
 9 A.M.  A typical day at Ladder Company 176 begins with roll call. Firefighters
work a seemingly haphazard pattern of shifts, a schedule adopted after World War
II that has never been changed. They do nine-hour tours on two succeeding days,
take 48 hours off, work two 15-hour shifts, then take 72 hours off. Each month,
they get an additional day off to keep the workweek to 40 hours.

At roll call the ladder company's five firefighters and one officer are assigned
duties. One man, the driver, is also expected to coordinate things outside a
burning building. Today he is Cornell Horne, an affable Vietnam veteran who is
quick to send flowers to a sick colleague. Mike Pagano, a second-generation
firefighter known for his physical and emotional strength, is designated the
forcible-entry, or irons, man. He uses an ax and other tools to fight his way to
a fire while a colleague carries an extingusher. The extinguisher bearer, or can
man, will be Jim Mills, a new fireman who radiates enthusiasm. Jack Sweeney,
whose father served for more than 35 years, will be in charge of "lateral
ventilation," through windows and walls. The roof man, Thomas Farragher, a
12-year veteran, is responsible for "vertical ventilation."

"Very few jobs have as much instant gratification," says Mr. Farragher. "You're
there, and you don't leave until it's out."

9:23 A.M.  The alarm sounds -- a smooth series of beeps. Then bells ring -- two
summon the engine company, three the ladder company and four both. Most often,
both go.

A few men slide down two gleaming brass poles from the living quarters, where
there is a study, lounge and dormitory for snatching naps in work clothes. The
men move briskly, putting on their leather helmets, coats and boots with
practiced motions. They don't run, to avoid bumping into one another. The idea
is to quicken response time rather than speeding in traffic. Talk is crisp and
factual as the men pile into the cab and race toward an apartment building in
East New York.

Some motorists pull to the side, but others seem oblivious even to the deafening
horn (the department has shifted to European-style electronic sirens, less
damaging to hearing than the old-fashioned whine).

At the apartment building, which houses the mentally ill, it turns out a
resident threatened to set fire to his neighbor's apartment. The police, who
automatically answer fire alarms, take over.

Minutes later, as the truck wends its way back to the firehouse, a beeping is
heard. Another alarm, this one in Brownsville. "I can see smoke," says Mr.
Horne. The atmosphere is tense, and they strain to see smoke as they approach. A
burning mattress has been thrown in an air shaft. The firefighters drag it
outside and extinguish it. A skylight is opened to ventilate the shaft. End of
job.

10:35 A.M.  Next stop is Met Foods. Mr. Horne stays in the truck to monitor the
computer, which sounds alarms and provides addresses and any known details (a
central computer processes all fire calls in the borough and automatically
assigns companies).

The other firefighters, led by Mr. Pagano, today's designated chef, keep in
contact with Mr. Horne via radio. At Met Foods they buy five loaves of Italian
bread, Goya red kidney beans and other fixings for chili, a Pagano specialty. He
attributes his culinary expertise to TV cooking shows and tricks picked up from
firefighters.

The men tip their helmets, a department tradition, to female customers as they
pass in the aisles. Each man's share for food will be $5.

11:05 A.M.  A call comes from a woman who thinks she is breathing toxic fumes.
The firefighters and their officer, Lieut. Philip McDonnell, nicknamed the
Sheriff, agree the oil burner and chimney in her tenement need to be fixed. They
shut off the furnace and begin the paperwork to force the owner to make repairs.
He has up to 16 days, which could mean the building will be cold until then.

"The woman probably thought we could just come over and fix it," says Lieutenant
McDonnell. "We can't."

12:53 P.M.  Mr. Mills, a firefighter for only nine months, pulls the ladders out
of the truck and begins washing them. He is quickly joined by the others, who
have finished helping Mr. Pagano chop vegetables for chili.

Firefighters must have a high school education and complete an eight-week
course. Before joining the department, Mr. Mills was a police officer for eight
years, rising to detective in a Brooklyn anti-crime unit. He is critical of
police life. "The managers here go into the fires with you," he says. "Police
captains sit in their offices. Then they second-guess what you do four days
later." A son and nephew of firefighters, he says it is the bonds between
comrades he most values. Referring to Mr. Pagano, he says, "When I come to work
and he's working, my confidence goes up."

1:30 P.M.  Motivated by thoughts of an alarm, the men gobble down huge platters
of rice and chili. "It's not good for your stomach, but you get used to it," Mr.
Horne says.

The scene -- firefighters gathered at the table, boots and rubber slickers
arrayed in neat rows -- fits the children's book stereotype. Except that this
company has never favored high-strung Dalmatians, a traditional horse-stable dog
that became a firehouse regular when apparatuses were truly horse-powered. The
firehouse has been dogless since the even-tempered Snotsy, a former stray, was
run over by a car. But there is no shortage of nonhuman companions. There are
two boa constrictors, a python, a baby alligator, four chinchillas and a
half-dozen tanks of large tropical fish.

2:10 P.M.  The company is on its way to shovel snow from around hydrants and
inspect them for storm damage. Mr. Horne, puffing a postprandial cigar, flips on
the siren. "I want everybody to know I'm coming," he says.

As the engine cruises, the firefighters see sites they have fought big fires.
They point to buildings, quizzing one another on how to approach a fire. After 3
P.M., with students dismissed from school, radio activity picks up as children
pull alarm boxes: more false alarms to go out on.

4:03 P.M.  Captain Vigiano, who is working the night shift, arrives early.
Between battles with a stack of paperwork, he recalls growing up in
Bedford-Stuyvesant, and how nice it was to walk with his grandmother to a little
bakery on Sundays. He learned his trade as the area burned in the late 60's,
when arson was common and there were as many as 38 calls a night for Ladder
Company 176.

The result, he says, was that firefighters quickly got on-the-job experience.
But he doesn't think the job has become easier. Today's double-paned windows
delay discovery of fires and make temperatures higher. There are toxic fumes
from plastics. Anti-burglary devices complicate firefighting. "We had more work,
so we got better," he says. "They don't have the work and face more obstacles."

5 P.M.  The first shift ends, but many hang around. Dinner, arroz con pollo,
will be served at 7:30 around the handsome wood table the men built themselves.

"If you had a son and you wanted him to be a firefighter," Captain Vigiano says,
"this is where you'd want him to learn his trade."

Mike Pagano's Firehouse Chili
Total time: 2 1/2 hours

5 pounds ground beef
5 pounds hot Italian sausage (links)
4 stalks celery, diced
6 pounds of bell peppers, both red and green, diced
5 pounds of yellow onions, diced
4 28-ounce cans crushed tomatoes
1 tablespoon each basil, oregano and dried red pepper flakes
3 tablespoons cumin
8 tablespoons chili powder.

1. In a large pot over medium heat, cook the beef and sausage until brown.  With
a spoon, remove excess grease from the pot.

2. Add the celery, peppers, onions, tomatoes and seasonings, and cook over low
heat for two hours. If the chili seems too dry at any time during the cooking,
add water.

Yield: 17 servings.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: At Ladder Company 176, equipment is washed by, from left, Jim
Mills, Jack Sweeney, Thomas Farragher and Cornell Horne. Mike Pagano, far right,
prepares lunch with Officers Sweeney and Horne. Casual footwear is discarded
when at alarm sounds. (Photographs by Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

He's No. 1

BYLINE: By Ken Bode;   Ken Bode is the director of the Center for Contemporary
Media at DePauw University and moderator of the PBS program "Washington Week in
Review."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 25;  Column 2;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 717 words



THE HOUSE THAT ROONE BUILT
The Inside Story of ABC News.
By Marc Gunther.
Illustrated. 381 pp. Boston:
Little, Brown & Company.
$23.95.

IN the old days, from Edward R. Murrow through Walter Cronkite, CBS was the
network about which the books were written. It was the undisputed class of the
field when it came to news. NBC's Huntley and Brinkley may have been as well
known to many Americans as Cary Grant, John Wayne or the Beatles; still, NBC was
second place. But ABC? Poor ABC was known as "last with the least." In the
mid-1960's, when it sent a rookie correspondent, Ted Koppel, to cover Vietnam,
ABC's news budget was $5 million, less than the amount the network apparently
paid Diane Sawyer this year to keep her from jumping ship.

Times, indeed, have changed. ABC News is now the undisputed leader in news, from
"World News Tonight" and "Nightline" to the Sunday morning program "This Week
With David Brinkley" and the magazine shows "Prime Time Live" and "20/20." In an
era when all three networks are run by managers of the bottom line, ABC News has
transformed itself from loss leader to a top profit center. That is a major
reason Roone Arledge has remained president of ABC News for 17 years while the
competition has rotated leadership like a pinwheel.

"The House That Roone Built" has enough in it about stars and salaries to assure
a popular readership, but it also painstakingly chronicles the way Mr. Arledge
moved a third-place news operation to the head of the class. Marc Gunther, a
reporter for The Detroit Free Press who has published two books about sports,
gives the reader endless detail about the personality and work habits of Mr.
Arledge, who after modernizing television sports coverage, rose to the
presidency of ABC Sports and then was greeted as a P. T. Barnum, likely to bring
glitz, glamour and lower standards to the network, when he added news to his
portfolio. Roone Arledge looms like a shadowy godfather, masterminding every
programming decision, elevating his choices to power and prominence, then
promoting the stars (Mr. Koppel, Peter Jennings, Barbara Walters, Sam Donaldson)
and cutting loose those who he thinks fall short or those who fall out with the
maximum leader (Carl Bernstein, Geraldo Rivera).

Once in command on the news side, Mr. Arledge proved himself willing to use the
rules he learned in sports, including the slow-motion instant replay and
satellites. He also proved determined to give the viewers what they were
interested in, not necessarily what they needed to know. On the day Elvis died
in 1977, Mr. Arledge made that the lead story on the ABC evening news; the other
networks led with a Washington story about the Panama Canal treaties. It may be
the truest measure of Mr. Arledge's influence on television that on a comparable
news day today, all the broadcasts would lead with Presley's death.

ABC News cooperated with Mr. Gunther in his research for this book, but his
overall assessment of Roone Arledge is decidedly mixed. There must be no one on
the globe more indifferent to returning telephone calls. On the other hand, Mr.
Arledge's genius as a producer is amply demonstrated, particularly in the
control room. He also proved a programming master of "fringe" periods, filling
late evening with "Nightline" and Sunday morning with Mr. Brinkley. Still, even
the stars he discovered and promoted describe his remoteness, self-doubt and
tremendous talent for self-promotion and ducking blame. Consider this
self-assessment: "It's not arrogance. . . . I truly do regard it as God's gift
to me . . . that I know I'm good at what I do."

R. GUNTHER has produced an accomplished account of the best and worst of the
last 30 years of ABC News. He lets readers peer behind the scenes at the news
producers who really make the decisions about what is covered and by whom.
Unlike many books by media critics, "The House That Roone Built" appreciates the
off-screen players. But it would have been helped by a chapter on just how a
single program comes together, how an evening of "Prime Time Live" or an episode
of "Nightline" is conceived, researched, produced, fact-checked, lawyered,
written, edited and broadcast. It would enrich the reader to know not just who
puts the news on the air, but how it gets there.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 13, 1994, Sunday

 CORRECTION:
A review on page 25 of the Times Book Review today, about "The House That Roone
Built: The Inside Story of ABC News," by Marc Gun ther, misattributes a
quotation from the book. It was not Roone Arledge, the president of ABC News,
who said, "It's not arrogance. . . . I truly do regard it as God's gift to me .
. . thatI'm good at what I do"; it was Ted Koppel, the host of ABC's "Night
line."

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By By David Murray

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 247 words



HISTORICAL NOVEL
AIR & FIRE
By Rupert Thomson.
Knopf, $23.

The conceit of Rupert Thomson's third novel, "Air & Fire," is the plan by a
French engineer at the turn of the century to build a prefabricated iron church,
designed by Gustave Eiffel, in a backwater mining town in Baja California. The
windblown, flyblown town could be most charitably described as bleak, its
European population the sort of scruffy empire builders who used to be cast up
on the shores of exhausted colonial outposts. There is a Mexican dandy officer
with the name of Felix Tortoledo de Aviles Montoya, a down-at-heels American
prospector called Wilson Pharaoh, a self-exiled French doctor and his wife, and
assorted Mexican supporting actors. At the center of the plot is the engineer,
Theophile Valence, and his wife, Suzanne, who from the outset is destined to get
herself into romantic difficulties, primarily through sheer boredom. The plot,
however, is less important than the haunting atmosphere that Mr. Thomson
skillfully describes: heat and dust and apathy and a sense of uselessness that
pervades nearly everything. But more evocative are the descriptions of the town
itself, with its broad French streets and pretentious houses, houses reminiscent
of the buildings the colonists erected in Morocco or Algeria or Vietnam -- Nimes
or Avignon transported overseas. This often surreal, evanescent story takes
careful reading, but the effort is well worth it.
   DAVID MURRAY

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ENCOUNTERS;
Crossing Cultures: The Complex Life of a Man of All Things

BYLINE: By ERIKA DUNCAN;   Erika Duncan is an essayist and novelist who lives in
Sag Harbor.

SECTION: Section 13LI;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2641 words


WAS it the fact that the Persian rugs themselves were so large that contributed
to the sense of a certain almost fairy tale strangeness as I waited for Feradoun
Hoveyda, ambassador to the United Nations under the Shah of Iran, to re-emerge?
Or was it the fact that they went from wall to wall, instead of being set in the
center, so that as soon as one rug ended, defining the ending of one room,
immediately another began?

It was only once I was sitting several rooms and rugs away from the foyer that I
became aware of a frosted glass panel-- the only window that I would later
remember -- through which you could see the light. It had a medieval, churchlike
appearance strangely in keeping with the Persian door panels and the tapestries
in the room where we sat.

Feradoun had left me in the foyer while he went to fix our tea and I found
myself busying myself looking at family portraits, pictures mostly of his two
daughters, with a plethora of boats and horses. Off to the side, there were two
prints in subtle muted dark tones by the painter Esteban Vicente, who had
introduced me to Feradoun in a Bridgehampton summer, along with his wife Harriet
and our Turkish actress friend, Shirin Devrim, with whom Feradoun would have
endless arguments about whether the nature of Islam itself had to change in
order for peace to come to the Middle East, Feradoun's contention that
theologically Islam was still back in the 12th century, and that any changes, in
order to have a lasting political effect, had to come from the Muslim
theologians themselves.

In the labyrinthine maze of halls that we would later wander through, there was
a painting of Andy Warhol by Feradoun and a painting of Feradoun by Andy Warhol,
but these were merely parts of the picture of Feradoun that I would be trying to
put together.

As Feradoun emerged with our tea tray and all sorts of chocolates, something in
the quality of the adventure put me in mind of the French comic strip Tintin.
Later on I would learn that Tintin was one of his "influences."

Feradoun Hoveda had been and continues to be a man of all things. In his young
manhood, serving in the diplomatic corps, he had been an expatriate novelist in
Paris. He had published five novels all dealing with the crossings of cultures.
At the age of 22, he was put on a committee set up to draft the First Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, along with his professor, Rene Cassin, who received
the Nobel Prize, and Eleanor Roosevelt, a position quite odd for one who would
spend a good deal of time in his adulthood in the ministry of a country hardly
famous for its record in human rights. This first apprenticeship in being caught
in the middle would render him capable of being in positions of compromise where
most others would fear to go.

At the same time he was coming to know the avant-arde film makers who would take
him on as a regular contributor to Les Cahiers du Cinema, a magazine that had a
profound influence on contemporary cinematic theory and technique. He was
becoming close to the psychoanalysts and mathematicians gathering in Paris about
that time, worlds that didn't ordinarily mix.

After serving a 14-year term with UNESCO, which freed him from having to deal
with the Iranian government directly, he returned to Iran when the Shah came to
power, moved by his promises in the areas of land reform and human rights. In
the first 10 years of the Shah's regime, he worked inside Iran to spread
literacy.

When I asked him how it felt working so closely with the Shah, he told me that
it gave him many opportunities to disagree fruitfully and to influence important
decisions. "It was only later that the Shah started to become arrogant," he
said.

In 1965 he came to New York, as Ambassador to the United Nations, and there he
worked on facilitating many compromises, between India and Pakistan, between the
United States, the Soviet Union and China.  Because of the fact that he was so
often straddling several worlds, he became a sort of ideal go-between.

Tie to North Vietnam

In a strange effort to end the war in Vietnam without losing face, President
Johnson -- "who was beginning to have nightmares and remembered that the Shah of
Iran had good relations with the North Vietnamese," he said -- would call upon
the Iranian government to establish a contact that might lead to an earlier
peace, and Feradoun Hoveyda would become the secret go-between, "the attempt
only known by my brother, President Johnson, the Shah and me."

They developed a code in which Feradoun would leave cryptic messages, such as "I
went to the house and the door was slightly ajar," to signify that he was
getting somewhere. When he needed to communicate in greater detail, he would
have to go to Teheran, so that people began to question him as to why he was
going there so often. He did finally make an effective contact, but Johnson was
not re-elected. The action was consigned to secrecy and the war went on for
another couple of years.  Soon the Shah was also deposed, and Feradoun lost his
position, remaining in the United States, a man without either a pension or a
country, until just recently he acquired his American citizenship.

At the time of my visit, Feradoun had just returned from a convention in Oslo,
where there was a seminar of Islamic intellectuals on human rights and Muslim
land reform. He spoke of having learned there of a group of Muslims in South
Africa who had actually reformed their religion to the extent that women can
enter mosques and don't have to wear a chadar. This was, clearly in his mind,
the direction in which the Islamic religion had to go.

"It is not a matter of adjusting," he had said to me rather firmly the first
time that we met, "but rather a matter of changing." It was just at the time
when Rabin and Arafat had made their first moves towards peace, and optimism was
in the air everywhere. Feradoun alone was withholding even the slightest modicum
of either pleasure or hope, because he felt so strongly that for the rest to
mean anything the religious changes must come first.

"Even if we believe that God is eternal, the universe he has created is not
eternal," he continued. "How can you say the Koran or the Zoroastra are eternal?
They are only 'instructions' on how to use this universe, and they must change
as the universe changes."

He paused. "I will be 70 years old next year," he said, "and I started to think
about these problems at 10.  Sixty years of thinking, writing and learning.I
only must say that we have one battle everywhere, against fanaticism in all its
forms. Any form of fanaticism -- the Pope on contraception, Farrakhan on Islam,
a Hitler, fanatic Jews about being "chosen" -- it is hara-kiri. It is suicide."

We sat down on the pale colored sofas, very modern and simple all at once, so
that even when our legs reached normally down to the floor, I had the impression
that we were sitting on the floor. Or perhaps once again it was the sense of the
largeness of everything else that made me feel so keenly our own smallness, as
if he had put us deliberately into one of his cinematic mis-en-scenes, in a kind
of far corner, like those far-off shots in the beginnings and endings of movies
before the telephoto lens zooms in, when main characters give over to
background, and background becomes foreground, my eyes darting from the
tapestries to the resume in my lap: "1972, elected chairman of the Ad Hoc
Committee on International Terrorism, 1973, elected Chairman of the Committee on
International Disarmament Conference," and suddenly an award for his fourth
novel, a lectureship at Bard College in "Literature and the Neo-Realistic
Revolution."

Feradoun himself was a small man, as he sat at right angles to me.  Or perhaps
that was also only part of the illusion he so carefully made. And his face and
his body were very contained.

Only his hands made expressive small gestures as he talked, and all within a
confined circle of motion, with the rest of him keeping quite still. He was
dressed rather formally, in a suit and tie, and even though we talked about
intimate feelings of working, we would talk rather formally.

The chocolates, the tea. People have such different rhythms as they come to know
one another. As Feradoun pointed out the tapestries on the wall that he had made
himself, some based on the ancient Persian alphabet, I became conscious of a
large sheet of blankness, so subtly turning from white to gray at the borders,
that I wouldn't realize until almost the end of our visit that it was a giant
movie screen, movies having been Feradoun first love, when he was a child
growing up in Beirut.

Feradoun Hoveyda was born in Damascus, Syria, in 1924, where his father was also
in the diplomatic corps, "because," as he was later to advise his son, "it is a
profession that allows a great deal of spare time and the opportunity to
travel."

Father Was a Linguist

"My father knew many languages," Feradoun said, "and translated a lot of books
from French into Persian, from Arabic into Persian, and my mother took care of
the house, cooked for us. For us, in our Eastern way of living, she was what
they would call here a Jewish mother."

When the child was a year old the family moved to Lebanon, where Feradoun, very
much a city child, would spend his growing years. As one who was to try over and
over again to record the experience of being torn between two cultures, Feradoun
would tell me that "childhood itself was another culture," as he reached out of
adulthood to touch it again in his third novel, "Dans une Terre Etrange,"
published in France in 1968. He was interested, from the beginning, in the
visceral and in the cinematic, and started writing because he was dissatisfied
with the way the image was translated into thought or reflection in so many of
the books that he read. But his earliest exposure to culture was really through
film.

We were going in so many directions at once as we came to know each other. First
there was the phenomenon of multiculturalism which he feels, for all its flaws
works better in the United States than in Europe, the way he grew up in a city
"with three or four cultures at once," for "at home there was Persian, in the
streets Arabic, and in school French."

"There were all sorts of Christians," he said. "We had Jews, Bahais, Druse,
Zoroastrians. So that you didn't feel like a foreigner. Multiculturalism was
lived, it was not just an institution, and this made me a strong opponent of
fanaticism. Everybody had a home in his own culture and in the social scene we
would mix together."

"A nation cannot be multicultural if it has to have its values shared by
everyone," he adds, as he speaks of the danger both of nationalism and of
"culture imposed with a sword."

"The moment I began to think about the world at large coincided with the
Roosevelt era. When I was 8 years old there wasn't television yet, and I wasn't
yet reading the newspapers. Beirut was a small city where nothing on the
artistic level was important. People were living a traditional life, and the
only thing was the cinema. By the time I was 5 years old in 1929 and the talkies
were introduced, I had already seen many silent films, so that I had images
before sound.

"At first when I began to think about thinking and I discovered thinking with
images, I was very upset with literature for betraying this. I preferred
adventure books that would follow the action in the way that a camera will
follow it."

And he spoke of the fact that even now he is more attracted to Dickens than to
Proust, "because Dickens can be so much more easily translated into film." He
spoke of the importance of comic books in his early development.

On long afternoons, in between the "bad movies like the Andrew Hardy series,
which showed American middle-class families and kids who should be happy, having
none of our restraints," he was introduced to the "characters from the outside
world who would remain with me permanently -- Roosevelt, and Mayor La Guardia,
which gave me my first interest in discovering America, and Gandhi coming all
the way to London to get milk for his goat. It was in the newsreels as well that
I caught my first glimpses of Chaplin and Einstein."

Taking with him his emerging interests in cinema and politics, Feradoun went to
study at the Sorbonne, receiving his doctorate in Paris in 1948. It was during a
time of war, and also of intellectual turmoil in Paris.  Upon graduation he was,
for a short time, press attache for the Iranian foreign service. In his spare
time he would take off his formal clothing and go to the Museum of Cinema, where
he began to know Truffaut, whose picture he would later show me, along with
pictures of himself with Presidents Carter and Ford, and Henry Kissinger,
intermingled with the photographs of Nureyev, Robert De Niro, Sadat, Arafat and
Jerzy Kosinski.

The psychoanalysts during that period, he said, were mainly people who were in
art, who were involved in applying psychoanalytic theory to the world of
imagery.

Later on when he came to this country to work for the United Nations, he would
become friendly with Robert Wilson and Richard Schechner, those of the
theatrical avant garde. "I inspired Robert Wilson's "Einstein on the Beach," he
says to me, "when I told him, you have used Freud in some of your plays. The
other part of the 20th century is Einstein." He and Rossellini were good friends
in Paris, and when Feradoun came here, they spent a whole week of evenings
"taking off shirt and tie and exploring the East Village."

Years passed. In 1980, he published a book on the Shah's fall. In 1990, he was
chairman of a conference on the "Repercussions of the Disintegration of the
Soviet Empire." In 1992 he was a member of a fact-finding mission to South
Africa. In 1993 he attended the Second World Conference on Human Rights. "More
and more I believe that reforms have to come from the people themselves," he
tells me.

I ask him about Taslima Nasrin, the 31-year-old Bangladeshi poet, deprived of
her passport, who carries a threat on her life and a head price of $1,250 set by
the Council of Soldiers for Islam, for her book "Lajja" ("The Shame"), which
sold 50,000 copies in the six months since its publication, which treated
sympathetically the plight of a Hindu family suffering persecution following the
1992 destruction of the Babri mosque in India, her statement "I tried to say,
shame to all dark aspects of fundamentalism. I said, let's uphold humanism
instead of using religion to kill each other."

And he in turn shows me his contribution to a recent book of 100 Muslim and Arab
intellectuals writing "For Rushdie." His short entry is outspoken, both in his
lack of admiration for Rushdie's writing and his cry ending with the lines: "The
last time that books were burned was in Berlin in 1933. The last time that
writers were burned was in the Middle Ages."

It is his feeling that because Muslims living under fundamentalist regimes are
so completely powerless to speak, those who are outside have a responsibility to
create movements for tolerance in the countries they have left, working for
equality between men and women, and fighting against "backwardness" in every way
they can. This is very much the work that he wants to do.

"One should have the courage of the tomb," he says handing me a glass of wine,
the formal part of our encounter being over, as suddenly, without warning he
turns on his VCR.

"At age 70 one should not be afraid; life is behind, not ahead of you. You have
dreams and dreams that never come completely true, but always half way." And
upon the giant movie screen in the midst of the tapestries, echoing the grey
greens and deep reddish crimsons of the rugs, we see the beginning of the day's
news.

NAME: Feradoun Hoveyda

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Feradoun Hoveyda, representative to the United Nations under
Shah. (Pg. 1); Feradoun Hoveyda, a former ambassador to the United Nations, in
his Manhattan apartment. (Pg. 2) (Marilynne K. Yee, The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 14, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

After Six Years of Scandal, Senator Seeks Redemption

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 966 words

DATELINE: ABINGDON, Va., March 13


When he was a burr-headed Marine in the mid-1960's, Chuck Robb won medals
leading an infantry company into Vietnam firefights. Today, an older and very
different Senator Charles Spittal Robb, Democrat of Virginia, began a new round
of combat by shelving the armor and instead working to win the hearts and minds
of the villagers.

Facing the most perilous battle of his 17-year political life, Mr. Robb opened
his bid for a second Senate term not with a bang, but with a heartfelt town hall
speech and a tea in southwestern Virginia, a land of bucolic scenery and
Democrats whose party loyalties go all the way back to Jefferson.

The object, today and through the Nov. 8 election, was to remind voters of the
old Chuck Robb -- the bemusingly stiff, movie-star handsome, rigidly
incorruptible public servant who won the daughter of President Lyndon B. Johnson
27 years ago, and whom Virginians had touted for the White House.

Resurrecting that man will not be easy. In his first term in the Senate, Mr.
Robb has almost totally demolished that careful image, admitting to a hazily
defined nude encounter with a beauty queen and a hidden life of hard partying in
the state's oceanside honky-tonks. Three years ago, he was investigated after a
scheme by his aides in which the private conversations of his onetime chief
Democratic rival, former Gov. L. Douglas Wilder, were recorded and leaked to the
press.

Damage Control

And now he is all but certain to relive it all in the campaign this summer and
fall. He faces no serious opposition in the June primary, but his Republican
opponent is likely to be Oliver L. North, the former White House aide who says
he has staked a claim on political and sexual morality.

Mr. Robb made an extraordinary first move to repair the damage last week. He
mailed a five-page confessional to hundreds of Democrats in which he denied
rumors of drug use and involvement in the plot against Mr. Wilder, but conceded
to "socializing under circumstances not appropriate for a married man."

The letter drew some gasps, which were repeated when The Washington Post then
published an eyebrow-raising memo to his staff in which Mr. Robb denied having
"coital relations" with anyone but his wife, although he added that he has "a
weakness for the fairer sex -- and I hope I never get over it."

Most supporters seem to believe the major problem with Mr. Robb's letter of
confession is that it is six years too late. "A lot of people thought he
should've done something like this a lot earlier," said John J. McGlennon, a
government professor at the College of William and Mary and the Democratic First
District chairman. "The advantage is that he can now get back to campaigning and
talking about his record."

So today Mr. Robb was in Abingdon, a pre-Revolutionary War town where Daniel
Boone was once attacked by wolves.

"In a period when it might be easy to be distracted, I've tried to remember that
it's a job that's done day by day, vote by vote," Mr. Robb waxed about his
Senate career at the Washington County Courthouse, before about 100 supporters
who filled the courtroom and its worn oak benches.

But most of all, he praised his wife, Lynda Bird Robb, who stood beside him
smiling. He dubbed her "my partner in life and in this campaign," and praised
her as "the love of my life and the mother of three almost-perfect daughters,"
all of whom hold a prominent spot in his new campaign brochure.

"You've heard me say it before: I outmarried myself," he cracked.

That is not likely to deter Mr. North, although the Republican has his own
problems, most notably criminal convictions -- later overturned on
technicalities -- in the Iran-contra affair. But Mr. Robb is in no position to
take true advantage of Mr. North's failings, experts said.

Robert D. Holsworth, a political scientist at Virginia Commonwealth University
in Richmond, called Mr. Robb the "limping favorite" in the race, and the public
so far agrees: a poll in The Washington Post last month gave the Senator a 14
percentage point edge over Mr. North among people who said they were certain to
vote.

Wisconsin to White House

Mr. Robb, 54, seemed bulletproof for his first 49 years. He went from the
University of Wisconsin to the Marines, was posted to the White House, where he
met and wooed the President's daughter, and earned an enviable war record in
Vietnam.

Mr. Robb went on to law school, a prestigious clerkship on the United States
Court of Appeals, and a swift rise from Lieutenant Governor to Governor of
Virginia to the Senate, where he won his seat with an astonishing 71 percent of
the vote.

But all that began crumbling in 1988 with the accusations about fast living and
the feud with Mr. Wilder, and for most of the past six years Mr. Robb has been
unable or unwilling to halt his political decline.

Of late, however, after being dismissed as a has-been, Mr. Robb has shown some
sparks of political life. Mr. Wilder, who seemed likely to oppose him in the
primary, pulled out of the race in December. At last count, Mr. Robb had raised
$1.3 million and had twice as much cash ready to spend as did Mr. North.

Mr. Robb still faces the real prospect that his marital and wiretapping problems
will hurt him, Mr. Holsworth said. But this time at least, he added, the Senator
is following a politically proven path in making a public confession and asking
forgiveness.

"What he did is adopt Clinton's tactics," he said, referring to Bill Clinton's
dousing of rumors about his private life during the 1992 Presidential campaign.
"Admit to mistakes, keep your admission at a generalized level, and suggest
neither the media nor the public ought to interfere in your desire to maintain
the stability of your marriage. I think it's a good tactic."

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Charles S. Robb (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 14, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

At Home Abroad;
'More Of Itself'

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 700 words

DATELINE: SYDNEY, Australia


When Lyndon Johnson was struggling in the quagmire of Vietnam, he took comfort
from his favorite ally in the war: Australia. Australian troops were there from
1966 to 1972, almost to the final American withdrawal.

Next month the Australian Prime Minister, Paul Keating, will fly to Hanoi. His
visit is a symbol of the most important trend in this country. Australia is
intent on finding a place for itself in Asia. And part of that is a greater
willingness to differ with the United States.

American Secretaries of State used to visit Canberra and bask in the warmth of
agreement and respect. But that was not what Warren Christopher encountered when
he was there the other day, on his way to China.

The Australian Foreign Minister, Senator Gareth Evans, told him bluntly that
Australia disagreed with President Clinton's invocation of the threat of trade
sanctions against Japan. That was managed trade, he said, not multilateral free
trade. If it had any effect, it would simply lead to a preference for American
goods in Japan -- and hurt Australia and others.

The Government and Australian commentators were equally critical of the Clinton
Administration's pressure on China to improve its human rights record by June or
lose its most-favored-nation trade status.

Senator Evans told the press after two days of meetings with Secretary
Christopher that a U.S. withdrawal of China's M.F.N. status would have "a very
adverse impact" on the economy of all Asia. He said it would be especially
devastating for Hong Kong but would also hurt Australia.

The sharp disagreement on trade policy -- and on what Australia sees as rough
American tactics -- illustrates the change in relationship with the United
States. It is a change both political and psychological.

When the British colonies on this island continent came together as Australia in
1901, the new country remained resolutely British -- with a colonial inferiority
complex. The Australian writer Thomas Keneally (author of among other books
"Schindler's Ark," on which the movie "Schindler's List" is based) remarked
recently that Australian culture and society had to recover "from a sense of
exile."

After World War II the ties with Britain frayed, no doubt inevitably because of
distance and the end of empire. America replaced Britain as the powerful friend,
a relationship formalized in the Anzus Treaty.

Australia's eager support of American policy in Vietnam showed the closeness of
the relationship -- and probably marked its high point. For Australia like most
developed countries has come to see the great issues and potential conflicts in
the world as economic rather than military. And Australia's neighbors in Asia
are the fastest growing in the world economy.

Until as recently as 25 years ago Australia was formally committed to not being
Asian. That was the import of its White Australia policy, barring Asian
immigrants. Since the repeal of that law, a flow of Asians has gradually
developed. They now make up 4 percent of the population. A Sydney taxi driver
said he came here from Canton seven years ago "to do better."

Echoes of America remain. A visiting American has a certain feeling of deja vu:
of familiar issues and trends.

Australia's old reputation was as one of the most macho cultures on earth. But
the country has a strong women's movement now, and two women are even moving
toward the top in politics. There is a sensitivity about gender in language,
sometimes to the same absurd degree as in American political correctness. A
woman applicant for a university position was criticized recently for referring
to someone's "mastery" of a subject.

Sydney has had a gay and lesbian mardi gras for years. Last week's attracted
500,000 onlookers, and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation did an hour's
program on the parade. A few politicians complained about the broadcast but most
people seemed happy about the event.

Maybe in that respect Australia is more comfortable with diversity than an angry
American society is today. In any case there is a distinctiveness about this
country now. It is not really a copy of anything. "Australia," Thomas Keneally
said, "has become more of itself."

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 14, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Why Do We Still Play This Dirty Spy Game?;
Terrorism Studies

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 414 words


To the Editor:

Terrorism studies, a think-tank mainstay of the 1970's and 80's, are among the
industries that have declined with the end of the cold war. For more than two
decades, this was an academic growth industry, sucking huge sums from Federal
agencies into such enterprises as the Rand Corporation, George Washington
University and the Institute for Foreign Policy Analysis -- represented by Mark
D. W. Edington in "Terror Made Easy" (Op-Ed, March 3).

Unfortunately, these studies taught us very little, or we were allowed to learn
very little from them. The money filtered into them was from agencies whose own
operations were usually sub rosa, so the resulting work was usually not publicly
available. Such arrangements seriously compromise academic standards, like the
free exchange of ideas and open access to data generated by public funds. Now
the students of terrorism are suffering from cutbacks.

One thing we did learn during the period of terrorism studies was that these
benefactors, the intelligence agencies, were unreliable in their main business:
knowing what was going to happen, or probably going to happen, in key places.
The collective wisdom of more than $1 trillion spent on intelligence gathering
and analysis did not foresee or properly analyze the consequences of any
significant event from the Tet offensive to the collapse of the Soviet Union --
let alone the hijacking of an airplane or the taking of hostages here and there.

Now the declining terrorism-studies industry warns us we face new dangers and
must beef up our vigilance (and, by implication, our terrorism research
budgets). They play off the domestic headlines and call for beefing up what we
are just debeefing, and stricter controls on immigration and personal rights.

The facts do get in the way. The incidents Mr. Edington mentions (the World
Trade Center bombing, the arrest of suspected Hamas supporters and the Brooklyn
Bridge shooting) were solved with conventional policing powers and are being
adjudicated through normal legal processes. We have enough knowledge and legal
power to handle these things, and we should not be frightened or seduced into
going back down the path of expensive and fruitless studies into what cannot be
foreseen.

And we should be especially wary of anyone who wants more domestic controls over
our movements and rights.

MICHAEL KAHAN
Assoc. Professor, Political Science
Brooklyn College, CUNY
Staten Island, March 3, 1994

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 15, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Admiral Is Named NATO Commander In Southern Europe

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 362 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


The White House today named Vice Adm. Leighton W. (Snuffy) Smith Jr. as NATO's
military commander in southern Europe, a post with responsibility for dealing
with the conflict in the former Yugoslavia. He replaces Adm. Jeremy M. Boorda,
who, as expected, was named to be the Chief of Naval Operations, the Navy's top
admiral.

Admiral Smith, a 54-year-old graduate of the United States Naval Academy, is the
Navy's director of plans, policy and operations at the Pentagon.  He was the
director of operations for United States forces in Europe from 1989 to 1991.

During that time, Admiral Smith oversaw operations that supported American air
attacks into Iraq from bases in Turkey in the Persian Gulf war, and provided
relief supplies to Kurdish refugees in northern Iraq after the war. In previous
years he was an aircraft carrier commander in the Mediterranean and a fighter
pilot in Vietnam.

In his new job, Admiral Smith will be responsible for enforcing a no-flight zone
over Bosnia and a cease-fire around Sarajevo, providing air support for United
Nations operations and helping to devise a peacekeeping strategy.

"Vice Admiral Smith possesses a thorough understanding of NATO structure and the
requirements of the European theater of operations," Mr. Clinton said in a
statement today.

Admiral Smith was also a principal author of the Navy's new strategy of dealing
with regional conflicts closer to shore, shifting from a cold war emphasis on
fighting the Soviet Navy on the high seas.

Admiral Boorda would replace Adm. Frank B. Kelso 2d, who is retiring two months
early largely as a result of the Tailhook sexual harassment case.

The Pentagon recommended Admiral Boorda, 55, to the White House four weeks ago,
but the announcement was delayed until Washington could consult with its NATO
allies on his replacement.

The Senate must confirm the nominations of Admiral Boorda and Admiral Smith, and
senior Navy officials said hearings before the Senate Armed Services Committees
could be held in the next two weeks.

Admiral Boorda would remain at his headquarters in Naples, Italy, until Admiral
Smith received Senate approval, Navy officials said.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 15, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

PENTAGON IS WARY OF ROLE IN BOSNIA

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 12


Three weeks after the threat of NATO air strikes quelled the fighting in
Sarajevo, the Pentagon's top civilian and military officials have taken to the
hustings, not to boast about their success but to slow the calls for further use
of the United States military.

As the Serbs continued their attacks on other Bosnian cities and towns, and as
calls from the Balkans for greater United States involvement grew louder,
Defense Secretary William J. Perry delivered a speech last week in which he
raised the specter of Vietnam and outlined the tests that should be satisfied
before the threat of NATO air strikes was applied to other cities.

Gen. John M. Shalikashvili, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
reinforced the point in blunter terms. "There were very specific conditions
around Sarajevo that lent themselves to the application of air power, conditions
that don't exist in any other places in Bosnia today," he told reporters last
week.

Fear of Open-Ended Missions

The Pentagon is clearly willing to fulfill its obligation to protect United
Nations peacekeepers with close air support if they need it. But taking on new
obligations to protect Bosnian Muslims is another matter, and the Pentagon has a
longstanding fear of being drawn into open-ended foreign engagements.

So Mr. Perry and others have put themselves in an odd position: rather than
promote the strengths of the military, they are playing down its capability and
seeking to restrict the situations in which air strikes might be used.

Some specialists say that such remarks could inadvertently give the Serbs a
green light to press the fighting in places other than Sarajevo and undermine
Mr. Clinton's diplomatic efforts to present a resolute face to the warring
parties.

"If this turns out to be a reversal to old Pentagon attitudes about the use of
force in Bosnia, it is quite possible we could undermine the momentum behind our
promising peace initative," said Morton Abramowitz, president of Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace and a former senior State Department official.

Mr. Perry's comments have also become a source of contention within the Air
Force. One officer who helped plan the air attacks during the Persian Gulf war
said the remarks reflected "a lack of understanding of how you can employ air
power to compel others to do what you want them to do."

Broader Debate About Military

From the start, Bosnia has been part of a broader debate about how to use
military power in the post-cold-war world. Bosnia does not fit the classic
Pentagon war scenario, in which the purpose of military action is not to apply
military pressure on a belligerent and encourage a diplomatic settlement, but to
win a decisive victory and occupy territory.

The Pentagon's first response, as advocated by Gen. Colin L. Powell, the former
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, was that there was no one way to slow the fighting
short of a vast infusion of ground troops.

When the Clinton Administration took office it began to question the Pentagon's
"all or nothing" approach and focused on more limited uses of force for more
limited political objectives, like lifting the siege of Sarajevo.

At the same time, Washington offered to send peacekeepers to Bosnia only if a
comprehensive settlement was reached. That policy stayed rock firm despite
appeals by the United Nations, and the issue of whether and how peacekeeping
troops should be sent has now been overshadowed by the debate over air power.

Success of Sarajevo Ultimatum

After months of wrangling within NATO, and a mortar attack on Sarajevo that
killed 68 people, the alliance issued an ultimatum to the Serbs to pull out or
face air strikes. For the first time in the Bosnian war, diplomacy was backed up
with a credible threat of force.

The success of that ultimatum led the national security adviser, Anthony Lake,
Secretary of State Warren Christopher and others to examine how similar threats
might be used to end fighting in other towns.

Administration officials say that the new Pentagon team of Mr. Perry and General
Shalikashvili is more flexible about using force for limited aims than their
predecessors, Les Aspin and General Powell, and that the issue of expanding the
use of air power to protect other Muslim enclaves is still open.

Still, the Pentagon is raising the caution flag.

In his first major speech on Bosnia, Mr. Perry said air raids could not be
extended to protect other Muslim enclaves unless the strikes would improve the
prospects for a diplomatic settlement and reduce civilian casualities. He also
argued that air power could not protect most of the Muslim enclaves because they
were being attacked by small arms and not by large artillery pieces that would
be identifiable from the air.

Casting the issue in terms of the heated debate over Vietnam, Mr. Perry said air
power in situations where the combatants were close together could increase
civilian casualties. "I recall the observation from the Vietnam War that we had
to destroy the village in order to save it," he said.

Gulf War Is Recalled

But Eliot A. Cohen, a professor at the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced
International Study and the former director of a Pentagon study of air power in
the gulf war, said Mr. Perry's comments reflected an "overly constricted" view.

During the gulf war, for example, the allies bombed the Iraqi commanders who
were giving the orders and destroyed key installations in the rear areas; air
strikes were not limited to the troops in the field who were firing the
artillery shells or driving the tanks.

Mr. Cohen said that Mr. Perry's concept was more like "law enforcement," in
which individual culprits are identified and arrested, than traditional warfare,
in which strikes are carried out against an array of targets to punish the
adversary.

In a meeting with reporters last week, General Shalikashvili argued that
Sarajevo was a special case because the Serbs' artillery positions were in open
country and United Nations troops could take control of weapons surrendered by
the Serbs.

But some critics say that if the United Nations lacks sufficient troops to
protect "safe" areas outside Sarajevo, it is in part because the United States
has so far refused to supply any ground troops.

The larger point is that the success of the Sarajevo ultimatum has energized,
not settled, the debate over using limited force in the post-cold-war world.

"The key thing we learned is that a credible threat of force caused the Serbs to
back down," said a civilian official involved in Bosnia policy. "Instead of
saying that we can't build on this principle because no other city matches
Sarajevo precisely, we should be looking for new ways to use air power. Without
continued military pressure on the Serbs, no real peace agreement will be
possible."

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jean-Sebastien Fortin, from Charlevoix, Quebec, operations
officer for a Canadian United Nations peacekeeping detachment, greeting a local
Serbian woman with her sheep yesterday while walking back to base camp from an
observation post south of Gracac, Croatia. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 15, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 921 words



International A3-14

CRACKDOWN IN ISRAEL
Israel searched houses for weapons and detained a settler after outlawing two
militant Jewish groups. It said it will continue to move against the radicals.
A1

'NON' TO ENGLISH
In its continuing battle against the English language, France is considering a
law that would create a barrier against any further foreign-language incursions.
A1

A GESTURE TO RUSSIA
Secretary of State Christopher stopped in Russia for talks with the Foreign
Minister, in a gesture to assure him that Washington does not take Moscow for
granted.  A7

U.S. ARMS PROGRAM DEFENDED
Defense Secretary William J. Perry said that he supports military cooperation
with Russia but that the United States should continue its nuclear weapons
programs as a hedge against instability there.  A6

GERMAN LEADER'S WOES
The Chancellor of Germany, Helmut Kohl, a leader in Europe for 11 years, appears
to be in trouble leading up to national elections in October, largely because of
the country's economy; but he says he is not worried.  A14

CAUTION ON BOSNIA FORCE
Despite calls for expanded military involvement in Bosnia, United States
officials are raising the specter of Vietnam, saying certain conditions should
be met before expanding NATO threats of air strikes.  A6

NO PROGRESS IN CHINA
The talks between the United States and China ended with the two sides still far
apart on human rights, and China blamed the United States for the lack of
progress.  A3

TOUGH WORDS FOR THE I.R.A.
After three I.R.A. attacks on Heathrow Airport, Britain and Ireland rebuffed a
request from the Irish Republican Army for concessions in terms for peace
negotiations over Northern Ireland.  A9

Euro Disney took its first step away from the brink of bankruptcy.  D1

A U.S. plane helping troops leave Somalia crashed off Kenya.  A10

Small countries accused the United States of a power play.  A12

El Escorial Journal: In Spain, believers and doubters.  A4

National A16-21, B6-8

JUSTICE OFFICIAL RESIGNS
Webster L. Hubbell, a member of the inner circle that the Clintons brought from
Arkansas, resigned from a top Justice Department job, saying he wanted to spare
the White House further embarrassment over accusations that he overbilled his
former law firm.  A1

HAUNTED BY TIMES PAST
News Analysis: The essential quality of those in the Clintons' inner circle was
the shared intimacy of times past. But now, that very intimacy is claiming them,
one by one, leaving the survivors in the White House feeling besieged.  A1

STILL WARY ON HEALTH
A New York Times poll shows that the Clinton Administration has made almost no
progress in persuading Americans that its approach will solve the nation's
health care problems.  A1

A health care plan will have its first test in this Congress.  B8

FRAUD CHARGED AT HONDA
Federal prosecutors said they are uncovering a scheme in which U.S. executives
for Honda Motor took more than $10 million in bribes and kickbacks from car
dealers for new dealerships and popular cars.  A1

LITTLE ENTHUSIASM
In Representative Dan Rostenkowski's Chicago district, there were few campaign
buttons and lots of indecision on the eve of a tough primary for an influential
Democrat scarred by ethics troubles.  A16

KEEPING A PROMISE
The Administration is stepping in to help an Ohio representative who voted for
the North American Free Trade Agreement and who is now being punished by labor.
A18

PACKWOOD RELENTS
Senator Bob Packwood gave up his battle and said he would turn over his diaries
to a Senate ethics panel, a move that could set the stage for public hearings
into his sexual and official conduct.  A21

PENSION MONEY FOR HOUSING
Two of the nation's largest pension funds announced that they would help finance
housing for low-income families. Administration officials hailed the move.  A21

AIR TRAFFIC REVAMPING
The Administration is proposing to move control of the air traffic-control
system from the Federal Aviation Administration to a Government-subsidized
corporation.  B6

Shelbyville Journal: A town builds a house for 28 Haitian children.  A16

Metro Digest B1

GAINS AGAINST TB SEEN
Saying that concerted efforts to control the spread of tuberculosis seem to be
paying off, Federal health officials announced that New York City experienced
its most significant drop in new cases in 15 years.  A1

Science Times C1-16

FLAWED CANCER STUDY BACKED
A re-analysis of a study comparing mastectomy and lumpectomy, excluding
falsified data, is said to support its conclusions that the treatments have the
same survival rates for most women.  A1

A curious sea creature shed light on kidney stones in people.  C1

Arts/Entertainment C17-22

The future of the New-York Historical Society.  C17

Music: Critic's Notebook C17

Television: Berle looks back.  C17

Business Digest D1

Obituaries B10

Fashion Page B9

Sports B11-17

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

Israel gets tough with its own.

Parading the wrong message.

Haiti: the plan no one wants.

Neglect of the CUNY board.

Letters

Russell Baker: Mired in stardom.

A. M. Rosenthal: The way she died.

Milton Viorst: Pay the settlers to leave.

Walter Cronkite: caveat spectator.

Chronicle B6

Chess C16

Crossword C22

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Lawyers Draft Agreement in Silicone-Implant Suit

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 769 words

DATELINE: BIRMINGHAM, Ala., March 15


Negotiators for recipients of silicone breast implants and for most of the
companies that made the devices are preparing to submit to a Federal judge their
agreement in the $4.75 billion settlement of the nation's largest
product-liability dispute.

Ralph I. Knowles, representing the plaintiffs, said that both teams of
negotiators would meet on Wednesday in Tuscaloosa, Ala., and hoped to present a
signed draft of the agreement that night to Judge Sam C. Pointer Jr. of Federal
District Court in Birmingham, who supervises all Federal breast-implant
litigation.

If approved by Judge Pointer, the settlement would make available about $3.6
billion in compensation to the thousands of women around the world with
illnesses allegedly related to the silicone implants.

J. Michael Rediker, another counsel for the plaintiffs, said extensive work
continued today on the wording of the agreement, which Mr. Rediker described as
"one of the most complicated structures in the history of civil litigation."

And Mr. Knowles said, "Major points are still being negotiated."

Participants in the discussions said that if Judge Pointer gave conditional
approval to the agreement, public notice would be given so that all women who
have had implants would have a chance to review the terms of the settlement.
Then they may accept the agreement or opt out of it and pursue individual
claims, as long as they do so by the opt-out date, which has yet to be set.
Formal approval by Judge Pointer will come only after public hearings, to be
scheduled over the next few weeks, lawyers said. Following that approval, women
with implant-related illnesses could decide as early as the fall whether they
want to apply for compensation or pursue individual litigation.

Judge Pointer has warned lawyers not to advertise for clients to come forward
and has limited legal fees to 25 percent of the settlement.

More than a million women are estimated to have received implants before the
Food and Drug Administration halted their use. More than a thousand women say
they have been injured by leakage from the implants and initiated individual law
suits.

Manufacturers that have participated in the most recent negotiations include Dow
Corning Corporation, a joint venture of Dow Chemical Company and Corning Inc.,
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company and Baxter International Inc.

Though breast-implant lawsuits have been initiated in various parts of the
United States, negotiations of the settlement have been confined to Birmingham
to avoid expensive duplication. An initial statement of principles was reached
in September 1993 by negotiators from both sides. Most major business points
were nailed down over the weekend in Birmingham, participants in the
negotiations say.

The Minnesota, Mining and Manufacturing Corporation is the only major
manufacturer of implants not included in the settlement thus far. 3M and two
other companies lost a jury verdict of more than $27.9 million in a Houston
breast-implant case earlier this month. 3M has said it plans to appeal the
Houston verdict.

Whether 3M eventually becomes a party to the settlement may depend on how much
it is prepared to contribute to the settlement fund, a lawyer involved in the
negotiations said.

A recent decision by the United States Supreme Court not to reopen a settlement
in a product-liability case involving the defoliant Agent Orange may have
encouraged negotiators to reach a tentative agreement in the breast-implant
litigation.

Some of the companies being sued feared that if they agreed to the terms of any
settlement and contributed money to a settlement fund, they would still be
subject to new lawsuits from women who recently discovered that they are
suffering from implant-related illnesses. The Agent Orange precedent appears to
have eased those fears.

In that case, Vietnam veterans were awarded more than $180 million from the
chemical's manufacturers. The Court refused to reopen the settlement to include
plaintiffs who said they did not know of their injuries at the time and had thus
not participated in the original settlement.

Lawyers for the plaintiffs in the breast-implant settlement pointed out that
they did not represent individual women. Instead, they are working on behalf of
the 17-member plaintiff steering committee appointed by Judge Pointer to
represent the interests of a potential class of plaintiffs. Only after
conditional approval has been given to the agreement will a motion be filed in
Federal court for class certification. That motion could come as early as the
end of this week, a negotiator said.


LOAD-DATE: March 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
A.T.& T. TO PARTICIPATE IN SOUTHEAST ASIA CABLE VENTURE

BYLINE: Associated Press

SECTION: Section D;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 80 words


The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that it would
participate in the construction of the first undersea fiber optic cable system
linking Vietnam, Thailand and Hong Kong. A.T.& T. said it would join 18 other
telecommunications companies and regulatory agencies in Southeast Asia and
Australia in building the 2,108-mile system. An average of about 7,800 miles of
undersea cables are being constructed annually in the Pacific region, the
company said.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Singapore Adds Flights

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 14; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 71 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, April 12


Singapore Airlines has added flights to the United States, Bangladesh and
Vietnam, and it plans to expand service later this year to Japan, Hong Kong and
the Philippines. There will now be five flights a week to Ho Chi Minh City, the
former Saigon, and to Dhaka, Bangladesh, the airline said today. The new United
States flight, to Los Angeles via Taipei, Taiwan, brings to 28 the number of
United States flights each week.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 17, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

AT HOME WITH: Shirley MacLaine;
A Free Spirit Of a Certain Age

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT

SECTION: Section C;   Page 1;   Column 1;   Home Desk

LENGTH: 1515 words

DATELINE: MALIBU, Calif.


EXCEPT for the sound of the sea outside, it is perfectly still in Shirley
MacLaine's beachfront apartment. She has shifted from talking about movies to
the mystical, pondering the cause of the underlying chaos on the planet.

"To me, it's like we're coming to the end of this millennium," Ms. MacLaine says
in her reasonable, woman-next-door manner. The 59-year-old actress pops a tiny
marshmallow from her fruit salad into her mouth.

It is one of those perfect California winter days, the kind that make Easterners
think about living here despite natural disasters and mystical thinkers. The air
is blue. The sun sparkles on the waves off the Pacific Coast Highway. The
bougainvillea is dazzling.

"We're coming to the end of what is really based on the alignment of the
planets," Ms. MacLaine continues. "You can see it in all these weather changes.
You can see it in human behavior becoming more erratic and bizarre. You're bound
to look into yourself and say: What's going on here? Why does this all seem like
a science fiction movie? Why does the world seem like its having a nervous
breakdown?"

Ms. MacLaine, who has written seven books about reincarnation and psychic
communication, has made it very clear that she does not want to be identified
with kookiness. But since the 1983 publication of her best-selling "Out on a
Limb," in which she described her reincarnations and out-of-body experiences,
her name will be forever linked to a certain brand of mysticism.

The reason she is submitting to a barrage of journalistic intrusions over this
lunch is to promote her latest movie, "Guarding Tess," in which she plays an
irascible Presidential widow who drives her Secret Service agents crazy. The
movie, which opened to favorable notices, is No. 1 at the box office this week.

But there is no escaping the shallow trays filled with psychic crystals
scattered about the apartment (she does insist that the one in front of her be
removed when she is photographed) or the beachfront doormat that says, "Welcome
to U.F.O.'s and their crews."

People don't need to agree with her particular spiritual stance (she says her
philosophical outlook is almost mainstream now, with Hillary Rodham Clinton
talking about a spiritual need to do her work and Bill Moyers dedicating whole
television series to alternative medicine); she just thinks it cynical to
ridicule her beliefs.

"When a person reviews one of my movies or my show, I really think it is tacky,
tacky journalism to make a metaphysical joke about whatever I've done in my
theatrical work," she says. "The 'I wonder what incarnation this is that she
thought whe was playing?' or 'She played it like it was from one of her old
Egyptian lives.' "

Her neighborhood is upscale, but hardly star-powered. Her house doesn't stand
out from the rows of two-storied beachfront homes on an unremarkable street. It
is a dun-colored apartment building with a Chinese-red metal gate. Behind the
gate is a patio anchored by an arched Oriental bridge, again red, and a mass of
evergreens.

Ms. MacLaine owns the building of six apartments, which she built almost 40
years ago. She lives in a second-floor suite behind a door flanked by wind
chimes that nod in the breeze. She lived here with Steve Parker, a producer,
when they were married, and, she adds, "many men."

She dates Andrew Peacock, the former Foreign Minister of Australia.  Distance is
no problem. "I find myself preferring relationships with men that give me a lot
of space," she says. "I don't need to be in constant attendance and neither does
he."

Yvonne Johnson, the dark-haired cook who looks a bit like Ms. MacLaine, opens
the door to visitors. "Sometimes she answers the phone as me, sometimes I answer
as her," says Ms. Johnson, who has been a girl Friday for the star for years.
"I'm Shirley's wife, though I don't sleep with her."

The apartment is sparse, beige-carpeted and, by Hollywood standards, modest.
Polished red driftwood furniture dominates the room. Nearby tables hold pictures
of Ms. MacLaine at various stages in her career; of her and her brother, Warren
Beatty; their parents; of friends like Jack Nicholson; of her daughter,
Stephanie Sachiko; of the Dalai Lama, and of Stephen Hawking, the Cambridge
University cosmologist who has Lou Gehrig's disease and can communicate only
through a computer.

"Stephen Hawking," she says. "I just love that man because he's had to live in
his own universe, and from that extraordinary space within himself he is helping
us understand the secrets of the outer universe." The two were introduced 10
years ago and have been friends ever since.

Despite a reputation for vivaciousness, she is smooth, unruffled, as if moving
on casters. And in all the sleepy beige of the room there are only two bright
spots: her coral-colored hair and a bouquet of bright flowers. Ms. MacLaine is
easy over lunch, explaining what is in the fruit salad. Is this the regular
regimen of the star?

"Nah," she says. "I love fruit, but I'd just as soon eat a piece of chocolate
cake."

Ms. MacLaine is lithe and firm and flexible. "I've learned to eat what I want,
and once I did that, I started eating better," she says.

But enough of that, she adds. This is a lunch to talk up Ms. MacLaine's latest
picture, and so she gamely throws herself into its promotion.

"What goes on with people who are now out of power, who feel that their privacy
is being invaded at every juncture: I just love the frustration and humor in
that," she says of her character, Tess Carlisle. Her co-star, Nicolas Cage,
plays a by-the-book special agent in charge who longs for a more macho duty.

"I love the study of the interplay that goes on in that particular situation,"
she says. "People who are in charge of taking care of people out of power have
their own agendas."

Ms. MacLaine has spent four decades making movies, with roles ranging from the
vulnerable waif in "The Apartment" (1960) to the smart-mouthed hooker in "Irma
La Douce" (1963) to the cantankerous Aurora Greenway in "Terms of Endearment,"
the 1983 film for which she won an Academy Award.

Her last half-dozen movies have featured her playing irascible but lovable women
of what she calls "an indeterminate age." She says she has always found playing
older women interesting because they have "so much wisdom, the parts are
richer." But there is also a slight irritation with the limitations of these
roles.

"They sent me the script, which said Tess Carlisle, 75, and I thought: Should I
be insulted or should I realize that this is a compliment as long as I can see
the gold under here?" Ms. MacLaine says. "So I made one change in the script as
I read through the whole thing. I just went back and where it said Tess
Carlisle, 75, I put Tess Carlisle, 57, and didn't change another damn thing."

And how old then is Tess Carlisle in Ms. MacLaine's mind?

"She's a woman of indeterminate age," says Ms. MacLaine, who wore makeup and a
wig in the film to make herself look older. "She's too old for a lot of the
other Hollywood actresses to play."

What Ms. MacLaine longs for -- as what 40-plus woman does not -- is a film that
would portray a woman of a certain age as vital, dynamic, sexy. "If they would
only write for someone over 45 a love story," she says.

Ms. MacLaine is not interested in making such a movie herself, she says. "I can
barely put up with questions of 'How do you see this character?' " she says. But
she said she is writing another book that will deal with just that kind of
woman.

That woman would have to be as complex as Ms. MacLaine, ambitious enough to live
on tomato ketchup and pickles when she arrives in New York to work on Broadway.
She would have to have one of those fairy-tale occurrences to thrust her into a
starring role, as did Ms. MacLaine, when she became Gladys in "The Pajama Game"
after the star, Carol Haney, injured her ankle a few days before the show's
opening in 1954.

She would have to be a member of the 1960's gang of actors called the "rat
pack," a group that included Frank Sinatra, Dean Martin, Sammy Davis Jr. She
would have to be socially and politically active, campaigning for politicians
like the Kennedys, Senator George S. McGovern, for civil rights, against the
Vietnam War.

And, "Oh, of course," she would have to be interested in the spiritual and
mystical, she says with a wave of her hand.

She adds that she takes the jokes about her beliefs with a grain of salt as long
as they are not connected with her creative work. Later that day in an
appearance on the "Tonight" show, when Jay Leno congratulates her on her 60
years on the planet, she says, "Don't you mean 4,000?"

She explains her attitude: "A sense of humor is a good thing to help carry you
through, especially if you wonder whether this is all there is."

And is this all there is?

"I don't think so," she says. "I live it like this is all there is because this
is the only time I'll be this. But I don't believe in what the Indians and the
Buddhists call transmigration of souls. I don't believe I was an ant."

NAME: Shirley MacLaine

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: At 59, Shirley MacLaine says she enjoys playing older women, as
in her new film, "Guarding Tess," because they have "so much wisdom." (Michael
Grecco for The New York Times) (pg. C1); Shirley MacLaine as Tess Carlisle and
Nicolas Cage as Doug Chesnic in "Guarding Tess." (TriStar Pictures) (pg. C10)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 17, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By CAROL LAWSON

SECTION: Section B;  Page 4;  Column 5;  Style Desk

LENGTH: 225 words


The year: 1966.

The place: A Marine encampment in the northern part of South Vietnam, near Phu
Bai.

A helicopter landed, and DAN RATHER jumped out with a microphone and a camera
crew. He quickly surveyed the troops, looking for a soldier who could tell his
viewers in the United States about the war for the evening news.

In an instant he found his man, a young Marine lieutenant from New York City,
RAYMOND W. KELLY.

Years later, when Mr. Kelly became New York City's Police Commissioner, Mr.
Rather had the nagging sense that there was something familiar about him, but he
didn't know what. "Then, at a benefit, we talked for a few minutes, and it came
back with a rush," Mr. Rather said.

On Monday night, Mr. Rather will be master of ceremonies at a retirement dinner
at the Sheraton New York Hotel for Mr. Kelly, who left the Police Department
when Rudolph W. Giuliani became Mayor in January and replaced him as
Commissioner with William J. Bratton.

Mr. Rather said that he remembered selecting Mr. Kelly for an interview in
Vietnam for two reasons: "He was very calm, and he looked the part. If you were
casting someone for a role under John Wayne, you would cast Ray Kelly."

Meanwhile, Mr. Kelly is hardly retired. He said that he and Theodore Kheel, the
labor lawyer, were talking about going into law practice together.


LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Plans Overhaul on Secrecy, Seeking to Open Millions of Files

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 900 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 17


At President Clinton's instruction, the National Security Council has drafted an
order that would overhaul Government secrecy rules, make public tens of millions
of classified documents from the cold war and reduce the number of new secret
records, Government officials said today.

The order would create the least secretive policy on Government records since
the birth of the modern national security apparatus in 1947.

The order would require the automatic declassification of secret documents after
25 years. Only the head of an agency, like the Secretary of Defense or the
Director of Central Intelligence, would have the power to stop a document's
release. Newly created secret documents would be declassified after 10 years at
most. The new order would also establish a Government-wide database and
directory of declassified documents available to the public.

The policy calls for Government officials to err on the side of openness when
weighing whether a document should be classified in the first place. That would
reverse the balancing act required under the prevailing executive order issued
by the Reagan Administration in 1981. Today the presumption is that documents
should be secret; once secret, they can remain sealed indefinitely.

A Year of Debate

President Clinton ordered a review of secrecy rules last April. After nearly a
year of heated debate, the council today sent the draft Presidential order to
the Central Intelligence Agency, the Pentagon, the State Department and other
agencies for comment. If President Clinton signs it, as expected, the new rules
could begin to take effect by the end of the year.

By the end of the century, most military and intelligence records from the
beginning of the cold war to the end of the Vietnam war would be available to
scholars and students of American foreign policy, Government officials said.

Billions of pages of secret records from those decades are locked away at the
National Archives, the Pentagon, the C.I.A.'s headquarters, the State Department
and in classified document depositories throughout the nation. Scholars of the
cold war liken their knowledge of its inner workings to a few islands jutting
above the surface of a secret sea.

The ocean of classified documents is so large that no one in the Government
knows how many secret records are in it. It includes yellowing papers from 1916,
before the American entry into World War I, analyzing that war in Europe. But
among its other documents are Pentagon assessments of the benefits of launching
a pre-emptive war against the Soviet Union in the 1950's, C.I.A. analyses of the
Vietnam war and White House records of plans to recreate a national government
if Washington were hit by a nuclear bomb.

Historians Encouraged

Government officials who support the new order gave The New York Times an
18-page summary of its main points, on the condition that the officials not be
identified. Historians and researchers expressed guarded pleasure at its tone
and content.

"It's very encouraging," said John Lewis Gaddis, a leading cold war historian
who serves on a C.I.A. panel that is slowly declassifying some documents from
the 1940's and 1950's. "We have had, however, a lot of experience with
encouraging directives coming from the top and then seeing the implementation of
those directives fall short. It certainly helps to have a signal coming from the
top that openness should be the rule."

Under the new order, much sensitive information would still be kept secret,
including the identities of foreign agents working for the C.I.A., war plans,
weapons technologies, intelligence methods like code-breaking techniques and
data that could help a foreign power create weapons of mass destruction.

The C.I.A.'s general counsel, Elizabeth Rindskopf, said that while the
intelligence agency agrees that "the end of the cold war has shown the need to
overhaul the classification system," it remained wary of automatically releasing
25-year-old documents and declassifying new secret records after a decade.

'Errors Can Result in Death'

Ms. Rindskopf, testifying on Wednesday before the House Permanent Select
Committee on Intelligence, noted that the C.I.A. is required by law to protect
its sources and its methods. "We must guard against the release of documents
that have passed the scheduled declassification date but contain information
that still merits protection," she said.

"Where human sources are involved," she added, "errors can result in ruined
reputations, imprisonment or even death."

Former intelligence officials say that foreign spies can exploit declassified
documents even if they do not contain lethal information. They use the analogy
of a jigsaw puzzle, saying even a half-completed puzzle can reveal the picture
on the box.

The House and Senate Intelligence Committees are considering legislation similar
to the draft executive order. Advocates of new secrecy laws say legislation can
have a more lasting effect than an executive order.

The draft Presidential directive would create a far more open system than one
proposed to the National Security Council last year by a Government panel
staffed largely by military and intelligence officials. That proposal would have
ordered the release of most Government documents after 40 years. Its provisions
drew an outcry from advocates of Government openness.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Samuel Perry, 53, Psychoanalyst Honored for AIDS Studies, Is Dead

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 399 words


Dr. Samuel Wesley Perry 3d, a Manhattan psychoanalyst noted for his studies of
the mental aspects of illness and injury, including burns and AIDS, died on
Tuesday at his home in Tenafly, N.J. He was 53 years old.

The cause of death was pancreatic cancer, said his wife, Anna.

Dr. Perry, the scion of generations of physicians, was professor of psychiatry
and associate chairman of research at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical
Center, where he had been conducting his work since 1977. He was also in private
psychoanalytic practice throughout his career.

He was a native of New Castle, Pa., graduated from Princeton University,
received his medical training at Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, and trained at the American Psychoanalytic Association. Except for two
years in the Air Force treating some of the first returning American prisoners
of the Vietnam War, he did all his research first at Columbia and then at New
York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.

Studies on Burn Injuries

His early studies centered on severe burn injuries and post-traumatic syndrome
affecting not only the victims but the attending staff as well. As he tested
methods of pain relief during debridement -- cutting away dead tissue -- he
broached the issue of undermedication by reluctant clinicians.

In his work on AIDS, Dr. Perry found a need to document the psychological course
of prolonged infection and made a record of adults tested positive for H.I.V.,
the virus that causes the illness. This led him to conclude that most
H.I.V.-infected patients were able to cope reasonably well over time if given
proper counseling. His commitment to such AIDS counseling earned him the
National AIDS Education Award from the Public Health Service.

He was the author or co-author of nine books and more than 200 scientific
articles and book chapters. He was recently elected to the editorial board of
The Archives of Psychiatry. This year he also received the Distinguished
Research Award from Columbia's Psychoanalytic Center, where he was a training
and supervising analyst.

Besides his wife of 28 years, Anna Smiley Perry, he is survived by two
daughters, Maren and Kimberly; a son, Daniel; his mother, Elizabeth Brumbaugh
Perry of New Castle; two sisters, Ann Mayberry of Pittsburgh and Susan Farmer of
Del Mar, Calif., and a brother, James B., of Linwood, N.J.

NAME: Samuel Wesley Perry 3d

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Samuel Wesley Perry 3d

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY BRIEFS

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 116 words



ALCATEL SUBMARCOM, Paris, a unit of Alcatel Cable S.A., will share a $128
million contract with Fujitsu Submarine to supply and install a fiber optic
undersea telecommunications system linking Thailand, Vietnam and Hong Kong.

GENERAL SIGNAL CORP., Stamford, Conn., a manufacturer of equipment for the
process control, electrical and industrial technology industries, announced a
program to repurchase up to 3.4 percent, or 1.6 million shares, of its common
stock during the next two years.



WOOLWORTH CORP., New York, said its Woolworth Canada Inc. unit had completed the
sale of 122 of its 142 Woolco discount department stores to Wal-Mart Stores
Inc., Bentonville, Ark.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 18, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Art in Review

BYLINE: By HOLLAND COTTER

SECTION: Section C;  Page 23;  Column 5;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 307 words



Chris Burden
 Gagosian Gallery
 136 Wooster Street
 SoHo
 Through April 2

Like many of his younger colleagues, Chris Burden assumes the perspective of a
child in his commentarial art. A few years ago, he filled a room with hundreds
of toy-size submarines suspended from threads to illustrate a statistic of
military spending; more recently, in "Medusa," he created an immense globe
covered with model trains to suggest a world overrun by ecological catastrophe.
Sometimes the ideas work, sometimes they don't. The delicacy of the ships gave
an unexpected spin to their message, but the jeremiad of "Medusa" was too
obvious to warrant all the fuss.

In his current show, Mr. Burden gets the perspective right. He has lined the
walls of Gagosian's front gallery with a sleeve-to-sleeve cordon of Los Angeles
Police Department uniforms, accurate to the last detail except that they are
each 8 feet tall, visually shrinking everything and everyone in sight to
children's size. This doesn't take much doing, because the sculptures that make
up the rest of the show are Lilliputian to begin with.

The five pieces titled "America's Darker Moments," for example, depict among
other things the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, the My Lai massacre
in Vietnam and the bombing of Hiroshima as tableaus of tiny, souvenir-size cast
tin figures. Smaller still are the minute infantrymen and the cluster of tiny
toy bombs in the gallery's back room. Although only one piece, "Perfect but
Cruel," with two doll-size embroidered Chinese foot-binding slippers set beside
model battleships, takes Mr. Burden's meditations on power in a really
interesting direction, his overriding suggestion that the facts of history are
mere playthings -- of gods, politicians and, of course, of artists -- is deftly
stated.   HOLLAND COTTER

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              274 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By Laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 28;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 929 words


NOBODY NOWHERE: The Extraordinary Autobiography of an Autistic
By Donna Williams. Avon, $10.
The author describes the tortured inner world she lived in for years, unable to
accept human contact and yet longing for it. Detailing her fitful progress
toward an independent life and also including advice for families of autistic
people, the book offers "fascinating testimony to an intelligence undimmed by
mental turmoil," Daniel Goleman said here last year.
OPERATION SHYLOCK: A Confession
By Philip Roth. Vintage International, $12.
In this novel, a writer who just happens to be named Philip Roth and who is
recovering from a breakdown discovers that another man is impersonating him
quite successfully in Israel. His confrontation with his doppelganger forms the
substance of the plot, which involves both men in Israeli politics and a debate
over the future of the Jews. Last year our reviewer, D. M. Thomas, said:
"Despite the seriousness of its theme, the book carries the feeling of creative
joy. One feels that Mr. Roth feels that he's let rip." Vintage has also reissued
two of the author's earlier books, both with autobiographical elements. MY LIFE
AS A MAN ($11) concerns the obsessive and disastrous early marriage of a writer
named Peter Tarnopol. Mr. Roth "can be not only funny but lyrical," Morris
Dickstein said here in 1974. GOODBYE, COLUMBUS: And Five Short Stories ($11),
Mr. Roth's first book, comprises the now famous love affair of Neil Klugman and
Brenda Patimkin, as well as various meditations on American Jewish life. In 1959
The New York Times's reviewer, William Peden, called the author "a keen recorder
of an indecisive generation."


TURNING POINT: A Candidate, a State,
and a Nation Come of Age
By Jimmy Carter. Times Books/Random House, $12.
The former President looks back on his first political race, when he ran for the
Georgia State Senate in 1962 and won only because he challenged the tainted
returns produced by stuffing ballot boxes. The result "is an interesting book,"
Numan V. Bartley said here last year, and "reveals a good deal about Jimmy
Carter."
VINDICATION
By Frances Sherwood. Penguin, $10.95.
This novelization of the life of Mary Wollstonecraft, the 18th-century English
feminist, is more a work of the imagination than of history, portraying its
subject as a subservient lover and abusive mother. Last year our reviewer,
Margaret Forster, objected strongly to these distortions, but found the author
"devoted to her subject. The pages . . . exude enthusiasm." Wollstonecraft can
be judged by her own words in 800 YEARS OF WOMEN'S LETTERS, edited by Olga
Kenyon (Penguin, $11.95), a collection of correspondence that also includes the
voices of Heloise, Lucrezia Borgia, Elizabeth I, Edith Wharton and Virginia
Woolf, as well as many less famous. It is "a book for pleasant voyeuristic
browsing," one critic said last year. Another writer and feminist is the subject
of FANNY FERN: An Independent Woman, by Joyce W. Warren (Rutgers University,
$14.95). Fanny Fern was the nom de plume of Sara Willis (1811-72), who survived
single motherhood by becoming the most highly paid newspaper writer of the time.
The author "tells her story well, including plentiful servings of Fern's raucous
prose," Janet H. Murray said here in 1992. Female contributions are also the
theme of FEMININE INGENUITY: Women and Invention in America, by Anne L.
Macdonald (Ballantine, $14). Celebrating inventions ranging from the fire escape
and the Snugli to the drug AZT, this book shows that most female patent seekers
prevailed "by struggling stubbornly against masculine -- and societal --
disbelief or disapproval," Iris Poliski said here in 1992.
WOMAN OF THE INNER SEA
By Thomas Keneally. Plume, $9.95.
The 20th novel by the author of "Schindler's List" concerns Kate
Gaffney-Kozinsky, who flees to the Australian outback after she loses her
husband through infidelity and her children through tragedy. Last year our
reviewer, Susan Fromberg Schaeffer, said the author "asserts and makes
convincing the very serious belief that each of us has a necessary place."
DREAM MAKERS, DREAM BREAKERS: The World of Justice Thurgood Marshall
By Carl T. Rowan. Back Bay/Little, Brown, $12.95.
A civil rights champion long before he joined the Supreme Court, Thurgood
Marshall personified liberalism while it was still a dignified term. He deserves
a better biography, Laura Kalman said here last year, but this book still
"allows us to hear Marshall speak."
WHORES FOR GLORIA
By William T. Vollmann. Penguin, $9.95.
Jimmy, a Vietnam veteran, tries to recapture his love for a prostitute named
Gloria, who may or may not be real. Frequenting San Francisco's Tenderloin
district, he buys women's stories more often than their bodies. In 1992 our
reviewer, Catherine Texier, called this novel "a lyrical poem of the street, sad
and beautiful."
BEHIND THE OSCAR: The Secret History of the
Academy Awards
By Anthony Holden. Plume, $14.95.
This book is jam-packed with Hollywood trivia. But as the actors interviewed
reveal, there is nothing trivial about winning an Oscar. "Mr. Holden's research
is impressive," Barbara Shulgasser said here last year.
KITCHEN
By Banana Yoshimoto. Translated by Megan Backus. Washington Square/Pocket Books,
$8.
The loneliness of a young Japanese woman, coping with grief and trying to be
independent in a tradition-bound country, suffuses this fiction. Last year our
reviewer, Elizabeth Hanson, praised the "endearing characters and amusing
scenes."
   LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              275 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Telling Tales Out of TV Land

BYLINE: By SARAH LYALL

SECTION: Section 9;  Page 1;  Column 5;  Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 1984 words


The barrage probably began in 1992 when Barry Williams, commonly known as Greg
Brady, published his memoirs. "Growing Up Brady: I Was a Teenage Greg" was a
rich mine of trivia, filled with delicious details about Mr. Williams's
off-screen necking with Maureen McCormick, who played his stepsister Marcia; his
unrequited crush on Florence Henderson, who played his stepmother, and the time
he showed up to work high on pot. ("Now there was no doubt," he wrote. "Greg was
going to be one stoned Brady.")

Mr. Williams said in a recent interview that the book "was a turning point in my
acceptance of the past," which is undoubtedly very true. But for Harper
Perennial, the publisher, "Growing Up Brady," which was written with Chris
Kreski, was a cash cow that sold 250,000 copies and spent 15 weeks on the New
York Times paperback nonfiction best-seller list. And its experience emboldened
other publishers, who, being publishers, decided it was time to jump as nimbly
as they could onto what they hoped would be a long and happy bandwagon.

As a result, actors who played characters on "Gilligan's Island," "The Partridge
Family" and "Star Trek" -- to name just a few of the shows -- have written or
decided to write memoirs that may or may not find toeholds in the crowded
market. Nor does the outpouring of books appear to concern some publishers, even
when relatively few of the memoirs perform exceptionally well. "Depending on
whom you speak to, there's a glut of celebrity retrospectives on the market,"
said William Birnes, president of the Shadow Lawn Press in Los Angeles, who
specializes in matching such books with prospective publishers. "But I'm still
getting some very fascinating proposals."

Clearly, publishers are trying to tap the public's relentless obsession with the
1960's and 1970's, particularly the era's television shows. Many of the shows
have returned to the air on nostalgia-fests like Nickelodeon's Nick at Nite,
drawing in a new viewing generation as well as again reaching the sort of
audience capable of appreciating beer commercials in which maturity-impaired
post-teen-agers walk around reciting the names of hit albums from the 1970's
like "Frampton Comes Alive."

"You have a great number of baby boomers who appear to not want to be where they
currently are," said Donna Passannante, a spokeswoman for Barnes & Noble.
"Either they want to be in the year 2000, where everything's computerized, or
they want to be back in the time when they were children and everything was
wonderful."

Dick Friedman, the television editor of People magazine, said that the public
seems to want to know what became of the actors, particularly the younger ones
who fell into the post-television netherworld when their shows went into
syndication. Such children's fates have always been the subject of mean-spirited
speculation. Susan Olsen (Cindy Brady), for instance, was said to have died
after her hair got caught in a school-bus door and she was dragged through the
streets; Ken Osmond (Eddie Haskell, from "Leave It to Beaver") was said to have
turned into a hard-core porn star, and Jerry Mathers (his neighbor Beaver
Cleaver) was said to have been killed in Vietnam.

" T HESE are the kinds of rumors that went around and gained currency but
weren't true," Mr. Friedman said. "You want to know where the characters really
ended up and just revisit them for a while."

The public can do plenty of revisiting, surely, between all the books that have
already been published and those still scheduled to come out. For one thing,
"Star Trek" memoirs are flying out of actors' word processors at warp speed. The
first one was "Star Trek Memories," (HarperCollins, 1993), in which William
Shatner (Captain Kirk) divulges that Mr. Spock's Vulcan hand signal, of a raised
palm with the four fingers split in a V shape, came from the Jewish priestly
blessing and that Walter Koenig (Mr. Chekov, the sexy assistant navigator) was
hired because he looked so much like Davey Jones from the Monkees. The publisher
said that the book, which tapped into a large subculture's insatiable appetite
for even the most obscure information about "Star Trek," sold 333,000 copies. It
spent 11 weeks on the New York Times best-seller list, outselling books like
"The Downing Street Years" by Margaret Thatcher.

Mr. Shatner is working on a book, for which he has been paid $1.35 million by
HarperCollins, that is supposed to be filled with even more tantalizing
behind-the-scenes scoops, in this case about the making of the "Star Trek"
films. At the same time, James Doohan (Mr. Scott, the prickly but lovable
engineer whose job was to repair the Starship Enterprise, the show's cheesy
ship) is writing a memoir for Pocket Books. George Takei (Mr. Sulu, the chief
navigator) is writing, too. And so is Nichelle Nichols (Lieutenant Uhura, the
mini-skirted intergalactic receptionist), whose forthcoming $500,000 book for
Putnam promises to reveal details of her affair with Gene Roddenberry, the
series' legendary creator. (Mr. Roddenberry subsequently married Majel Barrett,
who played Nurse Christine Chapel and who is writing her own book.)

That's not all. "Gilligan's Island" has already spawned "Mary Ann's 'Gilligan's
Island' Cookbook" (recipes by Dawn Wells, who played Mary Ann; published by
Rutledge Hill Press, 1993) and at least two memoirs -- one by Russell Johnson, a
k a the Professor, and one by Bob Denver, Gilligan himself, whose book includes
his years as Maynard G. Krebs on "The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis." Dwayne
Hickman (Dobie) is of course planning his own book, for Citadel Press. "I could
have said some real nasty things, but I decided to wait until my autobiography
comes out when I'm in my 80's," said Mr. Denver, who is just 49.

"Maynard, Gilligan and Me" (Citadel Press) is low on the kind of titillating
behind-the-scenes dirt that helped spur interest in "Growing Up Brady," although
Mr. Denver does reveal that Tina Louise (Ginger in "Gilligan's Island") once
startled him by making love very loudly with her boyfriend in her dressing room.
Apparently, Miss Louise has been loath to speak to her former co-star since the
book came out. "I think she got kind of bent out of shape about that," he said.

Penguin USA chose this winter to release "Lassie: A Dog's Life" by Ace Collins,
which reveals that the wolves Lassie often fought were actually dogs in
disguise. It strives mightily to retire the prevalent myth that Lassie was
played by dozens of different dogs -- one who jumped, one who swam, one who
rescued, et al. Forthcoming books include the "Honeymooners" memoirs of Audrey
Meadows (Alice Kramden), to be published by Crown, and David Cassidy's
reminiscences about life as the pop-singing heartthrob on "The Partridge
Family," which Warner Books has scooped up.

Publishers say they're just trying to capitalize on the prevailing mood. "We're
at a big moment of nostalgia," said Kent Carroll, publisher and editor in chief
of Carroll & Graf, which recently published the memoirs of Chuck Baris, the
creator of shows like "The Newlywed Game" and "The Dating Game." (The nadir of
his career, Mr. Baris reveals in the book, "Confessions of a Talk Show King,"
may well have been when "The Gong Show" featured a pair of barely dressed young
women whose talent was miming oral sex on Popsicles to the tune of "I'm in the
Mood for Love.")

Of course, trends can get carried to absurd extremes, particularly in books. The
question for many former stars, and current publishers, is when does the trend
become embarrassing overkill? And when will the public have had enough?

"You get proposals from everybody," said Steven Schragis, who published Mr.
Denver's book, "really dumb pitches like 'I was once on an episode of "Green
Acres" ' or 'I played the receptionist outside of Mr. Drysdale's office in "The
Beverly Hillbillies." ' It's one thing to be very interested in what Gilligan
himself thought while they were making the series, but it's another thing to
think that the guy who was a gas station attendant with Gomer Pyle has anything
interesting to say after 25 years."

How can you tell which shows will work as books and which won't? The answer is
that you really can't. Book publishing is not like the movie industry with its
focus groups and surveys; with books, it mostly comes down to a publisher's
judgment about what the market will bear and what will catch on.

"There were all those books about old television shows that did very well, and
then the new twist was to get someone from the show to tell it from the inside,"
said Robert Miller, publisher of Hyperion, which has passed on several projects.
"But whenever there's a big success like this, a dangerous glut follows. When it
rains it pours, and it's going to be harder for the individual books to emerge."

For many, "Growing Up Brady" remains the 10 of former television star tell-alls.
"That was the perfect book at the perfect time," Mr. Schragis said. "And that's
the standard we're all still trying to reach."

Any Requests

Of all the television actors and actresses whom you have spent too much time
watching, whose memoir or biography would you like to read?

Edd Byrnes, who played Kookie on "77 Sunset Strip." He was the only cool
character I ever saw growing up. He spoke hip. Every word was like "Hey man" or
"Hey daddy-o."
B. George, director, Archive of Contemporary Music


It's a toss-up between Hazel and Mr. Ed, but I seem to be focused on Mr. Ed. He
was always in character on the screen or off. And it would be a pleasure to read
a celebrity bio that doesn't contain five marriages and four divorces.
Cynthia Wallace, news producer, Reuters Television


It would have to be the actor Richard Deacon, who played Mel Cooley on the "Dick
Van Dyke Show." His sole function was to be insulted by people. He'd be insulted
by the writers and then he'd be insulted by Alan Brady. I want to know how that
felt.
John Groch, film studies instructor, University of Pittsburgh


I would read anything on Jerry Van Dyke, whom I had a major crush on when he
played Rob's little brother on the "Dick Van Dyke Show." After all these years,
he finally is on another hit show, "Coach," and he still has that same charming,
adorably stupid quality which I guess I go for.
Charlene Keel, managing editor, Playgirl magazine


Erin Murphy, who was Tabitha Stevens from "Bewitched." She had a father who was
an advertising executive and a mother who was a witch, and she also could use
her own witchcraft to get whatever she wanted. What a great childhood.
Alex Williamson, producer, "The Montel Williams Show"


Princess Summerfall Winterspring. She was the Indian princess on "Howdy Doody."
She was the first woman I fell in love with.
Stephen Holt, public-access cable television talk show host, "The Stephen Holt
Show"


Nancy Culp, who was Miss Jane Hathaway on the "Beverly Hillbillies." We had
formed a club for her in high school. In truth, it was based on wanting to learn
more about the secret nature of her sex life. We thought we weren't getting the
whole story.
Doug Wright, playwright


Lieutenant Uhura, of course, who was played by Nichelle Nichols. She was the
closest thing there was to a black astronaut -- even if she was basically an
outer space phone operator.
Veronica Webb, model


Jean Stapleton, who played Edith Bunker. She was a comic genius, a great reverse
straight man. And my dad and I used to watch the show and think that she was
exactly like my Aunt Bess -- even the voice.
Liza Featherstone, freelance writer


I'm sick of biographies. Black History Month just passed, and it was biography
after biography after biography. I have no interest in reading another biography
right now about anyone in television or anyone else.
Genette McLaurin, librarian, New York Public Library   ERIC MESSINGER

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Star Trek" memoirs are appearing at warp speed, including an
upcoming one from Nichelle Nichols, above. (Paramount Pictures); Bob Denver's
book also takes in his years as Maynard G. Krebs on "The Many Loves of Dobie
Gillis."; "Lassie: A Dog's Life" reveals that the wolves Lassie often fought
were actually dogs in disguise. (Photofest); Metropolitan Photo Service
(Byrnes), Photofest (Deacon, Summerfall Wintersprig, Culp)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              276 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART;
In L.A., Political Activism Beats Out Political Art

BYLINE: By JONATHAN RABINOVITZ

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 33;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 938 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


WITH SO MUCH ART NOW making political statements, it was probably inevitable
that someone would carry the endeavor to its logical conclusion: take the money
used to support art that addresses social injustice and give it to the poor. Go
straight to the point, as it were.

It happened in January. One of the country's most influential supporters of
contemporary art, the Lannan Foundation in Los Angeles, decided to stop spending
$2 million to $3 million annually to buy works of contemporary art and donate
the money to the rural poor instead.

The foundation will continue to spend several million dollars a year on grants
to museums for shows that are difficult to find money for and will continue to
organize and play host to shows at its own small galleries, as well as to award
literary prizes. But its 1,750-work collection will not be expanded.

The shift in emphasis is a poignant example of the heightened competition for
money between the arts and the social services. Another prominent Los Angeles
collector, Frederick R. Weisman, has cut down on his art buying while stepping
up his support for the poor, the homeless, and the mentally and physically
handicapped. Within the last decade, the Rockefeller Brothers Fund and the
Vincent Astor Foundation in New York have also increased their emphasis on
social needs, like schools and affordable housing, at the expense of cultural
programs.

A survey done in 1992 by the Foundation Center, a clearing house for information
about foundation and corporate philanthropy, revealed that between 1991 and 1992
the share of foundation money devoted to the arts dropped to its lowest point in
years, from 14.1 percent in 1991 to 12.7 percent in 1992, while the percentage
for human services increased by a similar amount.

This small change in the money pie should not be overstated. A number of new
foundations have entered the field, and most of the big ones have said that they
do not plan to cut their contributions to the arts. Still, arts managers at
dozens of foundations have told the Foundation Center that they are under
greater pressure than ever to justify their programs and that increasingly their
grants to arts organizations must include other fields, like education.

UNTIL THE ANNOUNCEMENT, THE Lannan, one of the few foundations devoted solely to
the arts, was a pillar of the contemporary art scene in Los Angeles. Established
in 1960 by the Chicago financier J. Patrick Lannan, it moved to Southern
California from Florida in 1986, when a vibrant gallery culture was flourishing
and Los Angeles seemed poised to become an international art center. In 1991,
the last year for which figures are available, it ranked 143d among the top
1,000 American foundations, with assets of more than $140 million.

With an acquisitions budget larger than that of most museums, the foundation
became famous for buying difficult, sometimes politically charged works that
others steered away from or could not afford. Who else but the Lannan, for
example, would have spent tens of thousands of dollars to commission the Los
Angeles artist Chris Burden to create "The Other Vietnam Memorial," a
13-foot-tall copper-and-steel Rolodex with millions of fictional names on its
cards representing the Vietnamese killed in the war with the United States? When
the Corcoran Gallery canceled the controversial Robert Mapplethorpe
retrospective in 1989, the Lannan quickly provided money to help the show's
supporters find another place in Washington to exhibit the photographs.

So it was a dramatic shift for the foundation to end the acquisitions program
that had been its primary mission. "This was not done lightly," said J. Patrick
Lannan Jr., the foundation's president and the son of its founder. "We feel we
can make a difference for a few people who desperately need it."

Mr. Lannan reached his decision after becoming frustrated over what he called
the country's "lost commitment to eliminate poverty." He was particularly moved
by visits to a Lakota Sioux reservation in South Dakota and the fact that the
entire campus of Sinte Gleska University there, an Indian college, had cost less
than some works his foundation had bought.

"We just felt that the art world wouldn't change that much if we stopped
collecting," he said, "and that we might be able to bring some new thinking to
these other problems."

Many leading art world figures are torn over the issue: they care about the
poor, but they are also concerned about the survival of artists, galleries and
museums. Kathy Halbreich, director of the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis,
called the foundation's move worrisome. "I hope that we don't see this
reallocation of resources to the rural poor as further indication that the arts
will be pitted against social needs," she said. Feeding the hungry and healing
the sick are "critical," she added, but art is "also a life and death issue."

John Walsh, director of the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif., said: "It's
a brave thing for a foundation to change direction, and one has to to applaud
that. But it will deprive the art world of some of the shrewdest collecting
that's been going on. We can only hope that the money is well spent, that it
does improve lives, and that it more than compensates for the loss to the
artists, the dealers, the scholars and the viewing public."

One who was not disturbed by the Lannan's decision was Leon Golub, a political
painter of 40 years' standing. "How much accumulation of contemporary art does
anyone need, anyway?" he said. "You can't compare the needs of artists with the
needs of the rural poor."

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Chris Burden's "Other Vietnam Memorial" -- Who else commissions
memorials to those killed fighting the United States? (Lannon Foundation)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              277 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Oil Industry, That Next 'Elephant' Proves Elusive

BYLINE: By AGIS SALPUKAS

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1885 words


MOBIL executives thought they had a live one about two years ago. The geology
looked promising for a major oil find in Peru. After long haggling over
environmental concerns and hauling equipment into a remote area, the well was
sunk.

"I mean this was classic -- this is the classic way of how to do it," recalled
Lucio A. Noto, chairman of the Mobil Corporation. Yet, "We came up with a dry
well -- $35 million later."

Such stories abound in the industry. Despite intense drilling and huge spending
in many places in Southeast Asia, Latin America and Africa, oil companies have
not made many big strikes.

This lack of new discoveries could ultimately lead to an increase in the price
of oil. While an oil surplus has driven down prices and has weakened the pricing
power of OPEC, renewed economic growth in many countries is making the world
hungry for oil again. And only the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
has the huge oil reserves to meet the increased demand.

With that kind of power, OPEC will be in a better position to control the price
of oil, just as it did so dramatically in the 1970's. That is comforting to the
OPEC ministers as they gather this week for a meeting in Vienna.

It's not that the major oil companies aren't trying. ARCO drilled 13 wells and
spent $163 million in Alaska in 1993, but it came up with only modest finds.
British Petroleum made a large discovery in 1992 in Colombia, which for a while
had the industry anticipating an "elephant field," but that field fell short and
there has been little to crow about since. The last huge oil discovery was made
in the North Sea in the late 1960's.

"Whatever discoveries have been made, they have been smaller," said Constantine
Fliakos, the oil analyst for Merrill Lynch. Nothing has approached the fields of
the North Sea, which have reserves of about 13 billion barrels, and Prudhoe Bay
in Alaska, at about 10 billion barrels.

As a result, many oil companies have moved their exploratory efforts to places
where they have already found a lot of oil, like the North Sea, or are confident
that a lot of oil exists, like the nations that were once part of the Soviet
Union, as well as China, Vietnam and Venezuela.

"In the 1980's they spent a hell of a lot of money and a hell of a lot of time
looking in funny places," said Bill Cline, an oil economist for Gaffney, Cline &
Associates in London. "It didn't work out. Now we are seeing a refocusing to
areas where we know there is oil."

The surge of oil from Alaska and the North Sea put OPEC on the defensive in the
1980's and cut its share of world oil production from more than 50 percent in
the 1970's to about 30 percent in 1985. Since then OPEC's share of the market
has rebounded to 43 percent.

THE OPEC ministers are expected this week to weigh whether to continue
production at 24.5 million barrels a day, or to cut back further to raise oil
prices, which have shown little resiliency.

Whatever their action, many industry experts think that despite OPEC's largely
passive role and a surge in oil from non-OPEC areas, the fundamentals have not
changed for the organization.

For one thing, the lack of major finds has kept the OPEC nations with about 77
percent, or 770 billion barrels, of the world's proven reserves, according to a
recent survey by British Petroleum.

"The current low prices are masking OPEC's long-term strength," said John H.
Lichtblau, the head of the Petroleum Industry Research Foundation, a consulting
group to the energy industry. The price of crude oil for April delivery closed
at $14.88 per barrel on Friday, down from about $20 last spring.

BUT OPEC first has to deal with some short-term problems. The surge of oil
coming from the North Sea, which is expected to reach an extra million barrels a
day by the end of the year, is adding to the world oil surplus of a few hundred
thousand barrels a day, and is keeping prices depressed.

The ability of oil companies to squeeze out more production from mature fields
by using new technology has also added to the surplus.

The expected re-entry of Iraq into the oil market once the United Nations
embargo is lifted, which is expected this year, could force the OPEC countries
to cut production further to absorb the million barrels a day Iraq is expected
to produce.

Combined with recessions in some big consuming countries, these trends have kept
oil prices down.

Nevertheless, the ability of the organization to push up prices is still there.
If Saudi Arabia, the world's largest oil producer and a member of OPEC, should
decide to support a major cut in production, prices will rise, most analysts and
economists agree. Thus far, Saudi Arabia has been unwilling to significantly
reduce its output. The Saudi position, which has led to reduced revenues for the
OPEC nations as the price of oil has fallen, has prevented the organization from
acting.

But that stalemate should not lull consuming nations into thinking that the
organization has lost its influence.

As demand for oil increases, the OPEC nations are the only ones with the reserve
capacity to meet that demand. That capacity is estimated at about 10 percent of
the 25 million barrels a day OPEC pumps.

Meanwhile, production in some major areas, such as the United States, is
continuing to decline. That creates more demand for OPEC oil. In the United
States, domestic crude oil production continued to plunge, falling to less than
6.9 million barrels a day in 1993, the lowest level since 1958.

"The fundamentals are shifting in their favor," Mr. Fliakos, the Merrill Lynch
analyst, said. "Oil demand has been flat for the past four years, but there is a
major recovery under way."

With economies beginning to grow again in much of Asia, India and China, and
with a strong recovery in the United States, he said, the demand for oil is
expected to grow by 3.5 percent to 4 percent this year. Even if demand grows by
just 2 percent, he said, that would add about 1.5 million barrels a day to
consumption, enough to soak up the surplus and put OPEC back in a strong
position.

"The added demand has to come from OPEC," he added. "They are the only ones that
can produce the additional oil that the world is going to need."

As demand recovers, the United States Geological Survey has forecast that OPEC's
share of the market will grow from the current 43 percent to about 50 percent by
2010, making it even more dominant.

At the same time, the chances of oil companies finding the elephant fields that
could cut into OPEC's share have become slimmer as they have shifted exploration
into areas where they have already found oil, such as the North Sea.

The wild cards in this scenario are the former states of the Soviet Union,
including Russia and Kazakhstan, where major oilfields exist and the potential
of finding more is very high.

BUT the drilling there is still many years away for most companies, like Mobil,
the Chevron Corporation and the Amoco Corporation. They plan to invest billions
of dollars in new exploration in the former Soviet Union, but they are still
working out agreements with highly unstable governments.

Meanwhile, the prospect of finding elephant fields elsewhere has dwindled.

Between 1981 and 1987, the 18 largest oil companies in the United States pulled
out of many areas where oil deposits are promising but unproven. Spending for
exploration declined from $14.3 billion to $5.6 billion during those years.
Since then, the oil companies have been spending between $5 billion and $7
billion on exploration each year.

The Exxon Corporation, for example, did extensive exploration in Somalia, Mali,
Tanzania, Mozambique, Chad, Nigeria and Morocco in the early 1980's. Now it is
only in Chad and Nigeria. The Royal Dutch/Shell Group has pulled out of
Madagascar and Guatemala, and has shifted much of its effort to the North Sea.

"Most places we're going into, by and large the governments are very receptive
to having us come in," said Paul J. Hoenmans, the executive vice president for
worldwide exploration and producing at Mobil. "American technology still is the
leader. It is to Houston and Dallas that the world looks."

He said the oil companies could eventually find huge fields "by applying the new
technology in the new areas and avoiding some of the mistakes we've made in the
past by just setting out at random to search for oil."



CHEVRON'S LONG ROAD IN KAZAKHSTAN

THERE is a sea of oil below the flat windswept desert of Kazakhstan, about 25
billion barrels, making it one of the largest oilfields in the world.

But Chevron is getting just a trickle out of the ground. And the oil it is
getting is laden with poison and has a stench, making it difficult to handle and
transport.

What could turn out to be a bonanza for Chevron remains as elusive as the
nomadic horsemen who occasionally appear outside the barracks of the 3,500
workers who are helping Kazakhstan restore its shattered oil industry.

It may be many years before oil flows in large enough quantities to make a joint
venture between Tengizchevroil, the state oil company, and Chevron pay off.
Chevron figures the partnership will spend about $20 billion over 40 years. By
2010, the partnership hopes to be pumping 700,000 barrels a day, bringing in
about $4 billion in revenue a year at today's oil prices.

Chevron has shifted its exploration from areas abroad where oil reserves are
promising but unproven, and from mature fields in the United States to known
fields, such as Tengiz in Kazakhstan. The challenge is not whether oil will be
found, but how to get large quantities out of existing wells and ship the oil to
world markets. After seven years, and after spending more than $300 million,
Chevron is producing only about 30,000 barrels a day, although that is expected
to grow to about 130,000 barrels soon.

Tengiz is a paradox. Its crude oil, the color of light honey, is perfect for
gasoline. But it is also full of poisonous hydrogen sulfide, which must be
removed at a special plant. Workers undergo safety training and carry gas masks.

The oil is also full of mercaptans, sulfur compounds that can cause a stench in
the countryside if they leak from the pipeline. To be commercially viable, the
crude must be transported through Russia, but the Russians limit shipments of
the Kazakh oil in their pipelines because they don't have a recovery system to
contain the vapors.

The partners want to build their own pipeline, at a huge cost, but there is a
problem with where to build it. If it is connected to the existing Russian
system, Chevron and its partner will remain hostage to expensive transport fees.
Other routes would take it through risky areas, like Iran and Iraq.

While production has been restored at about 20 of the 85 wells originally
drilled when Kazakhstan was part of the Soviet Union, oil from just 10 can be
shipped because of the transport restrictions.

The multinational work force is made up mostly of Kazakhs, but there are many
Russians, Hungarians and Americans.

The 250 workers from the United States are learning to live with the harsh
conditions, where temperatures can reach 130 in summer and 40 below zero in
winter. The wind blows powdery sand, making mouths gritty and contact lenses
uncomfortable.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "OPEC's Changing Fortunes" shows average daily crude oil
production for OPEC and the rst of the world from 1973 to 1993. (Sources:
Monthly Energy Review, Department of Energy)

Map: "Narrowing the Search for Oil" shows a map of the world showing locations
of frontier oil explorations in the 1980's and 1990'. (Source: Gaffney Cline &
Associates)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              278 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In Scolding China, Washington Loses Face

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 16;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 675 words


To the Editor:

In August 1944, John S. Service, a career diplomat then acting as political
officer to the United States Army's observer group in Yanan, had a lengthy
conversation with Mao Zedong. The defeat of the Axis powers was in sight, and
Mao was thinking of how to build a new China once the war ended. He told Service
he would be willing to go to Washington and discuss future Chinese-American
relations with President Roosevelt. He never received a reply.

Coolness became overt hostility when the People's Republic of China was
proclaimed in 1951. The United States Seventh Fleet plied the strait separating
Taiwan from the mainland. The United States imposed an economic embargo against
China and pressured its major trading partners to do the same. Guns were fired
in anger just on the other side of Chinese borders, in Korea, then in Vietnam.
China felt threatened. During the Korean War, Gen. Douglas MacArthur boasted his
troops would be "over the Yalu by Christmas."

The effect was to thrust China into the arms of the Soviet Union, which proved
very bad for China and created serious consequences for the United States. The
lesson was not lost on Washington. Friendly relations with China were obviously
in America's best interests. Starting with the visit by President Richard M.
Nixon and Secretary of State Henry Kissinger in 1972, the climate improved,
followed by extensive commercial activities fueled by China's economic boom.

But cold war warriors die hard. Though small in number, they are vociferous.
Their favorite weapon is alleged violations of "human" rights. Against Asian
nations this proves to be not a spear but a boomerang.

The Chinese have a strong sense of dignity and propriety. They think it
presumptuous for a mere infant of a country, historically speaking, to tell a
sovereign state 10 times its age and possessed of a highly cultured
civilization, how to live. China has its own Constitution and a body of laws
guaranteeing internationally recognized civil rights, including the right to a
decent livelihood. The Chinese consider specious the argument that economic
well-being is only a "social," not a "human" right. They believe democracy
cannot survive on an empty stomach, any more than a full stomach can supplant
democracy. They want both, simultaneously.

While most Chinese will admit to some failings in the protection of their civil
rights, they insist that interference in the internal affairs of a sovereign
nation is a violation of international law. Moreover, they claim to be competent
to deal with such problems themselves.

In any event, the Chinese are well aware of America's military incursions into
little countries abroad and its miserable civil rights record at home. They
witnessed the beating of Rodney King on their television news. They read in
their newspapers about American jails overflowing with prisoners -- mostly
black. Their daily press gives wide coverage to United States crime, drugs,
poverty, homelessness, graft and corruption. Such a country, the Chinese
maintain, is not fit to talk about violations of citizen rights in other lands.
America is lacking in moral authority.

And now, to heap absurdity on cant, the statements of visiting American
politicians and trade negotiators make it apparent that they care nothing about
Chinese rights, whether labeled "human" or "civil." They promise to tone down
their slanders immediately, if only the Chinese will grant them more economic
concessions. That is the name of the game.

America's human rights razzle-dazzle has brought loss of face and less respect
for American policy makers in China, and Asia in general. The Chinese made it
clear to Secretary of State Warren Christopher and his delegation that China
will not accept "linkage." It is time Washington stopped the fruitless gesturing
and got on with genuine, mutually beneficial, business.

SIDNEY SHAPIRO
Beijing, March 17, 1994

The writer, long a resident of China, is a member of the Chinese People's
Political Consultative Council.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              279 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Former Admiral Nominated To Be U.S. Envoy to Britain

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 125 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 22


A retired admiral, William L. Crowe Jr., has been nominated to be Ambassador to
Britain, the White House announced today.

Mr. Crowe, who served as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under two
Republican presidents, endorsed Mr. Clinton during the 1992 Presidential
campaign, thus helping him to weather criticism that he had avoided military
service during the Vietnam War.

Mr. Crowe, 69, was appointed Chairman of the Joint Chiefs in 1985 by President
Reagan and served under President Bush; he left the post in October 1989. He is
counselor at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington,
professor of geopolitics at the University of Oklahoma and chairman of the
President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              280 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Hyeres Journal;
Death on the Riviera, or, She Delved Too Deeply

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 932 words

DATELINE: HYERES, France


She was an outsider in the murky politics of the Riviera. But Yann Piat thought
that as a member of Parliament it was safe for her to fight the extortion
rackets, drug trafficking and milking of public funds that flourish on France's
most glamorous and shady playground.

Then, one recent evening on a dark road near her home, two men on a motorcycle
pulled close to her car. Mrs. Piat said to her driver, "What do they want from
me?" Moments later, she was shot to death.

The killing of Mrs. Piat, the first member of Parliament to be gunned down in
modern France, has chilled the nation and unsettled colleagues who knew her as a
courageous politician. But her gangland-style assassination on Feb. 25 has also
put a powerful spotlight on a region where corruption, business and politics
have long coexisted and crimes are rarely solved.

As a result, Paris has sent its own police inspectors to this pretty resort and
the nearby small wine-growing towns. In raids usually happening at dawn, police
officers have already brought in more than 50 citizens for questioning. Among
them are known thugs, local entrepreneurs and the region's leading politicians,
suggesting that the lines between them are not clearly drawn.

2 Held as Murder Suspects

Two local men, those said to be the motorcyclists, are held as murder suspects.
But all of Hyeres still remains obsessed with the question: Who put out a
contract on Mrs. Piat?

"There's no big Mafia, but we do have gangsters in the region and people here
can be rough," the Mayor of Hyeres, Leopold Ritondale, said, recalling that he
himself was ambushed in 1991 by three masked men who beat him up with baseball
bats.

Until a few years ago, Hyeres, a pink and white Mediterranean port of 50,000
inhabitants, had escaped the explosive underworld wars of Marseilles to the west
and the corruption scandals of Nice to the east. The nearby salt flats and
rocks, scented with umbrella pines and cork trees, are among the last wild
stretches of the Cote d'Azur, a coast now largely tamed and paved by developers.

But in the 1980's tourism began to replace wine-farming and fishing and with it
came a new airport, nightclubs, real-estate deals. The refurbished casino is now
three times the size of the little railroad station.

Growth has also attracted "le milieu," as the Cote d'Azur's underworld is known.
Last year, "le milieu" was blamed for throwing firebombs at several buildings,
planting explosives in cars and killing a restaurant owner and two nightclub
operators here.

At Mrs. Piat's offices on the corner of Edith Wharton Avenue, her shaken staff
searches for plausible theories to explain the death of their boss, a mother of
two teen-age daughters, whose life-size campaign pictures now look eerie on the
walls.

Eye on the Mayoralty

Mrs. Piat, 44, had announced her plans to run for Mayor of Hyeres next year, and
local polls showed her in the lead. Born in Vietnam, where her father, a French
soldier, was killed, she was not part of the local cronyism that has long run
politics here. Rather, she dared to take on male rivals from her own Republican
Party, which she joined five years ago after breaking with the far-right
National Front.

One theory here is that Mrs. Piat and her campaigns against violence and
corruption disturbed "le milieu," a posture that could become even more
inconvenient if she became Mayor. A Mayor's powers include granting building
permits and licenses for bars, discos and other new businesses. Mrs. Piat,
suspicious of casinos, which on the Riviera have a reputation for money
laundering, also warned that, as Mayor, she would convert the local casino into
a conference center.

Last year she helped prepare a parliamentary report on the "penetration of the
Mafia in France." And just a week before her death, she filed a request to turn
the salt flats of the Giens peninsula of Hyeres into a nature site, which meant
protecting 2,000 acres of beachfront land slated for development.

A week earlier, Mrs. Piat had visited the tough Interior Minister, Charles
Pasqua, in Paris. Claude Rolandin, her office manager, said she went to complain
about her district's extortion rackets, threats and killings and to ask him for
more police officers. "She told the press about it," Mr. Rolandin said. "Perhaps
this was a little indiscreet."

Political Bosses Questioned

Mr. Pasqua has pledged to get to the bottom of the killing. Indeed, to much
local astonishment, the police have questioned at length the region's two most
powerful political bosses, Maurice Arrecks and Joseph Sercia, the president and
vice president of the Var department, which includes Hyeres.

Compounding the intrigue are reports that among Mrs. Piat's papers, the police
have found the files she was preparing to denounce fellow politicians for
embezzlement of public funds. Moreover, she left behind a letter, written in
1992, citing the names of five people who might be responsible if she should die
a violent death. Among the five are Mr. Arrecks and Mr. Sercia.

As investigators try to unravel this web, a team of treasury agents have been
combing Government records and the books of several real-estate and construction
companies. They are reportedly also looking into Mrs. Piat's own campaign debts
of 1993.

An official familiar with the search said Paris was now getting its closest look
ever at the rich local loom of business and politics. "They are opening the
black box," the official said, "maybe more than one death or more than one
corruption scandal will come out."


NAME: Yann Piat

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The gangland-style killing of Yann Piat, 44, a member of the
French Parliament, has cast a powerful spotlight on the Riviera, where
corruption, business and politics have long coexisted. At her funeral, her two
daughters, Angelique and Laetitia, consoled each other. (Associated Press)

Map of France shows the location of Hyeres.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              281 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 24, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Goldwater Defending Clinton; Conservatives Feeling Faint

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;   Page 1;   Column 5;   National Desk

LENGTH: 1228 words

DATELINE: PHOENIX, March 21


When he said Government had no business trying to outlaw abortion, some people
told him to retire from politics.

When he spoke out in favor of a new Phoenix ordinance protecting homosexuals
from discrimination, and said they should be able to serve in the military, that
got him in more trouble.

And when former Senator Barry Goldwater, an Arizona institution who has been
compared with the Grand Canyon among this state's icons, endorsed a Democratic
woman for Congress over a self-proclaimed "Goldwater Republican" in 1992, he was
called a traitor. The Democrat, Karan English, won.

Iconoclasm in Arizona

Now, after Mr. Goldwater said last week that Republicans in Congress should get
off President Clinton's back about the Whitewater affair, critics say that the
author of "The Conscience of a Conservative," the man sometimes called the
father of modern American conservatism, has become -- close your ears, Rush
Limbaugh -- a liberal.

Calls have been pouring into Republican headquarters at the Barry Goldwater
Center here, demanding that his name be removed from the building. Some
Republicans say he does not deserve to have the high school in Deer Valley, the
boulevard in Scottsdale, the airport wing in Phoenix, or the engineering center
at Arizona State University named after him.

To hear the crestfallen tell it, it is as if George McGovern suddenly decided
the Vietnam War wasn't such a bad idea after all.

"The hero of America's conservative movement is starting to sound like he's lost
it," said Sydney Hoff-Hay, president of the Lincoln Caucus of the Arizona
Republican Party. "It's sad, because the name Barry Goldwater is revered by
people like me."

Other Republicans are even harsher.

"This idea that he's Mr. Republican is a bunch of baloney," said Jay Nenninger,
executive director of the leading anti-abortion group in Arizona. "He's really
becoming a joke."

'I Don't Give a Damn'

Mr. Goldwater denies any change in party stripes, and his supporters say many of
his comments merely reflect his longstanding libertarian beliefs. When asked
about Republican criticism of his recent statements, Mr. Goldwater replied: "You
know something? I don't give a damn."

Later, in a brief telephone interview this week, he said he knew that his
comments on Mr. Clinton would stir up trouble in the party that counts him among
its Hall of Famers.

"I realized that it would raise all kinds of hell with the Republican Party," he
said. "But I've been at odds with the Republican Party before, and that didn't
particularly bother me."

Many Republicans in Arizona have suggested that Mr. Goldwater's recent remarks
have been influenced by his new wife, Susan, a nurse 30 years his junior whom he
met when she visited his house to take his blood pressure. Critics also suggest
he has been swayed by his grandson Ty Ross, who recently announced that he is
gay and has tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS.

But others scoff at the notion that Mr. Goldwater is being manipulated.

"I've known him well for 30 years," said Dodie Londen, chairwoman of the Arizona
Republican Party. "He has never been afraid to speak his mind."

The Goldwater Tradition

At 85, Mr. Goldwater walks with a cane and relies on a hearing aid. But he is
still granite-jawed and has a head of pure white hair, and his aide, Doris
Berry, says he has no major illnesses.  To supporters, he is no less outspoken
now than he was when he first went to the Senate in 1952 and went after unions.

When he was the Republican Presidential nominee in 1964, Mr. Goldwater was
characterized as an extremist. He wore the title proudly, proclaiming, in words
that are perhaps his most famous: "Extremism in the defense of liberty is no
vice. And moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue."

Those words are now evoked by gay rights advocates, who view Mr. Goldwater as a
hero.

"A lot of people who think of themselves as Goldwater Republicans do not know
what it really means to be a Goldwater Republican," said Tom Paniccia, a former
Air Force sergeant who was discharged from the military last year after he had
proclaimed his homosexuality. "He has always had a near libertarian stance on
keeping government out of people's lives."

At the time, Mr. Goldwater wrote a letter on Mr. Paniccia's behalf to Senator
Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who heads the Armed Services Committee and is an
opponent of homosexuals in the military.

Leaders of gay groups around the country are fond of quoting a recent statement
of Mr. Goldwater's: "I don't care if a soldier is straight, as long as he can
shoot straight."

Similarly, he has been outspoken in favor of abortion rights and in his disgust
with fundamentalist Christians who have influenced the Republican Party.

The topper, for many Republicans, came last week, when Mr. Goldwater summoned
reporters to his house in the suburb of Paradise Valley. In a news conference
broadcast live in the Phoenix area, Mr. Goldwater said Republican critics of Mr.
Clinton's handling of the Whitewater matter should "get off his back and let him
be President."

He went on to say, "I haven't heard anything yet that says this is all that big
of a deal."

Mr. Goldwater said he had talked occasionally by phone with Mr. Clinton, who
recently called him "a saint." But he said that his decision to speak out was
his own, and that he had arrived at it after a night of agonizing.

A torrent of calls, most of them negative, to Republican headquarters and
Phoenix radio talk shows followed Mr. Goldwater's statements last week.

Paradise Valley's leading radio station, KFYI, which caters to a conservative
audience, cut off the news conference after about 15 minutes. Barry Young, the
station's program director and a talk show host, said on the air that Mr.
Goldwater had become "an embarrassment."

What irked many callers, Mr. Young said in an interview, was that a former
Republican standard bearer was interfering with party efforts to hurt the
Democrats. "Goldwater should know that when your party is hot on the trail and
barking up the tree, you don't call off the dogs," he said.

In his interview this week, Mr. Goldwater seemed as combative as ever. "I did it
for one simple reason: the President of the United States, in my opinion, should
be allowed to be President."

Personal Liberties

To many supporters, Mr. Goldwater's recent statements are not all that
inconsistent with past remarks. He always championed personal liberty and
minimal government interference with people's lives, they say.

"I don't think Goldwater has moved to the left so much as the Republican Party
has moved to the right," said Peter Crozier, a physicist at Arizona State
University who is a leader of the gay rights movement in Phoenix. "If you look
at Arizona's form of Republicanism, it was always a maverick state, a place
where people could do their own thing."

But critics say Mr. Goldwater's support for making the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr.'s birthday a state holiday, and of the Phoenix ordinance to ban
discrimination against homosexuals, show something else.

"He's worst than a liberal -- he's a liberal who's lost it," Ms. Hoff-Hay said.

Asked if he planned to leave the party, Mr. Goldwater said: "Hell, no. I've been
a Republican all my life, and I don't plan to change."

NAME: Barry Goldwater

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Former Senator Barry Goldwater's recent defense of President
Clinton in the Whitewater matter has infuriated Republicans in Arizona, where
Mr. Goldwater is considered an icon of conservatism. Mr. Goldwater talked to
reporters last week outside his house in Paradise Valley, Ariz. (Associated
Press) (pg. B10)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              282 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 24, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING -- ADDENDA;
Miscellany

BYLINE: By Michael Janofsky

SECTION: Section D; Page 19; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 124 words



* Rick Ender and Lisa Smith have formed Ender Smith Advertising, Atlanta. Mr.
Ender will be managing partner and creative director; Ms. Smith, managing
partner and strategic director. Mr. Ender had been senior vice president and
deputy creative director at McCann-Erickson Worldwide, New York. Ms. Smith had
been a vice president and management supervisor at BBDO/South.


* Backer Spielvogel Bates has agreed to a joint-venture partnership with
Vinexad, a division of the Vietnamese Ministry of Commerce, in Ho Chi Minh City,
becoming the first American agency to receive an operating license in Vietnam.
The client roster for the new agency, known as BSB Vinexad, includes Shell Oil,
Heineken, Mars Confectionary and Ovaltine.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              283 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 25, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

France-Vietnam Deal

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;   Page 5;   Column 6;   Financial Desk

LENGTH: 27 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, March 24


France Telecom has signed a long-term agreement to take part in a $500 million
project to develop Vietnam's telephone network, a Government report said today.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              284 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 25, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Photography;
Farewell Fashion, Hello Art

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KIMMELMAN

SECTION: Section C;   Page 1;   Column 1;   Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1246 words


HAS there been an exhibition that generated more noise before it opened than the
Richard Avedon show that is now at the Whitney Museum of American Art? Not this
season, anyway.

First came the collective groan after David A. Ross, newly installed as the
museum's director, proposed it as one of the largest retrospectives ever
contemplated at the Whitney. Those who knew that Mr. Ross had enjoyed successes
with two previous Avedon exhibitions at museums he headed, in Berkeley, Calif.,
and Boston, weren't surprised. But more than a few people were taken aback that
his first move at an institution dogged by charges of trendiness was a gigantic
display of the work of a master of fashion photography and celebrity
portraiture. Since then, despite being scaled back, the show has caused an
alarming buzz around the museum, like an approaching V-1.

It was hard not to notice that last week The New Yorker, where Mr. Avedon is the
staff photographer, was especially chockablock with Avedon photographs. The
co-publisher of the exhibition catalogue, with an essay by The New Yorker's art
critic, Adam Gopnik, is Random House, which is owned by S. I. Newhouse, who also
owns The New Yorker. (Among the six speakers at a Whitney symposium connected to
the show, called "Photography and the Word," are Random's chief, Harold Evans,
and the New Yorker writers Brendan Gill and Ingrid Sischy.) Eastman Kodak, the
other co-publisher, paid a chunk of the exhibition's cost. And the two companies
recently published "An Autobiography," the first book in a 10-book contract with
Mr. Avedon (the catalogue is the second). Kodak plans to underwrite two more
Avedon shows.

This one is installed on a floor of the Whitney elaborately designed by Mary
Shanahan of Mr. Avedon's studio (she also designed the catalogue). The curator
is not someone from the museum but Jane Livingston (whose fee comes from a grant
given to Mr. Avedon by Kodak to do the show and catalogue).

Ms. Livingston seems to have gone out of her way to comply with Mr. Avedon's
desire that he be taken seriously as an artist, and not thought of as a fashion
photographer: out of 200 photographs in the retrospective, 10 are fashion shots.
If you expect Dovima and the elephants at the Cirque d'Hiver in Paris, forget
it. Forget Sunny Harnett leaning over the roulette wheel at the casino at Le
Touquet. I don't know whether the closer analogy is a Picasso retrospective
without Cubism or a Woody Allen one without the comedies, but in either case,
the disservice is to Mr. Avedon.

Because his fashion photographs are great, and the rest rarely are, despite
their technical brilliance. The asylum inmates and celebrities made to look like
them, the drifters from the American West and American muck-a-mucks in South
Vietnam, the passengers on the Third Avenue El and revelers at the Brandenburg
Gate are here in numbers that only expose Mr. Avedon's limitations. If all
portraits are on some level self-portraits, as he likes to say, that may explain
why Henry Miller, Dwight D. Eisenhower and Groucho Marx resemble one another in
his photographs. But it doesn't make their portraits compelling.

Others are, to be sure: the famous ones of Ezra Pound with his eyes clamped and
Isak Dinesen as a skull in a fur coat and the artist June Leaf with her arms
folded like a mummy's, an unorthodox beauty (and a strange image for Mr. Avedon,
too). The photographs of his father are remarkable because, like the Leaf
portrait, they tap emotions deeper than the cliche of the aging figure in mortal
despair that Mr. Avedon peddles over and over.

You might not weary of this conceit, or Mr. Avedon's others -- above all, a
certain phony candor -- had the show been edited. (If only Alexei Brodovitch and
Marvin Israel, the photographer's mentor at Harper's Bazaar and his former
design collaborator, respectively, were still around.) But the show is too big,
and desperate, almost, to assert Mr. Avedon's high art bonafides. It begins with
New York street scenes, photographed on assignment for Life in 1949, that Mr.
Avedon decided at the time not to publish. Ms. Livingston unearthed them a few
years ago for her book, "The New York School," arguing they belonged with the
works of Robert Frank and Weegee. Mr. Avedon was right in the first place. Some,
like the one of a boy in an empty lot in Harlem striding toward the camera, have
a low-voltage current that's mildly startling, but they can't bear the weight
put on them.

Nor can the ones in the last gallery, the large, bafflingly unmomentous
photographs of a big moment, newly reunified Berlin on New Year's Eve in 1989,
shot for Egoiste magazine. The melodramatic installation with raking lights
seems as contrived as it did at the Carnegie International in Pittsburgh three
years ago.

If Mr. Avedon reminds me of any artist, it is Giovanni Boldini, the Italian
painter. Dimly remembered now, a century ago in his prime he was a vastly
admired and enormously successful portraitist of the rich and fashionable;
someone who was thought to capture the edgy glamour of the fin-de-siecle;
someone uneasy with his commercial reputation and anxious to be respected for
works he believed weightier and nobler than the ones on which his fame rested.

And a virtuoso. Mr. Avedon is that, certainly. The photographs are tours de
force of exquisite printing and meticulous mounting, made to simulate tactile,
highfalutin art objects by the absence of protective glass (as if the prints
were sculptures mounted in frames), and by the loose way some of them hang
unframed on the walls.

In the end it's artifice. But artifice is Mr. Avedon's forte. The familiar
criticism that his photographs are manipulative, contrived, false, misses the
point: his strength, such as it is, is precisely as an aficionado of style. And
he is at his best, as he is in the fashion photographs, when he celebrates that
talent. The problem with his rogues' gallery of drifters and factory workers
from the American West isn't that they're meanly exploitative, as critics have
moaned. Why not complain that Fellini's films give a slanted view of Italy and
Italians? The problem is that the theatricality of Mr. Avedon's portraits isn't
absorbing. They're momentary shockers, at best, and finally opaque.

But the fashion work is something else, as the handful of shots here, like the
one of a pony-tailed Veruschka dancing or a hooded Jean Shrimpton sprinting, can
only hint at. How many other photographers can be said to have distilled the
essence of a moment and milieu, as Mr. Avedon did in the fashion pictures of the
late 50's and early 60's? The paradox is that despite their artifice, they seem
more genuine today than almost any of the angst-ridden portraits do, and more
valuable as expressions of their era.

Too bad that the Whitney has capitulated to Mr. Avedon's mistaken view of his
own work. He has a place in the culture of his time, but not the one this show
claims on his behalf.

"Richard Avedon: Evidence, 1944-1994" remains at the Whitney Museum of American
Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, through June 26. It then travels to the
Museum Ludwig in Cologne, Germany (August to October 1994); the Palazzo Reale in
Milan, Italy (November 1994 to January 1995); the Los Angeles County Museum of
Art (June to August 1995), and the Minneapolis Institute of Arts (February to
May 1996). The show received financial support from Harper's Bazaar and Eastman
Kodak.


LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Essence of a moment: Richard Avedon's 1967 photograph of the
model Veruschka, at the Whitney. (pg. C1); "June Leaf, Sculptor," photographed
by Richard Avedon in Nova Scotia in 1975, at the Whitney Museum. (Richard
Avedon) (pg. C26)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              285 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 25, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BOXING;
Referee Leaves Ferguson On the Ropes in Bribe Trial

BYLINE: By GERALD ESKENAZI

SECTION: Section B;   Page 15;   Column 1;   Sports Desk

LENGTH: 393 words


Referee Wayne Kelly, the third man in the ring when Ray Mercer first fought
Jesse Ferguson last year, testified yesterday that he not only failed to hear
any bribe offer from Mercer to Ferguson, but that Ferguson was also doing most
of the talking.

Kelly's testimony left Ferguson as the only witness who contended that Mercer
made a $100,000 bribe offer, the charge on which Mercer is being tried in State
Supreme Court in Manhattan. It is unclear from the often-muffled sound on the
videotape that an offer was made, and even the transcript provided by the
prosecution does not have Mercer uttering the words "money" or "100,000."

Mercer faces up to seven years in prison if convicted of the felony charge. The
pair met at Madison Square Garden on Feb. 6, 1993, with an-out-of-shape Mercer
succumbing to Ferguson, his former sparring partner, in a 10-round decision.

"Did you hear talking?" Kelly, a 45-year-old recreation supervisor for the Town
of Hempstead on Long Island, was asked by Assistant District Attorney Roslynn
Mauskopf.

'Loud and Clear'

"Yes, I did," he replied. "Initially, I heard Jesse Ferguson loud and clear.
Something to the effect: 'You're supposed to be the champ. You ain't got
nothing.' I heard talking throughout the fight and I reprimanded both of them."

Kelly has refereed about 300 pro fights, but he said, "This fight, there was far
more talking going on than any other fight I have refereed." He said that in his
career, he had to admonish fighters only two or three times for talking.

Under cross-examination by Mercer's co-counsel, Dominic Amorosa, Kelly said he
had not heard a bribe offer.

In an interview after his testimony, Kelly put to rest the rumor that he is hard
of hearing. He said that while he was in Vietnam, and serving in the artillery,
he suffered what he described as "high-frequency hearing loss -- like I can't
hear a dog whistle. But I can hear regular conversation." He added that he had
taken a hearing test earlier this week and it showed about a 10 percent loss of
hearing on the high range.

Amorosa provided the day's strongest infighting by shouting at Ferguson, who
concluded his two days on the stand, and suggesting that his managers, Greg
Cohen and Seth Braunstein, were prompting him from the courtroom.

The defense is expected to ask for a summary dismissal today.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              286 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 26, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Unlikely Allies in a Dangerous Place and Time

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 11;  Column 3;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 648 words


The Attica prison uprising took place in 1971. In retaking the prison, state
troopers and members of the National Guard killed 29 inmates and 10 guards who
were being held hostage. The explosive confrontation was dramatized in a 1980
television movie based on the book "A Time to Die," an eyewitness account by Tom
Wicker, the former correspondent and columnist for The New York Times. Tonight,
HBO's new film "Against the Wall," directed by John Frankenheimer ("The
Manchurian Candidate"), looks at the Attica story from a different, partly
fictionalized perspective.

This version is told largely through Michael Smith (Kyle MacLachlan), a novice
22-year-old guard who has only just decided to go into what he calls the family
business. His father, Hal (Harry Dean Stanton), a retired guard, now owns a
small bar in the working-class town of Attica in upstate New York. His Uncle Ed
(Tom Bower) still works inside the local "factory," as the prison is called.

Michael, until recently something of a hippie, begins hearing the complaints of
increasingly politicized prisoners, particularly a Muslim man calling himself
Jamaal X (Samuel L. Jackson). The prisoners are demanding improvements in food,
medical care and laundry provisions. The seasoned guards, especially the gung-ho
Vietnam veteran Lieutenant Weisbad (Frederic Forrest), will brook no challenge
to their traditional methods of complete -- and often humiliating -- control. As
one guard says, "Nobody's got a legitimate bitch unless I say so." Michael's
occasional indications of sympathy for the prisoners make him suspect among his
co-workers as a bleeding-heart liberal.

The underlying agenda of this Attica resurrection is never entirely clear. Its
depictions of life in America are hardly comforting, either in the prison with
its almost casual brutality or in the town with its sad barroom customers
boozily harmonizing on "Let Me Call You Sweetheart." The message that society is
in big trouble is underscored by statistics tagged onto the film: since Attica,
the United States prison population has risen 300 percent, recently surpassing
South Africa's as the biggest per capita in the world. And with the current
three strikes, you're out campaign, there is no end in sight.

But the bulk of the movie is focused on Michael and Jamaal, who is based on
several inmates, including one the real Michael credits with saving his life.
Michael ended up being shot four times in "friendly fire." The guard and the
prisoner enter into a wary friendship as they tread the various forces of
extremism demanding their allegiances.

With John Leonetti as director of photography, Mr. Frankenheimer lets his
cameras barrel brazenly through the prison, actually one in Clarksville, Tenn.
The rage of the rebellion is distilled chillingly as cell doors swing open and
corridors are filled with rampaging convicts and terrified guards. As Chaka, one
of the more ferocious prisoners, Clarence Williams 3d is mesmerizing.

At one point, Michael, refusing to cooperate with his captors, tells his puzzled
co-workers, "I wasn't a guard long enough to learn how to be a prisoner."
Prisons as a metaphor for society have long been a movie staple. The device
remains ominously compelling.

AGAINST THE WALL
HBO, tonight at 8

Directed by John Frankenheimer; written by Ron Hutchinson; director of
photography, John Leonetti; production designer, Michael Hanan; music by Gary
Chang; editor, Lee Percy; produced by Steven McGlothen for HBO Pictures: a
production of the Producers Entertainment Group and a John Frankenheimer film;
Jonathan Axelrod, Irwin Meyer and Harvey Bibicoff, executive producers.

Michael Smith . . . Kyle MacLachlan
Jamaal X . . . Samuel L. Jackson
Chaka . . . Clarence Williams 3d
Lieutenant Weisbad . . . Frederic Forrest
Hal Smith . . . Harry Dean Stanton
Uncle Ed . . . Tom Bower

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              287 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: March 27, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1472 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   6   ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car
                collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives
                of five families.

 2      3   4   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 3      2  10   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A
                computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss
                and is accused by her of sexual harassment.

 4      4  85   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 5      5  21   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 6      7  50   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 7      6   5   THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun.
                (Putnam, $19.95.) Jim Qwilleran and his feline sleuths
                investigate a series of catastrophes.

 8      9   3   ROGUE WARRIOR II: Red Cell, by Richard Marcinko and John
                Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) An attempt to stop nuclear materials
                from reaching North Korea.

 9      8   7   FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) A
                widow's affection for the close friend of her son, killed in an
                accident, creates familial tension.

 10    10   9   FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of
                mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a
                sylvan Vermont town.

 11    13   5   RAMA REVEALED, by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee.
                (Spectra/Bantam, $22.95.) The concluding volume in a series
                about the voyage of a starship.

 12    11  30   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 13    12   5   MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $22.95.) Archy
                McNally's search for the thief of a family's heirlooms uncovers
                a string of surprises.

 14    14   2   SECOND NATURE, by Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $22.95.) A woman
                adopts a "wolf man" and, by teaching him, learns a lot about
                good and evil.

 15    15   5   SAREK, by A.C. Crispin. (Pocket, $22.) The stormy life of
                Spock's father, an illustrious ambassador for the "Star Trek"
                Federation.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  46   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2      2  14   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 3      3   4   HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and
                surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."

 4      8   2   ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary
                kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo, from 1991 (when she
                was 11 years old) to 1993.

 5      4  11   SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A
                psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.

 6      5   3   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 7      7  17   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                100, reflect on their lives.

 8     13   2   MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Random House, $23.)
                The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a
                Washington Post reporter.

 9      6  25   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 10    11  29   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 11    10   6   A DRINKING LIFE, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) The
                memoirs of a New York born-and-bred Irish-American journalist.

 12    12  31   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 13        32   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 14     9   4   MY LIVES, by Roseanne Arnold. (Ballantine, $23.) The television
                personality discusses her professional life and private
                affairs.

 15    15  84   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  10   MAGIC EYE, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when
                scrutinized at length.

 2      2  44   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 3      3  22   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.

 4      4  35   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending March 12, at 3,050
bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops,
department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ANCESTRAL TRUTHS, by Sara Maitland. (John Macrae/Holt, $22.50.) A splendid
novel, formally a book-length family reunion at which everyone is peculiar; its
prime focus is on a woman trying to remember whether she killed her male
traveling companion (she certainly wanted him dead).

ANIMAL HAPPINESS, by Vicki Hearne. (HarperCollins, $20.) The author of "Adam's
Task" investigates, in these essays, what pleases animals; she finds, in many
cases, that though creature comforts are important, what really tickles the
beasts is the sense of a job well done.

BLACK HOLES AND TIME WARPS: Einstein's Outrageous Legacy, by Kip S. Thorne.
(Norton, $30.) A physicist proposes that modified, limited time travel is
possible, clarifying his arguments for lay folk with illustrations and
anecdotes.

CHILDREN FIRST: What Our Society Must Do -- and Is Not Doing -- for Our Children
Today, by Penelope Leach. (Knopf, $22.) No amount of advice to parents suffices,
an outstanding advice giver concludes; she proposes social programs that would
cost plenty, in money and in effort.

FORDING THE STREAM OF CONSCIOUSNESS, by Dubravka Ugresic. (Northwestern
University, paper, $14.95.) A teeming politico-literary satire by a Croatian
(written in 1988, before the breakup) in which delegates from various East bloc
nations suffer the insults of history.

THE HEART THAT BLEEDS: Latin America Now, by Alma Guillermoprieto. (Knopf, $24.)
An experienced reporter's essays on Latin American realities as they are lived
and felt as the region copes with urbanization and market economics.

HYPERSPACE: A Scientific Odyssey Through Parallel Universes, Time Warps, and the
Tenth Dimension, by Michio Kaku. (Oxford University, $25.) Everything would make
better sense, a physicist maintains, if there were 10 dimensions instead of 4;
it remains to find the absconded dimensions, which are probably awfully small.

LISTENING, by Hannah Merker. (HarperCollins, $20.) A prolonged lyrical
meditation, wise and instructive, on the importance of sound in the lives of the
creatures of this planet, by a writer, editor and former librarian who lost most
of her hearing when she was 39 years old.

STONES FROM THE RIVER, by Ursula Hegi. (Poseidon, $23.) Resignation is the
highest virtue in this historical novel about small-town Germany from 1915 to
1952; its moral center is Trudi, a clever dwarf with a tenacious memory.

SURGERY: An Illustrated History, by Ira M. Rutkow. (Mosby-Year Book/Norman
Publishing, $99.) A large, attractive volume by a surgeon, chronicling the art
of wounding to heal from prehistory to the present, with 368 handsome (and
non-sick-making) illustrations.

TRAIN GO SORRY: Inside a Deaf World, by Leah Hager Cohen. (Houghton Mifflin,
$22.95.) Ms. Cohen, who hears normally but grew up in a school for the deaf,
thoughtfully introduces a society that is still deciding how it should live.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              289 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DON'T SEND IN THE MARINES

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 16;  Column 4;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 315 words


In "Don't Send In the Marines," David Fromkin rails against the straw man of a
world that no longer exists (Feb. 27). To fret that dispatching American combat
forces around the world will become an "everyday occupation" is ludicrous when
the President and Congress are preoccupied with domestic issues.

If interventions never succeed, as Fromkin contends, then why would not the
public or our elected officials tire after one or two fiascos? He claims --
contrary to the results of public-opinion surveys -- that the American people
demanded the withdrawal of our forces from Somalia with their first casualties.

The truth is more complicated. Some interventions work and others don't. The
United Nations record, especially with peacekeeping (Golan Heights, Cyprus,
Iran-Iraq) and nation building (Cambodia, Namibia, El Salvador, Mozambique), has
been more consistent, less costly and less risky than that of unilateral
interventions by the United States.

Instead of beating another dead horse -- the old-fashioned practice of imposing
governments from abroad on resentful publics -- Fromkin should consider the
United Nations's innovative efforts to foster democratic elections in places as
unlikely as Cambodia, Namibia and Eritrea, giving people a voice in their
governance for the first time. Likewise, you would never know it from Fromkin's
account, but our military has been used far more often in recent years for
saving lives -- through logistic support of humanitarian operations -- than for
taking them.

It is high time to get over Vietnam-syndrome talk of quagmires and begin to
explore the creative and positive ways the modern military is working with the
United Nations to help people rebuild their lives and their societies. If this
is intervention, let's have more of it.

EDWARD C. LUCK
President, United Nations Association of the U.S.A.
New York, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              290 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Winston Lord: Where the Buck Stops on China and Human Rights

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1544 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 26


Suddenly, it seems, Winston Lord has found himself at odds with the two worlds
that have defined his career.

The point man for the Clinton Administration on China, Mr. Lord has emerged as
the bane of official Washington -- including some leading members of the
Administration's economic team -- which has begun to blame him both for
Secretary of State Warren Christopher's confrontational trip to Beijing and for
the China policy linking trade and human rights.

The prestigious Council on Foreign Relations, which Mr. Lord served as president
for eight years, has thumbed its nose at him, unceremoniously canceling his
invitation to a televised seminar on China where the Administration's approach
was excoriated.

The recent ill fortune of Mr. Lord, the Assistant Secretary of State for East
Asian and Pacific Affairs, has little to do with his pedigree or his
personality.

The Perfect Image

An old-school Republican patrician, the 56-year-old is the quintessence of the
well-born diplomat whose total loyalty and aversion to confrontation have helped
him thrive in the cutthroat worlds of government and think tanks. Magna cum
laude from Yale, and first in his class at the Fletcher School of Law and
Diplomacy, he often introduces himself jokingly as the son of the late Mary
Pillsbury Lord, a celebrated delegate to the United Nations, and as the husband
of Bette Bao Lord, the Shanghai-born novelist.

Instead, his situation has much to do with trying to balance cold-war rules on
how to deal with an authoritarian state and the evolving bottom-line rules on
how to make a profit in the world's fastest growing economy.

The issue is whether Mr. Lord, a former Ambassador to Beijing who learned
realpolitik diplomacy at the feet of Henry A. Kissinger but who now strongly
advocates a tough human-rights agenda, has an ear for the language of dollar
diplomacy.

"I don't want to be type-cast," Mr. Lord said in a recent interview. "I'm very
concerned about economic issues, as concerned as everyone else. It's not fair to
say I'm worrying about human rights and not economics or geopolitics. If there
was not enough weight or attention given to economic considerations, it
certainly wasn't purposeful. It's total nonsense."

Enter Economists, Angry

Last May, when President Clinton avoided a bitter split with Congress by signing
an executive order giving China a year's grace to improve its human rights
performance or risk losing trade benefits, there was only praise.

But as the June deadline for renewing China's trade benefits approaches, a
rising chorus of critics, from the National Economic Council at the White House
to the Commerce and Treasury Departments, say they did not have enough input
into what they now term a misguided decision. The question most often asked by
officials who care more about balance sheets than the nuclear balance is this:
Who got us into this in the first place?

In the absence of a clear statement of support by the President for Mr.
Christopher and his team, the fingers are pointed at Mr. Lord. As the chairman
of the interagency group on China policy and a firm believer in the executive
order he helped to write, Mr. Lord makes a convenient target.

It was Mr. Lord, for example, and the national security adviser, Anthony Lake,
who devised the policy shift in September to one of intense, high-level
engagement with the Chinese. Although officials on the economic side were
pleased with the approach, they were unhappy that they had been left out of the
consultations.

Weighting the Agency

Bowman Cutter, deputy director of the National Security Council, complained to
the deputy national security adviser, Samuel R. Berger, that the State
Department -- and Mr. Lord -- had too much control over the policy, senior
Administration officials said. And, they said, Mr. Cutter felt that the policy
focused too much on human rights and security interests.

As a result of Mr. Cutter's concerns, the senior interagency group was set up,
headed by Mr. Lord but weighted heavily with economic agencies.

It was also Mr. Lord who convinced a wavering Secretary of State that canceling
his trip to China would deprive him of the opportunity to carry an unambiguous
message to China's leaders and might irreparably damage Sino-American relations.
Instead of keeping the diplomatic volume low during the visit, the two men
turned it up full blast.

It is not surprising that Mr. Lord does not lash back at his critics. He is so
loyal that when Mr. Kissinger ordered him in 1971 to keep quiet about their
secret mission to China, which ended 20 years of nearly total isolation, he
signaled his destination to his wife by looking out the window as he was packing
and saying, "I think I see a Peking Tom."

'Sour Grapes'

Some members of the economic team admit they have fought for more emphasis on
economic factors in foreign policy, but they add that the criticism of Mr. Lord
is misplaced.

"I cringe to think how it would be if there was a traditional foreign policy
person in that job," said Jeffrey E. Garten, Under Secretary of Commerce for
International Trade. "Obviously the economic stakes with China are almost off
the charts, and I have argued about the need to inject commercial considerations
more into the policy. But I never identified Winston as the obstacle, and any
revisionism about the policy that blames him is the worst kind of sour grapes."

Certainly Mr. Lord has revised his thinking on China over the years. As
Ambassador from 1985 until just before the crackdown on the pro-democracy
movement in Tiananmen Square in 1989, he dutifully followed the Reagan-Bush line
that China's political leaders were on the right track. saying in a 1988 speech
that he did not see any "hard-liners waiting in the wings."

He fell out of favor with George Bush during the President's visit to China in
February 1989 after Chinese security officials barred the dissident scientist
Fang Lizhi from a barbecue in Mr. Bush's honor. Senior Bush aides disavowed any
role in the invitation and blamed Mr. Lord -- incorrectly -- for not informing
them. Mr. Bush "expressed regret" to the Chinese.

No More Nice Guy

After Mr. Lord left Government, he openly broke with the Bush Administration
over human rights, and in a commentary on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times
in May 1990, he argued that extending trade benefits to China without being
forthright about the Administration's displeasure with Beijing would be "a grave
mistake."

Although Mr. Lord now argues strongly that revocation of the trade benefits
would have enormous economic consequences for China, he wrote in the 1990
article that revocation would have the "most severe impact" on China's private
sector, undermine Hong Kong and allow foreign competitors to profit at the
expense of United States companies.

In his 14 months back in Government, the former career Foreign Service officer
has been credited with shaping a strategy that puts Asia at the center of
foreign policy and with moving forward the politically sensitive decision to end
the trade embargo against Vietnam.

Both Mr. Christopher and Mr. Lord have supported the Administration's tough
trade policy toward Japan. For North Korea, the leading policy official is
Robert L. Gallucci, the Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military
Affairs.

Absent at the Forum

But Mr. Christopher's trip to China has trained the spotlight on Mr. Lord. At
the Council on Foreign Relations forum, Douglas H. Paal, who directed Asia
policy on the National Security Council under President Bush, said, "If you find
a policy is not serving United States interests, then you sacrifice somebody and
get rid of the policy. That's how we do it in Washington."

Mr. Lord was not there to defend himself at the forum, where three former
Secretaries of State -- Mr. Kissinger, Cyrus R. Vance and Lawrence S.
Eagleburger -- also criticized the Administration for linking trade and human
rights. At a planning meeting for the forum, Mr. Vance had argued that Mr. Lord
might feel constrained in what he could say and that if a Government official
were present, the council would also have to invite members of Congress. Thus
the invitation was withdrawn.

'Present at the Creation'

"The goal of the hearing is to offer realistic policy options to government and
not to investigate government policy," Karen Sughrue, the vice president of
meetings, wrote in a letter faxed to Mr. Lord's office in Washington on the day
he arrived in Beijing. Saying no other Government official would attend, she
added, "We appreciate your understanding on this and hope that it allows you to
more fully recover from the jet lag following your Asia trip."

Mr. Lord was insulted. "It was stupid and dumb," he said. "I was present at the
creation of the China policy. I had just come back the night before from meeting
with Chinese leaders. I am a former president of the council. I'd like to think
I might have added something to the discussion."

But ask him about the more substantive criticism of his and the Administration's
performance on China and the rest of Asia, and his mood shifts.

"I'm very confident in our policies," he said. "I'm extremely serene."


NAME: Winston Lord

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Winston Lord. (Kirsten Bremmer for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              291 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Journal;
The Two-Way Mirror

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 17;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 710 words


The book on the press during the '92 campaign was that it favored Bill Clinton
because it identified with him.  Here at last was a potential President of their
same 1960's generation: He opposed the Vietnam war (and avoided the draft),
smoked dope, listened to rock music and then settled down to an imperfect
marriage and an establishment career that, however successful, stayed clear of
the go-go greed of the Reagan-Bush 80's.

Now that these same reporters are obsessed with Whitewater, the theory is
turning violently on itself. Those who so identified with Mr. Clinton's 60's
idealism and touchy-feeliness are enraged, it's said, because he may turn out to
be an 80's sort of guy, after all. Whatever the final verdict on Whitewater, it
puts the Clintons in close proximity to income-tax sleights of hand, high-flying
market investments and a bevy of lawyers and bankers right out of "Barbarians at
the Gate."

Could Bill Clinton have at least as much in common with Neil Bush as he does
with Robert Kennedy? And if so, isn't he the hypocrite his most severe critics
have always warned us against, a consummate chameleon, Slick Willie indeed?

Speaking as someone who also belongs to the President's generation -- and who
shares the broad outlines of his biographical curve -- I find myself running hot
and cold on him too.  But not just because of Whitewater, and not just from one
year to the next.  Mr. Clinton can jerk me violently from one pole to the other
several times in any week. After having had a clear fix on the character of
every previous President, I am for the first time a hostage to ambivalence.

But is that solely the President's fault?

What may really make Mr. Clinton galling to his demographic peers, and not just
those in the press, is that his character holds up a mirror to their own. And
they -- we -- do not like what we see. His self-contradictions keep us on a
yo-yo precisely because they're so cruel and damning a parody of our own.

Far from being a fraud, an operator who disguised himself as a Man from Hope in
an election year, Mr. Clinton has been both these men concurrently from the
moment he shifted his sights from collegiate rebellion to the real world. And
that duality reflects a gnawing legacy of the 60's that the generation as a
whole has been unable to resolve.

Many middle-class retired collegiate rebels of the Vietnam era still think of
themselves in idealistic terms that echo Mr. Clinton's, and, like him, back it
up with civic deeds (as well as an excess of pious rhetoric). But we also know
we are not as selfless as we once assumed we'd be. We make money; we may be
ambitious; we don't always put our favorite causes ahead of our own selfish
interests; we might even hope to get lucky in real estate.

Is this hypocrisy? Not exactly. Our idealistic beliefs, many of which are
reflected in Mr. Clinton's political agenda, are deeply held, not phony. So is
our desire to make our way in middle-class American life. In Mr. Clinton this
same compromise between high ideals and narcissistic pragmatism is magnified and
caricatured grotesquely by his trade, politics, not to mention his exalted
office.

The President's vacillating behavior in the past week typified the pattern. Last
Saturday, speaking with schoolchildren on television from the White House, he
was in slick mode, fielding a question from Polly Klaas's sister with a canned
response calculated for political effect.

Yet only two nights later Mr. Clinton was back on ABC, speaking searchingly and
candidly about his religious beliefs without a trace of glibness. Then came the
Thursday press conference, a classic example of his ability to play both his
sides, the altruistic and the politically expedient, against the middle.

Even if Whitewater ultimately proves to be more stupid than criminally
scandalous, the jury may remain out on Mr. Clinton's contradictory character for
a long time. Many who share the President's path from the 60's to the 90's
remain as conflicted about that journey as he is, swinging between self-love and
self-loathing. To reach a final judgment about Bill Clinton's character, we may
first have to face the far harder task of coming to terms with what we really
think about ourselves.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              292 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Technology;
The New Space Race In Satellite Communications

BYLINE: By EDMUND L. ANDREWS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 9; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1306 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


NOBODY ever accused Craig O. McCaw of being too cautious, but the cellular
telephone pioneer's $9 billion proposal to circle the planet with 840
communications satellites is almost swashbuckling in its optimism.

That was apparent in the fine print of the plan submitted last Monday to Federal
regulators by the Teledesic Corporation, the company Mr. McCaw has formed with
assistance from William Gates, chairman of the Microsoft Corporation.

To hear the company tell it, Teledesic will be by far the biggest start-up in
history. The company predicts that in the year 2001, its first year of service,
it will generate more than a half-billion dollars in revenue from the sale of
telephone, high-speed-data and video services to and from the most remote
regions of the world.

And that would be just the beginning. After five years of business, the company
predicts that annual revenue will be $6.5 billion, and heading north.

Teledesic is equally bold about its ability to put the system together. Even
though the company says it must still do about $1.5 billion worth of research
and development, it told the Federal Communications Commission that it can build
all 840 satellites by the year 2000 and launch every one of them by the end of
the following year. That could easily entail 100 or more rocket launches in less
than two years, a pace into space never before achieved.

If this all sounds like pie in the sky -- and many industry experts think it
does -- most remarkable is how many other apparently serious people have similar
ideas. Indeed, on the drawing board at least, the empty reaches of outer space
are suddenly looking downright crowded.

Motorola Inc., for instance, has already raised $800 million to build its $3.3
Iridium system, a global network of 66 satellites that will provide
pocket-telephone service anywhere in the world beginning in 1998. And just last
Thursday, the Loral Corporation and Qualcomm Inc. said they had lined up nearly
a dozen corporate partners and $275 million in first-round capital for their
proposed Globalstar network, a $1.8 billion satellite-phone system with 48
spacecraft that will go into operation in 1998.

MEANWHILE, American Mobile Satellite Communications, a consortium owned in part
by Mr. McCaw's McCaw Cellular Communications, is launching the first of two
communications satellites this year that will provide wireless phone links
through much of North America. And Inmarsat, the London-based international
satellite consortium, is struggling to assemble a satellite pocket-phone system
of its own. Inmarsat suffered a setback earlier this month when its biggest
shareholder, the Washington-based Comsat Corporation, expressed doubts about
Inmarsat's plan and suggested that some other company take the lead. Even so,
Comsat executives say they remain convinced of the need to build a global
satellite phone system that can compete with Iridium, Teledesic and the others.

Taken together, these and other projects imply a bullishness about space
communications unlike anything seen since the early 1960's, when satellites made
international phone calls and television broadcasts part of everyday life. The
new systems are appealing: huge parts of the world, from villages in India and
China to much of Africa and Latin America, have no basic telephone service and
certainly have no advanced forms of communications. Wiring all the world's
far-flung outposts would cost billions of dollars, but satellite beams can sweep
over deserts and mountains as easily as over urban business centers.

What troubles many industry experts is that the communications world is changing
quickly. The real challenge for Mr. McCaw, some analysts say, is not competition
from Iridium or Loral, but the rapid construction of land-based networks --
hard-wired telephone networks as well as cellular telephone systems. China, for
example, has embarked on a plan to install 40 to 80 million telephone lines by
the year 2000.

According to a recent report by the Department of Commerce, almost every country
in Asia, Africa, Latin America and Eastern Europe either has built or is
building cellular systems intended to provide basic telephone service. The list
includes Vietnam, Cambodia, India, China, Argentina, Brazil and Hungary.
Meanwhile, many countries are modernizing their decrepit wired telephone
networks, often by selling part of their state-owned telephone companies to
foreign corporations willing to finance their efforts.

"THEY'RE not going to make money," said Herschel Shosteck, head of Shosteck &
Associates, a consulting firm on wireless technologies in Silver Spring, Md.
"The business case for most satellite systems, which may have been viable five
years ago, is not viable today and it will certainly not be five years from
now."

Many analysts now predict that 100 million people will be using cellular
telephones worldwide by the year 2000, up from 35 million today. And Mr.
Shosteck, who was for years a skeptic about the growth of cellular service,
thinks the real number may actually turn out to be 200 million.

Against such competition satellite technology must become much more efficient
and cost effective than it has been. Most of the proposed satellite systems,
including those of Motorola, Loral and McCaw, are "low-earth orbit" systems that
use small spacecraft orbiting a few hundred miles above the earth, from pole to
pole.

In contrast, traditional "geosynchronous" satellites orbit at 22,300 miles above
the Equator at the same speed as the earth's rotation. From that distance, they
can cast broad beams, potentially covering much of a hemisphere. But the vast
distance also requires significant amounts of power to send a signal up to the
spacecraft.

Low-earth-orbit satellites move across the sky, casting much smaller beams, so
that large fleets of them are required to cover the entire planet
simultaneously. But the allure is that they are smaller and cheaper to build
than geostationary satellites, are much easier to launch and can be reached with
low-powered and inexpensive communication devices.

Russell Daggatt, president of Teledesic, based in Kirkland, Wash., said the
McCaw-Gates system would complement rather than rival cellular telephone
networks. Unlike the Iridium or Loral systems, he said, it will go beyond just
telephone service and be able to relay digital medical images, bulky computer
data files and two-way video conferences. These types of signals are packed with
so much electronic information that they require the high-capacity, or
"broad-band," communications pathways Teledesic plans to provide.

"We fully expect cellular penetration to explode around the world," Mr. Daggatt
said. "But to the extent that your basic access to voice communications is over
cellular, there is a need for complementary technology. How else are you going
to get access to broad-band services without a telephone wire?"

Nevertheless, basic telephone service is clearly a big part of Teledesic's plan.
As envisioned, each satellite will be capable of handling 100,000 simultaneous
conversations. Those channels could also be bundled together as needed for more
sophisticated communications. The big question is how many paying customers will
need this broad-band capacity in areas not accessible by terrestrial telephone
networks.

Officials at Iridium say they are aiming for an elite group of business
travelers whose main interest is in being able to send and receive calls on the
same telephone wherever they go. "We're responding to the standards anarchy
around the world," said John Windolph, a spokesman for Iridium. "We're the only
company offering global dial tone."

While supply often creates its own demand, it is impossible to predict what
people will do if a cornucopia of new services become available.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A satellite as envisioned by Teledesic. (Teledesic Corp.)

Chart: "High Beams and Low" shows a comparison of new and old methods of
high-orbit satellite communications.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              293 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 28, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
A Policy Maker on the Subject He Knows Best

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1192 words



Diplomacy
By Henry Kissinger
Illustrated. 912 pages. Simon & Schuster. $35.

With Henry Kissinger's "Diplomacy," the reader actually gets two books in one.
On one level, the volume is an elegantly written study of Western diplomacy,
from Richelieu down through Metternich and Bismarck to modern times. This book
tries to give the reader an understanding of four centuries of Western politics
and history, as well as an appreciation of the highly divergent traditions in
statesmanship found in Europe and the United States. Like Henry James, Mr.
Kissinger contrasts European cold-bloodedness and sophistication with American
innocence and naivete; like Tocqueville, he wants to examine the consequences
that American optimism and democratic ideals have had on the country's practical
conduct.

The second book, the book that emerges as a subtext in "Diplomacy," is a more
subjective and cunning one. To begin with, this book attempts to place Mr.
Kissinger's own policy-making exploits (as national security adviser and
Secretary of State under President Richard M. Nixon) in context with the
policy-making records of such historical giants as Metternich, Castlereagh and
Bismarck. While making an impassioned case for such Kissingerian concepts as
triangular diplomacy, linkage and balance-of-power negotiations, the book also
tries to spin recent and not-so-recent history to support Mr. Kissinger's own
embrace (as both a scholar and a policy maker) of the power-oriented pragmatics
of realpolitik.

For instance, the failure of the Western democracies to recognize the dangers of
Nazi Germany early on, Mr. Kissinger suggests, can be attributed to those
countries' failure to pay attention to traditional balance-of-power tenets,
which "should have made it clear that a large and strong Germany bordered on the
east by small and weak states was a dangerous threat," regardless of Hitler's
motives.

Such arguments, of course, serve another purpose in this book as well: they
provide a resonant historical backdrop for Mr. Kissinger's efforts to explain
and vindicate his own handling of foreign affairs for President Nixon. After
all, as Mr. Kissinger well knows, books have the capacity to help shape one's
place in history (or at least affect how one's efforts are perceived): his
second book, "Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy" (1957), made him an
intellectual celebrity at the age of 34, while his later books, including his
best-selling memoirs, helped cement his fame. In this respect, "Diplomacy" can
be seen as a kind of response to the publication of recent books (from Seymour
M. Hersh's angry diatribe "The Price of Power" to Walter Isaacson's
comprehensive biography, "Kissinger") that have provided less-than-flattering
portraits of the former Secretary of State.

Indeed, the last portion of "Diplomacy" rehashes events dealt with at length in
Mr. Kissinger's two volumes of memoirs ("White House Years" (1979) and "Years of
Upheaval" (1982), including the end of the Vietnam War, detente with the Soviet
Union and the opening to China. Although Mr. Kissinger does not directly address
the charges of secretiveness frequently made against him and Mr. Nixon, he
argues (in a passage about Franklin D. Roosevelt) that "there is inevitably in
every great leader an element of guile which simplifies, sometimes the
objectives, sometimes the magnitude, of the task." Elsewhere, he suggests that
only hands-on ministers "with executive powers over all aspects of foreign
affairs" can rise to the level of greatness.

Many arguments in "Diplomacy" are decidedly familiar. Once again, Mr. Kissinger
complains that Watergate undermined the authority of the President and his
long-term foreign-policy objectives. He defends Vietnamization as "the best of
the available options." And he angrily rebuts critics like William Shawcross who
have charged that his policies set the stage in Cambodia for the Khmer Rouge
atrocities.

What overall lesson does Mr. Kissinger draw from the Vietnam War? "The nightmare
of Vietnam was not the way in which America entered the war," he writes, "but
why it did so without a more careful assessment of the likely costs and
potential outcomes. A nation should not send half a million of its young to a
distant continent or stake its international standing and domestic cohesion
unless its leaders can describe their political goals and offer a realistic
strategy for achieving them -- as President Bush did later in the gulf war.
Washington should have asked itself two basic questions: Was it possible to
establish democracy and achieve military victory more or less simultaneously?
And even more crucial, will the benefits justify the costs?"

Whereas the sheer amount of detail in Mr. Kissinger's memoirs often shrouded the
larger policy goals of his tenure in the Nixon Administration, "Diplomacy"
provides a succinct overview of both his basic philosophy and his interpretation
of individual events. The reader finishes the volume with a vivid sense of the
author's dark, Hobbesian view of the world and the political implications of
that vision.

Moving from the philosophic to the anecdotal with ease, Mr. Kissinger holds the
reader's attention with colorful cameo portraits of statesmen, and sharp apercus
about the practice of power. He is also adept at articulating parallels between
seemingly disparate situations -- between, say, 19th-century Europe and the
post-cold-war world -- and using this ability to define broad historical
patterns and dynamics. The book's final chapter sketchily sets forth Mr.
Kissinger's current views on such matters as United States relations with the
former Soviet Union, Germany, Eastern Europe, China and Japan, views that will
be familiar to anyone who has followed the author's frequent appearances on
public-affairs talk shows on television.

Mr. Kissinger argues that the conduct of American foreign policy has
historically divided into two dominant schools: the realist school exemplified
by Theodore Roosevelt and Richard Nixon, and the messianic, idealist school
exemplified by Woodrow Wilson and Ronald Reagan. He argues that America's
universalist ideals, combined with its advocacy of collective security, has
sometimes blinded the country to the cultural differences of other countries.
And he argues that the United States, alone among nations, has "rested its claim
to international leadership on its altruism," a claim that possesses "a certain
aura of unpredictability" for other countries used to blunt calculations of
national interest.

Such assessments of America's role in the world should win Mr. Kissinger a new
set of readers, even if "Diplomacy" itself fails to solidify the place in
diplomatic history Mr. Kissinger would like. In fact, while Mr. Kissinger's
focus on national interests and geopolitical realities frequently led to
criticism that he lacked an innate feel, as a policy maker, for American values
and mores, his very position as a philosophical outsider in this country makes
him a provocative observer and essayist, the roles best ratified by this shrewd,
often vexing and consistently absorbing book.

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Henry Kissinger (Associated Press, 1987)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              294 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 29, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Kenneth Huntington, 72; Sank the Yamato

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;  Page 22;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 176 words

DATELINE: SANTA CRUZ, Calif., March 28


Kenneth E. Huntington, a retired Marine Corps colonel who as a pilot in World
War II helped sink a Japanese dreadnought by dropping a single bomb down her
forward turret, died on Wednesday in Santa Cruz. He was 72.

While serving in a Cosair squadron on the aircraft carrier Bennington, he earned
the Navy Cross for helping to sink the battleship Yamato when he dropped a bomb
down the turret and silenced the ship's guns.

Colonel Huntington was born in Moreland, Kan., and graduated from Moreland High
School. He received a bachelor of science degree from Kansas State University
and enlisted in the Navy's cadet program in 1943. He was commissioned in the
Marine Corps, where he became a highly decorated career officer, flying both
jets and helicopters.

He served two tours of duty in the Korean War and the Vietnam War and received
the Purple Heart after being wounded in Vietnam. In 1974, Colonel Huntington
retired to Santa Cruz.

He is survived by his wife of 49 years, Marllys; two daughters, six
grandchildren and a great-grandchild.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              295 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 29, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film Festival;
Frustrations of Two Artists in China

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section C;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 622 words


Who knew there were slackers in China? "The Days" examines the personal boredom
and professional frustration of two painters in their 20's, an unmarried couple
who have been together since art school. Now teachers, they still live in a tiny
apartment in Beijing more suited to students than adults, and are stymied about
the future. Xiaodong is an intense-looking man, with large glasses and a roomful
of paints and canvases. But as the narrator says, "He dreamed of nothing but
being rich," and the fantasy paralyzed him. "He couldn't even paint." Xiaochun
is so ready to leave the relationship and the country that she writes to
relatives in New York and hopes to join them.

The film is most intruiging when it becomes a window on aspects of Chinese
culture rarely depicted on screen. Some early-morning sex between Xiaodong and
Xiaochun is discreet by American standards, but the scene is long and emphatic
enough to be unusual in a Chinese film. And at times "The Days" effectively
suggests the tension between an awful past that the characters want to forget
and a present that seems cut off from all meaning. Xiaochun's parents had been
persecuted by her entire school when she was 16. There is no need for the film
to belabor the point that when she finally goes to New York, she writes to
Xiaodong without reference to their life together. In the words of the narrator,
she acts "as if the past had evaporated."

But "The Days," a first feature written and directed by the 29-year-old Wang
Xiaoshuai, is far better as sociology than as a film. Only 80 minutes long, it
nonetheless seems excruciatingly slow. Though it glancingly evokes the loose,
textured feel of early Jim Jarmusch films, it is humorless and not well-shot.
That this is a black-and-white film about painters says more about the film's
low budget than it does about the characters' or the film maker's esthetic
styles.


"The Days" will be shown tonight at 9 and tomorrow at 6 P.M. at the Museum of
Modern Art as part of the New Directors/New Films series. It will share the bill
with "Life Like Dust," a quasi-documentary that presents a more complex and
dramatic version of a misguided life. At the center of the film is Ricky Phan, a
refugee from the Vietnam War whose family came to California when he was an
adolescent. He is now serving 11 years in prison for armed robbery, and in "Life
Like Dust" he narrates scenes from his own past as a gang member. The gang was
his family, and the film includes scenes of its members at home, eating,
singing, creating the false sense that this was a way of life with a future.

Much of the film was shot by the directors, Ahrin Mishan and Nick Rothenberg, in
the three years before Mr. Phan's arrest. Mixing after-the-fact scenes with
documentary episodes, the film raises some disturbing questions about the film
makers' responsibility and the mix of truth and fiction. But like "The Days,"
"Life Like Dust" offers a fresh view of a part of society that mainstream movies
ignore.

The Days
Written, produced and directed by Wang Xiaoshuai, in Mandarin with English
subtitles; director of photography, Liu Jie and Wu Di; edited by Qingqing; music
by Liang He ping; production company, Shu Kei's Creative Workshop Ltd. Running
time: 80 minutes. This film is not rated.

WITH: Yu Hong and Liu Xiaodong.

Bui Doi
Life Like Dust
Directed by Ahrin Mishran and Nick Rothenberg. Running time: 29 minutes. This
film is not rated.

WITH: Ricky Phan.

At the Roy and Niuta Titus Theater 1 in the Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d
Street, Manhattan, as part of the New Directors/ New Films series of the Film
Society of Lincoln Center and the museum's department of film and video.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Yu Hong in "The Days," part of the New Directors/New Films
series. (The Film Society of Lincoln Center)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              296 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Pop Life

BYLINE: By Sheila Rule

SECTION: Section C;  Page 24;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 927 words



Marvin Gaye Reissues

Marvin Gaye was shot dead by his father 10 years ago this Friday. To mark the
anniversary and honor Gaye's 26-year career, which critics have said left an
indelible mark on popular music, Motown Records is kicking off a yearlong
celebration featuring the reissue on compact disk of many of his works.

Gaye, an internationally popular singer, songwriter and musician who died on
April 1, 1984, a day before his 45th birthday, is remembered by many as a
handsome, sultry soul balladeer. But he was also recognized as a
recording-session drummer, a gifted instrumentalist, the first artist associated
with the Motown label to begin producing his own albums and a performer
concerned with spiritual matters. Rock singers like Mick Jagger and Rod Stewart
were influenced by his singing and several of his songs, including "Sexual
Healing" in 1983, were perhaps the most overtly sensual popular music recordings
of their time.

"Marvin went from 'What's Going On' to 'Here, My Dear' to 'Sexual Healing,' "
said Jheryl Busby, Motown's president and chief executive. "He was sharing so
much. I think he would be perceived today as an artist who lived his life
through his music. He would be perceived as an artist who has credibility."

First to be reissued is "Here, My Dear," the 1978 double album that traced the
dissolution of Gaye's marriage to Anna Gordy. Considered an ambitious and
brilliant concept album, it was not a big hit and has been out of print. It will
be followed by his final Motown album, released in 1981, "In Our Lifetime?," and
a four-disk collection that includes "Let's Get It On" (1973), "I Want You"
(1976), "Troubleman" (1972) and a compilation of previously unreleased material.
There will also be a boxed-set career retrospective and a reissue of "What's
Going On" (1971), the first album by a major black pop artist to grapple with
the Vietnam War, industrial pollution and similar issues. A television special
is also planned.

" 'What's Going On' was done contrary to the conventional wisdom of the time,"
said David Ritz, Gaye's biographer. "No one thought you could do a whole album
of songs that went for more than three-and-a-half minutes and had sociological,
ecological and political elements. But he didn't care at that moment in time,
and it turned out great."

"That's also true of 'Here, My Dear' and 'In Our Lifetime?,' which were done
when Marvin was the most disturbed and serious about his art and when he didn't
feel any commercial restraints," Mr. Ritz added. " 'In Our Lifetime?' is about
his struggle for his soul, this terrible inner turmoil between the fundamental
Christianity of his childhood and his self-indulgence."

'Bolero' on Guitar

After a four-year recording break, the guitar virtuoso Stanley Jordan is back
with a new album, "Bolero" (Arista), and a national tour that will take him to
the Blue Note in Greenwich Village from Tuesday through April 10.

"The main reason I play isn't for my work but because music is essential, like a
spiritual food," said Mr. Jordan, who is noted for his two-handed tapping
technique, which can produce an almost orchestral sound. "I got to the point
that I was so caught up in obligations in my career that it started to feel like
a job. I wanted to get away from the music business and remember why I really
play."

Mr. Jordan says he kept himself occupied writing software for sequencers and
other electronic musical gear and doing a computer analysis of Roget's
Thesaurus. At the end of the hiatus came "Bolero," which incorporates his first
recorded use of the acoustic guitar. The title track is a contemporary rendition
of Ravel's composition and the album also includes classics like Jimi Hendrix's
"Drifting" and Herbie Hancock's "Chameleon," as well as original material like
"Plato's Blues," on which Mr. Jordan plays two guitars simultaneously. He says
he wrote it as a tribute to his mother, a scholar of Shakespeare and Plato who
died last year.

"When I compare the music on this record to the last couple of albums before
this, I hear more joy in the music," he said. "Even though there was a lot of
struggle I was going through, I can hear that I've come through it. Even though
losing Mom had difficult aspects, I learned about life and I feel I've grown
from it."

University Conference

Want to know about the latest developments in pop music? Try New York
University's conference called "A to the K: New Directions in Popular Music." It
will be held April 16 and 17 with performers like Me'Shell NdegeOcello, Phranc,
Kid Capri and Moby, as well as music critics, producers and film makers. For $5,
you get the conference and a dance party. Pre-registration is required.
Information: (212) 998-8648.

Hip-Hop and Respect

At the top of Vanilla Ice's wish list: respect from the hip-hop world.

"But that's a hurdle," he said from his home in Miami. "Nobody would have heard
of Vanilla Ice if it wasn't for hip-hop, my music. That's what got me here. My
first album crossed over to pop stations but that wasn't my fault."

Vanilla Ice's 1990 debut album, "To the Extreme," was extraordinarily
successful, but within hip-hop the white rapper was greeted as a fraud, a joke,
a white boy trying to sound black. He describes the style of his new album,
"Mind Blowin' " (SBK/ ERG), as "a lot harder."

"I'm not wanting to sell as many records as I did before because I don't want to
cross over to pop radio stations," he said. "In the hip-hop community, if you go
to pop stations, you're a sellout."


LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              297 of 297 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 31, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Depositors to Withdraw Money in Retaliation for Natwest Bank's Transfer of Jobs

BYLINE: By TOM REDBURN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 723 words


Venting frustration over another exodus of jobs from Long Island, several local
government officials and real-estate developers said yesterday that they would
withdraw money from National Westminster Bank to protest a transfer of some back
office operations to Pennsylvania.

"It's time we stop mincing words to businesses that seek to use Long Island
residents as their cash cow," said Thomas Gulotta, the Nassau County Executive.
"In part, what we are doing is symbolic. But it's an important message that we
hope will be interpreted in a positive fashion. We want to lend our support to
those businesses who are willing to remain here on Long Island."

First Such Boycott

The action, which one expert said may be the first time major depositors have
threatened a bank boycott over a loss of jobs, is not expected to halt NatWest's
move.

With $11.7 billion in total deposits in New York, NatWest would only be modestly
affected even if most local governments on Long Island banded together and
withdrew the estimated $150 million to $200 million they hold in NatWest
accounts.

The bank, a subsidiary of Britain's second-largest banking institution, National
Westminster Bank, expects to save much more by reducing its operating costs than
it would lose in profits from any withdrawal of funds.

"Our decision wasn't an easy one, but it was an essential one," said Tim
Connolly, a NatWest spokesman. Faced with growing competition, NatWest plans to
reduce its costs by $34 million after two years and $25 million annually in the
future by moving 1,300 service jobs from the New York area to Scranton, Pa. It
expects to gain the savings through lower wages, taxes and utility costs.

After the move, which will require a new $31 million building, NatWest would
continue to employ 3,000 people on Long Island in its data center in Melville
and its 69 branches in Nassau and Suffolk Counties.

Little Comfort

But that appears to provide little comfort to local officials and developers,
who are particularly worried that other service-oriented companies may be
tempted to abandon Long Island because of the higher costs of doing business
there.

"The loss of NatWest may be more serious and more dangerous to the Long Island
economy than the loss of Grumman," Lee E. Koppelman, executive director of the
Long Island Regional Planning Board, said last week.

Other New York banks, including Chemical and Citbank, have a significant number
of back-office jobs on Long Island. In contrast to NatWest's decision to
relocate almost 1,000 jobs in customer service and credit card operations,
Greenpoint Savings Bank is looking for a location in Nassau County for a
headquarters to employ 1,500 people.

In the past, several banks have been targets of campaigns by depositors, but
they have usually been efforts to end discriminatory lending practices or
protests over loans to South Africa. One union led a boycott against a Seattle
bank because it refused to negotiate a contract.

"This doesn't happen very often on a large scale," said Tom Schlesinger,
director of the Southern Fiscal Project in Charlotte, N.C. "This is the first
I've heard of this kind of protest being targeted at a loss of jobs."

Led by Real-Estate Group

The Long Island protest was organized by the Association for a Better Long
Island, which represents commercial, industrial and residential real-estate
concerns with $10 million in deposits at NatWest. Suffolk and Nassau Counties
hold $65 million in NatWest accounts, officials said.

In an echo of Vietnam-era draft-card burnings, Vincent Polimeni, the
association's chairman, cut up his NatWest credit card.

"We've had enough in terms of seeing companies leave without doing anything to
try to stay," Mr. Polimeni said. "We're calling on everyone to take what money
you may have in NatWest and put it in the banks who are staying here on Long
Island."

Leaders of the protest, while saying they would all recommend withdrawals, said
that none of their governments have acted yet.

Those joining Mr. Polimeni and Mr. Gulotta, the Republican leader of Nassau
County, at a news conference in Mineola included: Robert Gaffney, a Republican
and the Suffolk County Executive; Lewis J. Yevoli, Democrat and Supervisor of
the Town of Oyster Bay, and Arthur Thompson, the Mayor of Freeport.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
